year	session_number	session_title	title	abstract	author1_firstname	author1_name	author2_firstname	author2_name	author3_firstname	author3_name	author4_firstname	author4_name	author5_firstname	author5_name	author6_firstname	author6_name	author7_firstname	author7_name
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Relating Activity Involvements to Child Weight Status: Do Normal and Overweight Children Differ in How They Spend Their Time?	The prevalence of obesity in American youth has reached alarming levels. The proportion of overweight children, defined as Body-Mass-Index (BMI) exceeding the 95th percentile for age- and sex- based norms, has tripled in the past three decades (Troiano & Flegal, 1998). It is assumed that obese and non-obese children spend their time in different ways. Yet, few studies have examined how normal weight and overweight children differ (or do not differ) in the ways they spend their time. In this paper, we draw upon the Child Development Supplement (CDS) to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) which collects 24h time diaries from children to examine similarities and differences in the ways normal weight and overweight children spend their time. Results indicate that overweight children and adolescents spend less time participating in organized sports and outdoor play, sleeping, and playing with friends and more time playing video games, reading and being alone.	Silvia	 Bartolic	Sook-Jung	 Lee	Elizabeth	 Vandewater
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Overweight Children: Assessing the Contribution of the Neighborhood Environment	Using the 2002/2003 wave of Child Development Supplement (CDS) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), this paper examines the effect of the neighborhood environment on the prevalence of overweight and at risk of overweight status in children. We consider a variety of neighborhood environment features, such as anonymity, informal social control, safety, and the physical environment. Preliminary results suggest that neither neighborhood anonymity nor informal social control in the neighborhood nor neighborhood safety affect the risk of being overweight for children of either gender. However, living in a low or medium physical condition neighborhood is associated with a 69-92 percent increase in the odds of being overweight relative to living in a high physical condition neighborhood. Moreover, physical condition of the neighborhood has greater effect on girls. The results of this study emphasize a particular importance of the built environment of the neighborhood for weight status of children.	Irina	 Grafova
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Using Cumulative Risk Models to Link Social Disadvantage to Obesity Risk in the Transition to Young Adulthood	I assess the relationship between social disadvantage in childhood and adolescence and obesity trajectories from adolescence into young adulthood using cumulative risk models and nationally representative data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. The cumulative risk model assumes that it is the accumulation of risk factors across a variety of domains, rather than a single risk factor that is important in adversely impacting child developmental and health outcomes. I utilize multiple measures of health/obesity risk and multinomial logistic regression models to investigate what factors place individuals at risk for obesity, which populations (defined by sex, race/ethnicity, and poverty) face greater levels of cumulative risk, whether risk factors operate in a cumulative manner (where higher levels of risk are associated with higher levels of obesity risk) and whether cumulative risk measures mediate the relationships between poverty status and obesity and ethnic minority status and obesity.	Hedwig	 Lee
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Predicting Young Adult’s Obesity: The Role of Body Image during Adolescence and Race/Ethnicity	Obesity among adolescents and young adults has become a national health concern. Using the first and third waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth), we examine the effects of adolescents’ body image and weight management behaviors on their chances of being overweight or obese as young adults. Being overweight at Wave I increases the chances of being overweight or obese at Wave III. Controlling for actual Wave I weight, we find that adolescents who think they are overweight and are trying to lose weight at Wave I are more likely to be overweight or obese at Wave III. These effects are particularly strong for Blacks and Hispanics. This suggests that Blacks and Hispanics may be particularly likely to engage in unsuccessful weight control behaviors. Our results suggest that social programs that are geared toward decreasing the prevalence of adolescent obesity should be more culturally specific.	Linda	M. Manning	Mary	H. Benin	Verna	 Keith
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Childbearing Trends and Policies in Europe	This paper will present selected findings and conclusions of an international comparative project of 18 countries, which is coordinated by the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. A book of country and summary chapters is to be published in 2007. The central topics include: effects of political systems on childbearing behavior; fertility during the transition from autocratic to democratic systems in central and Eastern Europe; principal determinants of fertility decline at younger ages; childbearing postponement; changing parity distributions and family size norms; changing family and changing living arrangements; migration and fertility; effectiveness of family-related policies; convergence or diversity in childbearing behavior; possible emergence of a new demographic disequilibrium.	Tomas	 Frejka	Jan	 Hoem	Laurent	 Toulemon
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Globalization, Policy Intervention, and Reproduction: Below Replacement Fertility in China	This paper presents preliminary results from a field survey on fertility preference and behavior among six counties in one of the most dynamic regions of China (Jiangsu province) with one of the lowest fertility levels (TFR at 1.0). The survey, to be completed in January 2007, will be the first of a longitudinal study planned for this research site. This paper will be the first to report on a new study designed to understand below-replacement fertility in the context of economic and social globalization and political intervention. Some results from the study will have special relevance for China, given its unique government intervention and control in reproduction, but many of the results should have broad implications for understanding global low fertility, with China being one of the most dynamic players in the new wave of globalization.	Baochang	 Gu	Zhenzhen	 Zheng	Feng	 Wang	Yong	 Cai
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Birth Replacement Ratios in Europe: A New Look at Period Replacement	European reproduction trends are traced using a new period replacement indicator: the Birth Replacement Ratio (BRR). The BRR is a replacement ratio that compares the period number of births to the mean size of the mothers’ generation at birth. In contrast with the Net Reproduction Ratio, differences between the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) and the BRR are not due only to period mortality. They also incorporate the effect of mothers’ emigration and immigration. The application to a number of European countries between 1800 and 2004 (depending on data) shows interesting contrasts between the TFR and the BRR, which trace the demographic history of the respective countries.   The BRR makes it possible to track the impact of emigration and immigration on population replacement over the demographic transition and compare the differences between sending and receiving countries, tracing the European emigration of the early 20th century or the current immigration processes.	José	Antonio  Ortega	Luis	Alberto  Del Rey Poveda
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Preference Theory and Low Fertility: A Comparative Perspective	The discussion on the causes of the most recent fertility decline in Europe, and in particular on the emergence of “lowest low” fertility, emphasizes the relevance of cultural factors. The heterogeneity of preferences concerning the “career vs. family” dichotomy has been systematized in Hakim’s Preference Theory. This paper makes use of new comparative data from the 2004/05 round of the European Social Survey to test the links between individual-level preferences and fertility outcomes and intentions in a variety of societal settings. Results confirm an association between work-family lifestyle preferences and actual fertility in a variety of European countries, while they do not support the relevance of lifestyle preferences on 3-year fertility intentions.	Agnese	 Vitali	Francesco	C. Billari	Maria	Rita  Testa
2007	4	Family and Work	Allocating Time	The household production model remains the lens through which many social scientists view time allocation within households. Becker claims that the household production model implies that in efficient married couple households, husbands will specialize in the market sector and wives in the household sector. In this paper I argue that Becker's specialization conclusion rests on auxiliary assumptions to which neither economic theory in general, nor the household production model in particular, have any commitment. These include assumptions about household preferences (e.g., the absence of process benefits), household technology (e.g., spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes), and the number of household commodities (e.g., one household commodity). I conclude by examining the relationship between household technology and the technologies of individual members of the household. This relationship is especially interesting at three crucial transition points: (i) household formation, (ii) divorce, (iii) widowhood.	Robert	A. Pollak
2007	4	Family and Work	Market versus Non-Market Time Allocation in a Family Setting	Using the American Time Use Survey, this paper focuses on how time use decisions are related within the household. Because the ATUS provides time diaries for only one adult per household, it is not possible to model joint choices directly. Instead we implement a statistical matching approach in which we will “marry” husbands with wives across households to form synthetic couples. This methodology allows us to construct measures of household production, child caregiving, active leisure, and work time for each “husband” and “wife”, which are then used to construct relative time measures, e.g. the proportion of childcare done by the mother. Using these relative measures as dependent variables, we estimate a four equation simultaneous tobit model for mothers' and fathers' time use. The goal is to examine the role that spouses' time use, gender wage gaps, and demographic factors play in fundamental time allocation decisions between market and non-market time.	Rachel	 Connelly	Jean	 Kimmel
2007	4	Family and Work	Order amidst Change: Work and Family Trajectories in Japan	Substantial family and work change has been occurring in Japan. Examples include a decline in the availability of jobs that afford lifetime protection against unemployment, an increase in jobs that do not carry benefits such as a pension, an increase in age at marriage and at first birth, and an increase in marital dissolution. Using life history data from the 2000 National Survey on Family and Economic Conditions, young Japanese appear to have responded in a fairly orderly manner. Marriage and childbearing have been postponed, but marriage still precedes childbearing. Education is completed prior to starting work. For men, once work commences they continue working. For women, the classic conflict between work and family roles is evident. Beneath this apparent order amidst change lies the possibility of a long-term realignment of family and work roles. The timing of events is described both across as well as within life domains.	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Minja	K. Choe	Maria	Midea M. Kabamalan	Noriko	 Tsuya
2007	4	Family and Work	Intergenerational Health Implications in the Labor Market: Exploring Parents' Health and Child's Subsequent Labor Outcome in Russia	Understanding behavioral response to parental health provides valuable insight for predicting a labor market situation, especially in a developing and transitional economy. This paper provides an economic framework incorporating labor supply, family economic linkage, and health dynamics. Using the Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Study, empirical analysis shows that having an unhealthy father substantially reduces a daughter’s future working probability in the labor market: the daughter tends to demand time-intensive consumption relatively more than earning-intensive with unhealthy father. In the process of reallocating resources in response to a family member’s poor health, women tend to be more specialized to non-market labor and men to market labor when relative return on market labor is significantly lower for women. This paper also highlights that where family members are linked economically to each other, it is plausible that those members’ health conditions can play an even more significant role in determining one’s future economic behavior.	HwaJung	 Choi
2007	4	Family and Work	Multiple Demands or Multiple Opportunities? Work, Family, and Spousal Health in the U.S.	Men and women who have multiple roles (e.g. spouse, employee, parent) generally have better health than those who have fewer roles. But prior research has not examined how living in a household that makes many care-taking demands and having a spouse who works long hours impacts health among husbands and wives. This is an important oversight given the growing labor force participation among women in recent decades and evidence that spousal factors can influence personal health. We examine the relationship between spousal employment and households that have high demands for care-work, and personal risks of death among men and women, with data from the 1990-1994 Family Resources Supplements to the National Health Interview Survey, linked to the National Death Index through 1997. Our results will illuminate whether, and in what circumstances, men and women benefit from having spouses who have multiple roles (and multiple demands on their time).	Patrick	M. Krueger	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith	Xuemin	 Gu
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Decomposing Trends in Non-Marital Fertility among Hispanic Women	The National Center for Health Statistics recently reported that U.S. non-marital births reached a record high in 2004, when 36 percent of all births occurred to unmarried women. Significantly, 46 percent of Hispanic births occurred outside of marriage, and teenage childbearing rates were exceptionally high. We use data from the 1990-2004 NCHS’s Natality Detail File to decompose trends in non-marital fertility ratios into three proximate components: marital status, marital fertility, and non-marital fertility. Specifically, we partition 1990-2004 changes in the fertility ratio into rate and n composition components. Our paper also evaluates whether the “mix” of components varies across Hispanic subpopulations distinguished by economic and cultural assimilation into American society. The empirical results suggest whether public policies are best targeted on (1) reducing non-marital fertility rates, (2) increasing marriage (and, and by extension, marital fertility), or (3) both.	Felicia	Yang DeLeone
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Racial/Ethnic Differences in Cancers of the Liver and Stomach in Texas, 1999-2003	This project examines racial/ethnic- and sex-based differences in incidence, mortality, and survival rates of cancers of the liver and stomach in Texas for the period 1999-2003. Population-based cancer registry data are used to calculate age-adjusted incidence and mortality rates for two cancers that occur more frequently among Hispanics and blacks in Texas, and are characterized by infectious etiological factors. Further, employing linkage software specifically designed for use with cancer data, incidence and mortality data are linked in order to analyze survival, especially among Hispanics. Preliminary findings illustrate the high liver cancer incidence and mortality rates among Texas Hispanics, as well as the high rates of stomach cancer among both Hispanics and blacks. While the cancer literature in the U.S. consistently highlights relatively low overall cancer incidence and mortality rates among U.S. Hispanics, these morbidities and causes of death do not evidence any Hispanic Mortality Paradox, and warrant further study.	George	J. Lara
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Understanding Socioeconomic Gradients in Health in the U.S. Latino Population	Health differentials between U.S. Latinos and other racial/ethnic groups are frequently characterized by the advantages or disadvantages that remain after controlling for socioeconomic indicators. This literature has given less attention to formal comparison of the significance and magnitude of health gradients between racial/ethnic groups. Recent research has found weak relationships between education and health for individuals of Mexican origin in comparison to non-Latino whites. This study investigates one potential explanation for this disparity: social gradients in health in Mexico may differ from those in the United States. The study uses data from the National Health Interview Survey to compare gradients for health behaviors for Mexican-origin individuals by age at immigration and duration of stay in the U.S. Weaker gradients among those who immigrated at older ages and those with shorter durations of stay in the U.S. would offer evidence of the influence of Mexican gradients on the health behaviors of Mexican Americans.	Pamela	J. Stoddard
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Gateway State, Not Gateway City: New Immigrants in the Hudson Valley	Much research on new immigrants outside the gateway states has been on new destinations in the Midwest and South, not on new destinations within the gateway states, but outside the gateway metropolitan areas within them. In this paper we examine Spanish-speaking immigrants to two small cities that have not received many immigrants since the early decades of the twentieth century, Newburgh and Poughkeepsie, in the Hudson Valley of New York State. Data come primarily from in-depth interviews with 50 Latin American immigrants (25 in each city), supplemented with data from Census 2000 and the 2005 ACS. New immigrants tend to come directly from their home country, know only a few relatives or friends upon arrival, and have been here a short time. They settle in poor neighborhoods close to African Americans, with whom relations are not always cordial, and in both cities, are actively forming organizations to help them adapt.	Jacqueline	 Villarrubia	Nancy	A. Denton
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	The Impact of School Meals on School Participation: Evidence from Rural India	This paper assesses the effect of a nationally mandated free school meal program in India on school enrollment and attendance using survey data. School panel data allow a difference-in-differences estimation strategy, comparing the difference in the participation rates before and after the introduction of the program between treatment and control schools. The results show that the average monthly attendance rate of girls in grade 1 jumped up by more than 10 percentage points with the introduction of the program. Analysis of cross-sectional household data suggests that the program did not lead to a significant increase in overall enrollment levels although there was a small positive effect on the enrollment rates of girls from disadvantaged socio-economic groups. Overall the findings indicate that the program has been more successful in improving participation rates of girls, thereby reducing gender disparity in schooling.	Farzana	 Afridi
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	Matching the Gold Standard: Evidence from a Social Experiment in Nicaragua	We compare nonexperimental impact estimates using propensity score matching with those from a social experiment to determine whether this nonexperimental approach can ‘match’ the gold standard. The social experiment we use was carried out to evaluate a conditional cash transfer program implemented in Nicaragua in 2000. The outcomes we assess include total and food expenditure and a variety of children’s health outcomes including vaccinations, morbidity, and breast feeding. We find that PSM does better at replicating the benchmark for individual outcomes, but does poorly for expenditure outcomes. Judicious choice of samples and more stringent common support requirements improve the performance of PSM for all outcomes. The PSM technique seems most promising for evaluating individual and easily measured outcomes such as those related to child schooling and health, but less so for more complex outcomes such as expenditures.	John	A. Maluccio	Sudhanshu	 Handa
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	Family Planning and Fertility: Estimating Program Effects Using Cross-Sectional Data	This paper uses a novel method of identifying the effects of a family planning program, when there is endogenous program placement and only cross-sectional data are available. It focuses on the differential effects of health facilities, standard family planning and community-based reproductive health programs. Access to family planning reduces the age-specific fertility by about 0.5 children for women younger than 30, while the effect is less for older women. This is in line with what other studies have found. This reduction is not overly large considering the high total fertility rate in Ethiopia. There are, however, other positive effects of access. Women are generally older when they have their first child in areas with family planning service, which may have a beneficial effect on child health and maternal health.  It appears that access reduces the risk of  unwanted pregnancy, especially for older women.	Claus	C. Pörtner	Kathleen	 Beegle	Luc	 Christiaensen
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on Household Composition, Fertility, and Migration in Central America	Providing conditional cash transfers (CCTs) to households has the potential to influence the composition of households by altering the economic incentives faced by households. Altering the composition of households may in turn alter the manner in which the transfers are used. We explore this possibility using experimental evaluation data collected from the PRAF program in Honduras and the RPS program in Nicaragua. Our results indicate that the programs have had an impact on household structure and composition, but that this impact varies by country. Our analysis clearly indicates that CCT program design and context can influence the structure and composition of households. Therefore, CCT programs must be designed carefully to ensure that unintended and possibly undesirable outcomes do not occur.	Paul	C. Winters	Guy	 Stecklov	Jessica	 Todd
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	Couples’ Retirement Coordination and Well-Being: A Multi-Method Approach	Our project investigates the coordination of retirements among married couples age 56 to 62. Specifically, we show how financial, emotional, and health-related considerations impact coordination of the transition to retirement among couples. We draw on data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study and use multinomial logistic regression models and two-stage latent life path models to address three specific issues: 1) the conditions under which husbands and wives coordinate their transitions to retirement; 2) the effects of health, socioeconomic status, and coordination on post-retirement marital satisfaction and well-being; and 3) how the onset of major health conditions affects the timing and coordination of retirement.	Gina	 Allen	Carolyn	A. Liebler	Sarah	 Flood
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	The Effect of Subjective Survival Probabilities on Retirement and Wealth	We explore the proposition that expected longevity affects retirement decisions and wealth using micro data drawn from the Health and Retirement Survey for the United States, the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing, and the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. We use data on individuals' subjective probability of survival to age 75 as a proxy for their prospective lifespan. Our estimates for the U.S. and U.K. indicate that increased subjective probabilities of survival result in increased household wealth among couples, with no effect on the length of the working life. These findings are consistent with the view that retirement decisions are driven by institutional constraints and incentives and that a longer expected lifespan leads to increased wealth. The SHARE results are less informative, mainly due to small sample sizes.	David	E. Bloom	Michael	 Moore	Younghwan	 Song
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	How Well Prepared Are People Age 55-64 for Retirement? Selected Indicators of Well-Being in a Comparison of Three Cohorts	Dramatic changes in life expectancy, women’s roles, the structure of the workforce, and pension systems have occurred in recent history all influencing the well-being of future retirees.  This paper uses U.S. data to focus on the retirement resources of persons aged 55-64. By comparing these resources for near retirees in 2004 to their counterparts in 1994 and 1984, this paper provides some indication of the preparedness of future aged relative to those who retired before them.  Preliminary results indicate that there are marked differences in potential retirement outcomes by educational attainment and race.  Notable changes have occurred with women’s pathways into retirement due to changes in patterns of market work.  Though few near retirees have purchased long-term care insurance, most near retirees could receive care from family members, so the extent of their exposure to risk is unclear.	Howard	 Iams	John	W. R. Phillips	Irena	 Dushi	Lionel	 Deang
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	Retirement in America: Working Life Table Estimates for the Population over Age 50, by Sex and Race	Population-level analyses are sorely needed to document trends in labor force participation and gauge the increased demand for public and private pensions that will accompany population aging. Using data from the 1992-2002 Health and Retirement Study, we estimate a series of sex- and race- specific multistate working life tables for the population over age 50. We find that at age 50 men can expect to spend 46% of their remaining years working for pay and women can expect to spend just one-third. More than half of all men and women have left the labor force before ages 63 and 60, respectively, although about one-fifth of retirements are reversed. The non-working years are experienced differently across sex and race groups as well. Blacks overall spend proportionately more years disabled, and the rate of reentry from retirement is lowest for Black males. We discuss our findings with an eye toward the pension policy debate.	David	F. Warner	Mark	D. Hayward	Melissa	 Hardy
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	The Effects of Local and Extra-Local Neighborhood Conditions on White Mobility Decisions	We utilize data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, neighborhood data from four censuses, and rapidly developing techniques for spatial data analysis to provide a first exploration of the ways in which the racial composition of extra-local areas – areas surrounding the neighborhood of residence – affects mobility decisions of individual white householders. Results indicate that, net of the influence of other predictors of mobility, changes in the relative size of the non-anglo minority population in extra-local areas affects mobility decisions for homeowners and some other specific groups of white householders, but these additive effects are fairly modest. However, the effect of local minority populations on out-mobility among white householders does appear to be more pronounced if the neighborhood is surrounded by areas containing large and growing minority populations. These results provide unique evidence on previously untested aspects of theories of neighborhood change and individual behaviors that affect segregation.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Scott	J. South
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Black-White Segregation in Multiethnic Metropolis: How Does Multigroup Context Alter the Effect of Black-White Segregation for Blacks?	How do the residential dynamics change the nature and impact of racial residential segregation when the American residential landscape becomes increasingly diverse? Although the multigroup segregation method has been developed, its utility in substantive interpretation and hypothesis testing are underdeveloped. This paper first explores the interpretive meaning of multigroup measures of segregation, constructed using the 2000 census. The decomposed components of the multigroup segregation are compared with traditional pairwise measures. By examining three types of cities, we bring life to the abstract measures. We then examine the impact of black-white residential segregation on the income of blacks while controlling for measures of diversity and multigroup segregation of individuals' resident metropolitan areas. We test the hypothesis that the detrimental effect of black-white segregation on African Americans' income becomes weaker as the local population becomes more diverse using the quantile regression technique and the 5% PUMS 2000 data.	Lingxin	 Hao	Amy	 Lutz
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Disaggregating Trends in Racial Residential Segregation: Metropolitan, Micropolitan, and Non-Core Counties Compared	Previous research has focused on patterns of segregation in metropolitan cities and suburbs. In this paper, we examine sources of change in residential segregation between and within places in U.S. metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas, including micropolitan and non-core counties. We focus on black-white, Hispanic-white, and Hispanic-black trends in segregation using block data from the 1990 and 2000 Census Summary Files. By decomposing segregation into its spatial components, we can determine whether minority populations cluster within places, between places, or across higher-order spatial systems (e.g., metropolitan, nonmetropolitan, micropolitan, or rural areas). Place segregation is measured using the Theil index. Our analysis addresses whether the optimism implied by recent declines in neighborhood segregation in cities must be balanced by increases in segregation at other spatial scales.	Domenico	 Parisi	Daniel	T. Lichter	Steven	M. Grice
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Patterns and Trends in the Spatial Scale and Magnitude of Racial Residential Segregation, 1980-2000	In this paper, we use newly developed methods of measuring spatial segregation to investigate how racial residential segregation patterns in U.S. metropolitan areas have changed from 1980 to 2000 (Reardon et al., 2006; Reardon & O'Sullivan, 2004). In particular, we examine the relationships among the spatial scale of segregation and trends in segregation levels. By ‘scale’, we mean the granularity of residential patterns. We find that black-white segregation has declined, on average, only at the local level; macro-scale patterns of black-white segregation within metropolitan areas have changed little. We find that Hispanic-white and Asian-white segregation levels, in contrast, have increased at both micro- and macro-scales, suggesting patterns of localized immigration settlement and enclave formation.	Sean	F. Reardon	Barrett	A. Lee	Chad	R. Farrell	Stephen	 Matthews	David	 O'Sullivan	Glenn	 Firebaugh	Kendra	 Bischoff
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Reshaping the Post-Soviet Periphery: The Impact of Men’s Labor Migration on Women’s Lives and Aspirations in Rural Armenia	In this paper we use recent survey and qualitative data to examine the impact of men’s labor migration from rural Armenia to Russia on their wives’ economic conditions and activities, social networks, and proclivity to migrate. We find that households with labor migrants have considerably higher incomes than households without migrants and that this gap is wider in the poorer province. However, we find no difference in women’s own employment status and incomes. Households’ agricultural and consumer assets reflect the value of these assets in rural society and the presence/absence of adult males. Women with migrant husbands are found to have more interactions with other villagers, yet, at the same time, less financial dependence on them. While women with migrant husbands are significantly more optimistic about the material future of their households, they are, ceteris paribus, also more inclined to migrating out of their villages than women with non-migrant husbands.	Victor	 Agadjanian	Arusyak	 Sevoyan	Cecilia	 Menjivar
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Remittances and Changing Gender Power Relations in Recipient Households	This paper analyzes household expenditures strategies of male and female beneficiaries of remittances in the metropolitan area of Pereira, located in the coffee region of Colombia. The objective of the analysis is to study the role of migrants in redefining gender roles in their communities of origin through remittances. I compare expenditures profiles in six types of households, defined by their status as remittance beneficiaries, gender of the remitter, and gender of the household head. The differential patterns of expenditure are considered proxies for women’s empowerment at the household level. I argue that female beneficiaries expend more on human capital and living expenses than male beneficiaries. In the analysis I control for the presence of children, civil status, and the beneficiaries’ life cycle stage, among other variables.	Maria	 Aysa
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Migrant Social Capital: Effects of Thailand’s 1997 Economic Crisis and Post-Crisis Recovery	Employing longitudinal data from Thailand, we extend current knowledge of internal migration processes by analyzing changes in migration frequencies before, during, and after Thailand’s economic crisis of 1997. We replicate recent studies of cumulative causation by measuring frequency of trips, duration of time away, and level of network aggregation (village or household), to estimate a model of migration among men and women in Thailand during recent periods of national economic growth and recession. Building on our earlier work showing that migrant social capital differently affects men’s and women’s migration, this study evaluates year and occupational sex segregation effects. Expected findings are that return migration of men and women to villages of origin increased during the economic crisis. Although rural-urban migration decreased for both male and female migrants, within two years, it began to increase again, first affecting female migrants in the manufacturing industry and then male migrants in all occupations.	Sara	 Curran	Karen	 Brooks	Anita	 Rocha
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Who Arrives First? The Timing of Arrival among Immigrants in the Same Household	This paper focuses on differences in the timing of arrival among immigrants in the same household because earlier arriving immigrants may be able to accelerate the adaptation of later arrivals through the sharing of knowledge or scouting out of opportunities. Although U.S. immigration policy encourages family members, especially spouses, to immigrate together, it also allows closely related immigrants to enter the country at separate times. Using U.S. 2000 census data, we describe patterns of timing of arrivals among immigrants in the same household. Results show that over a third of husbands and wives arrive in different years and that the sequence is gendered, with men more often arriving before the women. These patterns differ by country of origin, and years of separation differ by family composition.	Hiromi	 Ishizawa	Gillian	 Stevens
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Family Size, Birth Order, and IQ	It is clear that birth order affects children’s outcomes along a number of dimensions, including education and earnings, although recent psychology literature provides mixed evidence of the effects of birth order on IQ. The evidence on the effect of family size in the economics literature is even more mixed, with inconclusive results on all outcomes. This paper uses a large dataset on the population of Norway and focuses on the effect of birth order and family size on IQ, an outcome not previously available in datasets of this magnitude. Because of the endogeneity of family size, we instrument for family size using twin births. We find a strong and significant effect of both birth order and family size on IQ.	Sandra	 Black	Paul	 Devereux	Kjell	 Salvanes
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Demographic Transitions and Children's Resources: Bonus or Divergence?	How do fertility transitions affect children’s resources? Existing perspectives provide two seemingly different answers: “Dilution” arguments focusing on family size predict a resource bonus, while “divergence” arguments focusing on family structure predict increased inequality. We argue that these two perspectives are complementary and reconcilable within an integrated framework. The proposed integration shows how changes in family size and structure jointly shape children’s resource levels and inequality. Failure to integrate these two perspectives can bias understanding of the magnitude or direction of the influences of fertility transitions. In particular, the resource bonus accruing to children depends not only on the quantum of fertility decline, but also on its locus and on accompanying changes in family structure. We illustrate with empirical data from Cameroon.	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	C.	Shannon  Stokes
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Is Gender Bias in Education Mediated by Sibling Configuration? Evidence from Egypt	In this paper, the Resource Dilution model of parental investments in children is tested using nationally representative survey data on Egyptian adolescents. I investigate the statistical associations between adolescent educational attainment and three characteristics of the sibling group (size, ordinal position, and gender composition), and their interactions with the respondent’s gender. Findings show that sibship size has a net negative association with educational attainment. Contrary to Resource Dilution evidence from Western settings, first-born children in Egypt are disadvantaged relative to their later-born peers. The presence of older sisters in one’s sibling group has a particularly strong positive effect on schooling, indicating that girls may be withheld from school to free up or generate resources for their younger siblings’ education. While gender remains among the strongest determinants of education, sibling configuration plays a large role in mediating its impact. Revisions to the Resource Dilution mechanisms linking family structure to adolescents’ gendered outcomes are offered in conclusion.	Rania	 Salem
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Family Size, Children’s Cognitive Test Scores and Familial Interaction: U.S., 1997-2002	This research evaluates hypotheses derived from two prominent explanatory frameworks related to the well- known negative association between family size and children’s outcomes: the resource dilution and confluence models. Central to both models is the distribution of interpersonal resources, especially time children spend in interaction with parents and siblings. This research tests for potential resource dilution effects in larger families associated with differential time spent with parents and confluence effects associated with time spent with siblings on children’s scores on the Woodcock-Johnson Revised Letter-Word Identification test. Models are estimated using both cross-sectional and longitudinal fixed effects designs. Results from the cross-sectional analysis suggest important resource dilution effects associated with time parents are accessible to but not directly engaged with children.	John	 Sandberg	Patrick	 Rafail
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Who Cares for the Elderly? Intrafamily Resource Allocation and Migration in Mexico	This paper investigates the determinants of individual contributions from children to parents in terms of both physical and financial care and explores how the distribution of responsibility for the elderly parent across siblings affects international migration. I address these questions by estimating best response functions for individual time and financial contributions as well as migration as functions of total siblings' contributions of time and money to their elderly parents. I find that (1) individuals reduce their time and financial contributions in response to an increase in their siblings' contributions and (2) a decrease in siblings' total financial contribution and an increase in their total time contribution results in an increase in the probability that the individual will migrate to the U.S. These results suggest that siblings' contributions toward their parents are substitutes,  and individuals who feel more financially and less physically responsible for their parents are more likely to migrate.	Francisca	M. Antman
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Continuity in Intergenerational Support across Three Generations	Changes in the demography of U.S. families – increasing longevity, smaller families, and higher rates of women’s employment – raise new questions about who will care for older family members. This paper examines social support and transfers between parents and adult children. It poses three questions: How do the needs and resources of both generations affect the level of help that the younger generation provides parents? How and why do sisters and brothers differ in the help they provide to their parents? Is there continuity across generations in intergenerational care giving? We use data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey (WLS), a fifty-year panel study of high school graduates of the class of 1957 and their siblings, the latter being a more socioeconomically diverse group. We consider socialization or “demonstration effects” and take account of both actual and potential exchange and reciprocity in family relationships.	Esther	M. Friedman	Judith	A. Seltzer
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Differences over Time in the Relationship between Family Disruptions and Support at Older Ages in Britain	Despite long-standing concerns that changes in family behaviour (such as divorce) may have had a detrimental effect on support at older ages, there is little research on this topic. Employing comparable data from the 1988 British Retirement and Retirement Plans Survey (RS) and the 2001/2 British Household Panel Study (BHPS) we examined variations over time in the relationship between family disruption (due to divorce, separation, and death) and support (e.g. co-residence, help to and from, and contact with, children) in early old age in Britain. We explored whether changes in support were due to differences in the mix of individual attributes associated with the propensity to give and receive support (e.g. the percentage experiencing divorce) or to changes in the strength of relationship between explanatory variables and support outcomes (e.g. the effects of divorce). Our findings suggest that the negative effect of family disruption on support appears to be weakening over time.	Karen	F. Glaser	Cecilia	 Tomassini	Rachel	 Stuchbury
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Buying Out of Familial Obligation: The Tradeoff between Living with versus Financially Supporting Elderly Parents in Urban China	For Chinese families, co-residence with elderly parents is both a form of support and a moderator of financial support. Previous literature on the intergenerational support in Chinese societies has studied either co-residence or financial support, but not the joint nature of the two forms of support. Using a recent dataset (Study of Family Life in Urban China) collected in 1999 in three cities, Shanghai, Wuhan, and Xi’an, we examine whether or not children (especially sons) with high socioeconomic status buy out of fulfilling the obligation of living with parents by providing more financial support. We first perform the analyses by estimating between-family and within-family models. To account for the potential selection bias associated with co-residence, we further treat co-residence and financial transfer as joint outcomes by using endogenous switching regression models.	Haiyan	 Zhu
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	On the Momentum of Marriage Decline	Over the last several decades, first-marriage rates declined remarkably in the more developed regions, raising the proportion never-marrying at ages 45-49 to 8.5% on average. We analyze the future trends in the proportions never-marrying for 96 countries, of which 32 are in the more developed regions, 42 are in the less developed regions, and 22 are the least developed countries. In a way similar to the approach of population momentum, we assume that first-marriage rates stop declining instantaneously and remain constant over the next 35 years. Even under such an optimistic assumption, however, we find that on average the proportion never-marrying at ages 45-49 would still increase by more than threefold for countries in the more developed regions. Few countries and areas in the less developed regions would follow the trends in the more developed regions. And there is yet no sign of marriage decline in the least developed countries.	Nan	 Li	Vasantha	K. Kandiah
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	The Intrinsic Total Fertility Rate: A New Approach to Tempo-Adjusted Fertility	Various parameterised approaches have been developed to adjust the Period Total Fertility Rate (PTFR) for birth timing distortions. These tempo-adjusted Total Fertility Rates have been criticized and their interpretation is unclear. The PTFR can be considered as the product of a matrix of birth probabilities by age, parity and interval since last birth applied to a population composition matrix with the same characteristics. Our contention is that past impacts of changes in the timing of births are reflected in the current population composition matrix and it is this that distorts the PTFR. This distortion gradually disappears if a constant matrix of birth probabilities is applied across time. After about 25 years, the population composition matrix and the PTFR become constant. We refer to the final PTFR emerging from this process as the Intrinsic Total Fertility Rate. Using Australian data, we illustrate the benefits of this measure in interpreting fertility trends.	Peter	 McDonald	Rebecca	 Kippen
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	The Evolution of the Mortality Curve: Changes in the Age of Minimum Mortality	The shape of the age-specific mortality curve has long been viewed as constant: with very high mortality at both ends of the age range and with lower levels of mortality after childhood and before the beginning of old age. Demographers have tended to focus their analysis on the ages of high mortality and paid little attention to the age at minimum mortality; biologists, on the other hand see the age at minimum mortality as the point in the lifespan when the organism has successfully passed through development and becomes subject to the forces of mortality that eventually result in senescence. The age at minimum mortality has been dropping in recent decades in many countries of the world. We hypothesize that this earlier age of lowest mortality is connected to an earlier age of physical development or maturity that accompanies the epidemiological and nutritional revolutions that have resulted in longer life.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Greg	L. Drevenstedt	Caleb	E. Finch
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	Forecasting U.S. Mortality Using Cohort Smoking Index	In this paper, we introduce a recently established relationship between cohort smoking patterns and adult mortality into mortality projections for the United States. In particular, we incorporate a variable representing the intensity of smoking within a cohort into the original Lee-Carter model. By accounting for the striking variability in sex differentials in mortality, this variable enables us to introduce a common temporal trend of mortality change, rather than a separate trend for each sex. We project age-specific mortality rates for men and women in age group 40-85 between year 2003 and 2075 in the U.S. and demonstrate how the introduction of cohort influences affects mortality projections.	Haidong	 Wang	Sam	 Preston
2007	13	European Family Migration	Family Migration and Women's Labour Market Status in  Britain: The Effect of State Dependence and Geography	Numerous studies have shown that women’s labour market status is influenced by family migration. Thus, it has been shown that women who move long distances with their partners have lower wages, work shorter hours and are less likely to be employed in the labour market than otherwise equivalent women. Using longitudinal data from the British Household Panel Study (BHPS) we investigate two issues that have received relatively little attention in this literature. First, we explore the role of women’s employment status prior to moving, using random-effects dynamic probit models that allow us to model state dependence issues explicitly. Second, we also include variables relating to the geographical location of the movers. In particular, we test whether moving into urban destinations increases women’s subsequent employment rates and whether women working in geographically ubiquitous jobs are less likely to be out of work following family migration.	Paul	J. Boyle	Zhiqiang	 Feng	Vernon	 Gayle
2007	13	European Family Migration	The Dynamics of Working Couples' Activity Spaces	In Europe, most couples in their reproductive lives are faced with residential choices, which are influenced in part  by their family and occupational choices. Whether one or both couple members work outside their home, whether they have children or not, the territory defined by their place(s) of residence and place(s) of work results from an equation in terms of gender roles, distances, career strategy, etc.  Having collected the work and residential histories of both members of more than 1,500 couples born between 1930 and 1950, we present a paper that focuses both on applied research into the strategies of couples who relocate either their workplace or their home, and on methodological aspects of the modelling of territory dynamics. This paper forms part of a larger research program that aims to encompass a wider range of locations to which individuals are linked in the analysis of residential mobility.	Eva	 Lelièvre	Nicolas	 Robette
2007	13	European Family Migration	Distance to Parents and Geographical Mobility	We address the influence of parental proximity on residential mobility and migration of young and middle-aged adults. We investigate whether current proximity to the parents discourages geographical mobility, particularly in situations where the need for support or contact is greater; and which factors influence the probability of a move that either decreases or increases the distance to the parents. We use data from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study (NKPS) and Dutch register data. We estimate binary logistic regression models of the probability of moving, and multinomial logistic regression models to distinguish whether the move increased, decreased or left unchanged the distance between generations. Preliminary results from analyses of NKPS data show that parental proximity strongly decreases the likelihood of moving. Divorce and having an additional child enhance the probability of moves without a change in distance and of moves in the direction of parental home.	Francesca	 Michielin	Clara	H. Mulder
2007	13	European Family Migration	Professional Consequences of Couple Internal Migration: Evidence from France	Studies on the professional consequences of spatial mobility are largely individual-centered. Their implicit hypothesis is that the mobility decision is taken by the breadwinner partner. With increasing women labor force participation, such assumptions are less valid. It seems obvious that moving is a couple decision. This paper aims to analyze the professional consequences of this joint decision in terms of activity, job type, earnings and job satisfaction. We first estimate the probability that the couple moves outside the current area (“French department”) with a probit model on panel data, according to both partners’ characteristics. Secondly, we analyze the consequences of the couple migration. We find that migration is generally profitable for the couple, but not necessary for both partners. In particular, the woman may reduce her professional investment and activity, and the wage increase is greater for men.	Ariane	 Pailhe	Anne	 Solaz
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	The Role of Attitudes toward Risk in the Decision to Migrate	Geographic mobility plays a key role in the process of development in most low-income countries. This is especially true in Mexico, whose border with the U.S. has the largest flow of migrants in the contemporary world. Developing a good understanding of the socio-economic determinants of migration decisions has proved to be extremely difficult. This paper examines the role that attitudes toward risk play in the decision to migrate. It utilizes unprecedented longitudinal data on social, economic, and demographic outcomes from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), which also includes migration histories and direct measures of people’s preferences—risk aversion among them. With these data, the paper tests directly whether people’s attitudes toward risk influence the decision to migrate and finds a (perhaps surprisingly) positive relation between financial risk aversion and willingness to migrate: The most financially risk averse seem to be the most willing to migrate.	Hector	 Conroy
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Remittances in the Context of HIV/AIDS in Africa: New Theory and Evidence from Western Kenya	Numerous studies focus on social ties that migrants maintain with their origin households and communities as determinants of remittance behavior. Absent are investigations of new, non-familial ties that migrants form in urban destinations and how these compete for migrants’ resources. In sub-Saharan Africa, male migrants often enter into nonmarital sexual partnerships that involve the financial exchange of money and gifts. Using both quantitative and qualitative data from urban Kenya, we find that financial transfers to sexual partners reduce remittances to rural households. We present additional evidence that serious nonmarital partners serve as substitutes for familial emotional support in the city, explaining much of the negative relationship between transfers and remittances. Financial transfers have been linked to risky sexual behavior. Thus, non-familial ties in urban Kenya may have short-term repercussions for rural families who are dependent on migrant remittances, as well as longer-term consequences for families whose migrant sons contract HIV.	Nancy	 Luke
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Longitudinal Analysis of the Impact of Migration on Household Wealth in Kanchanaburi Province, Thailand	The objective of this study is to examine the impact of migration and remittances on household wealth using data from a longitudinal study conducted in the Kanchanaburi province of Thailand. The Kanchanaburi province is of interest due to its varied economy that allows us to examine these relationships over time in five different types of communities. These communities include urban or semi-urban, rice growing, plantation, uplands, and mixed areas. The Kanchanaburi DSS is operated by the Institute for Population and Social Research (IPSR) in the Kanchanaburi province of Thailand. Panel data were collected from households, individuals and communities each year from 2000 to 2004. In each round, about 42,000 individuals were interviewed in about 12,000 households. Both multiple regression and random effects models are used to estimate the impact of migration and remittances on household wealth over a four-year period.	Kathy	 Ford	Aree	 Jampaklay	Aphichat	 Chamratrithirong
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Internal Migration, Remittances, and Community Development	This study seeks to evaluate the developmental consequences of internal migration and remittance flows for 22 migrant sending communities in Thailand. The paper first establishes a theoretical link between migration-remittance motivations and expected changes in the level and distribution of economic resources in sending communities. Emerging hypotheses are then tested on a multi-level, longitudinal, and prospective data set from 22 Thai communities. Quantitative analyses are supplemented with insights from fieldwork to evaluate how economic changes caused by migration and remittances alter the social structure of the community. The paper also attempts to determine how the changes caused by migration-remittance flows in a community affect future migration flows. Utilizing a computational modeling approach, long-term changes in the distribution of resources in a community due to migration-remittance flows, and the subsequent changes in the dynamics of migration are simulated.	Filiz	 Garip
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Gendered Migrants Networks and the Health of the Left Behind: Evidence from Indonesia	Recent research has begun to analyze the consequences of migration not merely on the health of migrants, but on the health and well-being of family members left behind in the migrant’s origin household or village. This paper addresses concerns over reverse causation between migration and health outcomes and endogenous selection into migration by employing a longitudinal, counterfactual framework. Preliminary findings suggest that internal migrant children reduce the likelihood of being in poor health in later years for elderly parents among the entire sample. In contrast, international migrant children appear to benefit only those elders in households with high migration propensity. These findings support three key assertions of an emerging theoretical framework on migration-health relationships: that migration benefits the left-behind, that these benefits may reflect selection based on preexisting family traits, and that the international migration process may be more subject to this sort of selection.	Bethany	 Everett	Randall	 Kuhn	Rachel	 Silvey
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Male Migration, Old-Age Support, and Marriage Outcomes of Women in Rural Bangladesh	This paper examines the effect of brother’s migration on the marriage patterns of sisters in a rural area of Bangladesh. It has been proposed that when sons are migrants, especially when accompanied by their spouses, parents become more willing to marry their daughters nearby to secure care for old-age. Such willingness arises because of a missing market for care. Using a rich dataset from a Demographic Surveillance System in Bangladesh, which contains 20 years of marriage and migration records, we find strong evidence that women with migrant brothers are more likely to marry someone from the same village and are also more likely to marry someone with lower education. While village endogamy is a rational response for providing increased care support to parents, marrying someone with lower human capital ensures that a woman with migrant brothers marries a man who is less likely to migrate himself.	Ali	E. Protik
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Intergenerational Transfers between Older People and Their Migrant Children in Rural China: Strategic Investments, Strategic Returns	This investigation studied how older parents and their adult children in rural China strategically engaged in reciprocal transfers with each other. We asked whether downstream investments by parents enhance the ability of children to migrate and accumulate resources that could then be used to make upstream transfers to parents. Data derived from 1,180 parents aged 60+ who participated in 2001 and 2003 surveys of older people in rural Anhui Province, China. Parents reported about time and money transfers with 4,652 adult children. Random effects models revealed that older parents enabled their children to migrate by offering them childcare and financial support. Migrant children--particularly sons--reciprocated for their parents’ earlier economic contributions by providing them with greater upstream financial transfers and farm labor. Migrants and non-migrants reciprocated childcare equally. Results support a mutual-aid model of the rural Chinese family in which intergenerational transfers are reciprocal and multiple family needs are met.	Merril	 Silverstein	Zhen	 Cong	Shuzhuo	 Li
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	A Comparative Study of Migrant Interactions with Elderly Parents in Rural Cambodia and Thailand	Internal migration in Southeast Asia raises questions about strains upon traditional systems of support for elders. While remittances to origin households can play a role in rural household economies, uncertainty remains regarding whether and under which circumstances children remit or maintain contact with aging parents. This paper examines  remittances and visits by adult children of rural elderly in two countries using data from 2004 SEC (Cambodia) and 1995 SWET (Thailand). Analyses considers what spatially dispersed children do to support parents; whether traits of parents; migrants; or households from which they originate enhance or detract from these expressions of intergenerational exchange; and how remittance, visits, and determinants vary across countries. Comparisons of conditions and characteristics of remittance and contact across Thai and Cambodian families allows for insights for refining notions of how social, economic, and cultural forces motivate provision of support to aging parents.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Kim	 Korinek	John	 Knodel	Napaporn	 Chayovan
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	The Changing Influence of China’s Family Planning Programme on Women’s Contraceptive Choices: Evidence from a Multilevel Analysis of the Recent UNFPA Reproductive Health Surveys	Historically, the family planning programme in China has been driven administratively with a strong emphasis on post partum IUD use after first birth and sterilization after any subsequent births. Following the ICPD recommendations, China began implementing a client-friendly informed choices approach to the delivery of family planning services, encouraging women or couples to be the prime decision makers of their methods of choice rather than service providers. Using data from the UNFPA reproductive health and family planning surveys conducted during September 2003 and November 2005, this paper applies multilevel modelling techniques to demonstrate the effect of changes in the family planning programme on women’s contraceptive decisions and behaviour in 30 selected counties covering eastern, central and western regions of China. The preliminary results show clear evidence of county-level effects, underscoring the influence of family planning workers in determining women’s choices to use IUD at parity one and sterilization at parity two.	James	 Brown	Bohua	 Li	Sabu	S.  Padmadas
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Does Policy Relaxation Increase Contraceptive Flexibility? Short-Acting Contraceptive Use in China	Contraceptive composition in China is characterized by dominant user of long-acting contraceptives, such as IUD and sterilization. Less than 10 percent of people use short-acting contraceptives. An important reason behind the composition is the state regulation on birth contraception and contraceptive use. In the mid-1990s, the Chinese government initiated a pilot program on quality of care, which now spreads over one third of the country. The core of the program is informed choice of contraception. The main research question of this paper is whether the policy relaxation increased the flexibility of contraceptive use. Specifically, it examines whether the policy change increased the use of short-acting contraceptives. Using data from 1997 and 2001 China Demographic and Family Planning Survey, we compared short-acting contraceptive users before and after the policy change. The results indicate that the policy change did not increase contraceptive flexibility, particularly in the rural areas.	Xingshan	 Cao
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Changing Family Planning Scenario in India: A Trend Analysis of Major States	Over the decades, there has been a substantial increase in contraceptive use in India. The direction, emphasis and strategies of the Family Welfare Programme have changed over time. However, meeting the contraceptive needs of considerable proportions of women and men and improving the quality of family planning services continue to be a challenge. The 1990s witnessed a growing recognition of this, and several innovative policy and programme initiatives have been launched to address these issues. This paper reviews and synthesises evidence from surveys and service statistics of the 1990s and thereafter on contraceptive use dynamics and tries to quantify the trends in accepting contraceptive method mix over the last decade. From the policy perspective viewpoint, this paper makes suggestions for areas that need further programme and research attention.	Saurav	 Dey
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Twenty Years of Field Worker Visits by FP Workers in Bangladesh: Do We Really Need Them?	In Bangladesh the National Family Planning Programme  introduced female workers in 1978 to provide doorstep services. A total of 24,000 female workers continued this service until 1998, when new policies were enacted, static clinics were set up and home visits were drastically curtailed. This analysis uses the national level data from the BDHS 2004 to investigate the effect of the new policies and evaluate the importance of female field workers after their  visits were reduced. Results show that for various methods of modern contraception, the home visits still remain a strong predictor of use of the method, even when other related covariates are controlled. We also find that in the newly defined administrative regions, Barisal and Sylhet, the performance in contraceptive use is significantly poor. This indicates that Bangladeshi women of reproductive age still benefit from doorstep services, and complete withdrawal of these services should be delayed.	Nashid	 Kamal	Masuda	 Mohsena
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Population, Land Use Change, and the Changing Fortunes of Migrant Settler Households in the Ecuadorian Amazon	The Northern Ecuadorian Amazon, the principal region of migrant colonization in Ecuador since the 1970s, has experienced major changes in population and land use. The closing of the frontier (as major areas become protected and off limits and large areas are titled to indigenous populations) and continuing population growth have led to fragmentation of plots.  This paper uses panel survey data on farm households for 1990-1999 to examine the implications for land use, increasing off-farm employment, and farm household incomes. We examine farm and off-farm incomes by size of plot, and estimate Gini coefficients for total household income as well as farm and off-farm incomes and land distribution. Decreasing household size from falling fertility and out-migration is found to be a major explanation for the lack of overall decline in household incomes despite plot fragmentation and falling market prices of major farm outputs.	Richard	 Bilsborrow	Alisson	F. Barbieri	Bolier	 Torres-Navarrete
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Population Growth and Agricultural Land Use in Two Agro-Ecological Zones of Ghana, 1960-2010	Multiplicative and mediating variables are combined with a demographic variable, in non-linear multiple regression models to assess the effect of population growth on agricultural land use in two agro-ecological zones of Ghana. The paper uses data from a retrospective household survey (conducted among 1,568 farmers in 504 households in 24 communities), population census reports of Ghana for 1960, 1970, 1984 and 2000, agricultural census data for 1992 and 2000 and a land suitability map. Predictions of cropped area required to meet anticipated population growth are computed for 2010, based on multiple regression models and projected populations. Required cropped area is matched with actual arable area that would be available, based on a land suitability analysis. Predictions show that three and two districts in the dry and derived savannah zones, respectively, would experience agricultural land shortfall. The rest of the districts would have agricultural land available to support future population growth.	Samuel	N.A. Codjoe
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Spatial Modeling of the Amazon Deforestation	The greatest challenge in establishing a function of socioeconomic development for an environmental degradation potential, as in the specific case of  deforestation, is in obtaining measures for a group of variables that give some indication of the dependent variable behavior in a the future. This paper aims to explore, in a spatial context, the variables that better explain the Amazon deforestation. We reach a parsimonious model, capable of showing the environmental degradation behavior of that area in the future. Based on the statistical exploration of the variables that are directly or indirectly involved in the process of Amazon deforestation, the main objective of this paper is to elaborate classic and spatial lineal models that establish functional relationships between the variables and the percentage of the deforested areas. The estimated models are intended for subsidizing the simulation of future scenerios, integrating socioeconomic variations and deforestation impact levels.	Ricardo	A. Garcia	Britaldo	 Soares-Filho
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Demographic Effects of Major Hurricanes: An Analysis of Long-Term Neighborhood Change Following Big Storms of the 1990s	Much research has examined the social, psychological, and economic impacts of major natural disasters, but few have considered their demographic effects and fewer still have moved beyond specific case studies to consider how places, in general, recover demographically after catastrophe. In this study, we contribute to social understanding of natural disasters by investigating their demographic futures as well as their pasts and by doing so for multiple disasters. We focus on U.S. places hit by the costliest hurricanes of the early 1990s, specifically on areas receiving over a billion dollars worth of property damage. For these areas we merge localized storm data from the national HAZUS database with demographic data on individual census tracts to test and refine general propositions about how neighborhoods change after a major coastal disaster, paying particular attention to patterns and processes of power and vulnerability following the event, as communities struggle to rebuild.	Jeremy	 Pais	James	R. Elliott
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Partner Violence in Cambodia: Examining Tolerance and Incidence	This paper examines the relationship between experience of and tolerance for partner violence in Cambodia among ever-married women age 15-49. Controlling for socio-demographic variables, we compare the risk factors that  make women more likely to (1) report experience(s) of partner violence and (2) report high tolerance for partner violence. Current research on domestic violence discusses measures of tolerance as an indication of the social environment and a potential risk factor for incidence of domestic violence. Using data from the 2000 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS), we employ logistic regression to compare individual- and community-level risk factors for tolerance and experience of partner violence. Comparison of these two models illuminates the links between tolerance and incidence. We find that tolerance is not significantly related to experience of violence. Tolerance is generally predicted by women’s social capital, and incidence is more clearly related to socio-demographic and economic variables.	Maryann	 Bylander	Tricia	S. Ryan
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Contextual Explanations for Variations in the Effects of Women’s Status on Domestic Violence in Rural Uttar Pradesh, India	This work-in-progress examines the effect of women’s status on domestic violence in rural Uttar Pradesh, India, using merged village- and individual-level DHS datasets. I address two main questions: does higher status protect women from experiencing marital violence? And how might village-level social organization, such as collective efficacy, socioeconomic status, and norms of tolerance toward violence, contribute to variation in domestic abuse across villages and variation in the relationship between women's status and violence? Preliminary results suggest that the effects of status depend on the dimension measured: individual-level women’s status related to the domestic sphere (decision-making autonomy and freedom of movement) is protective against violence while status related to the outside world (working and exposure to media) puts women at greater risk of abuse. Part two will apply multi-level modeling to analyze how village-level factors may condition the impact of these individual-level effects.	Elizabeth	A. Mogford
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Women’s Acceptance of Intimate Partner Violence within Marriage: Qualitative Perspectives from Rural Bangladesh	While violence against women by husbands and male partners occurs throughout the world, the proportions of women who report experiencing such violence, and the proportions of men and women who say it is sometimes justified, vary substantially among societies and subpopulations—or, more precisely, the proportions who say so in surveys vary. This paper uses data from 110 in-depth interviews and 16 small group discussions to explore the psycho-social underpinnings of a 2002 survey finding that an extremely high proportion of women believe it is acceptable for husbands to use violence against their wives. The qualitative findings suggest that women may view intimate partner violence as a violation of their human rights even though they have resigned themselves to accept it. The authors conclude by raising questions regarding the meaning of responses to commonly used questions intended to measure women’s attitudes regarding intimate partner violence, and discussing policy implications.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Farzana	 Islam
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	School Characteristics, Family Background, and Variation in the Gender Gap in College Graduation among African Americans	African Americans experience large and growing gender differences in educational attainment. In this paper I examine variation in the gender gap by characteristics of schools that students attend and their family background. Qualitative work provides reason to expect gender gaps across the socioeconomic spectrum, but possibly larger ones among more disadvantaged students. Using data from the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS:88), I find that differences in college graduation between males and female students are more sensitive to school context than to family background. The gaps tend to be larger in more segregated schools and those in urban areas. In addition, male students report relatively worse teacher treatment of students in urban areas, while the grade point averages of male students at the top of the distribution are especially low in more segregated schools. I discuss potential explanations for those patterns and implications for future research into educational gender gaps.	Andrew	 Clarkwest
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Social Segregation and Academic Achievement in State-Run Elementary Schools in the Municipality of Campinas, Brazil	Space is not solely a reflection of social inequality; the neighborhoods also work to reinforce the advantages or disadvantages associated with one’s social class. However, the study of how neighborhoods affect their residents has only recently entered the debate on urban poverty in Latin America. We use 2000 data from the Brazilian population census, school census, and the state of São Paulo’s educational evaluation system to analyze the relationship between school infrastructure, school academic achievement, and the neighborhoods in which these schools are located. Our analyses indicate that state-run elementary schools located in areas of concentrated poverty have lower academic achievement in Math and Portuguese than those in non-segregated and affluent areas of the city, even though these schools are all administered by the same government body. We end with a discussion of the relationship between Brazilian education policy and its influence on the spatial differences in São Paulo State.	José	Marcos  Cunha	José	Roberto  Rus Perez	Maren	Andrea  Jimenez	Cibele	 Yahn de Andrade
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Effects of Socioeconomic Status of School Population on Student Math Achievement Growth	This study examines the effects of socioeconomic status of student population on student math achievement gains between 10th and 12th grades. Focusing on some methodological and conceptual issues raised in previous studies, this study addresses the following research questions: (1) does the socioeconomic composition of schools affect student gains in standardized math test scores above and beyond the family- and individual-level effects? (2) If so, what are the underlying mechanisms through which the social composition of schools affects student achievement? (3) Are students from specific backgrounds more affected than others by the composition of student population in a school? Using data drawn from ELS:2002 and employing the HLM, this study reveals the importance of compositional context of student population in a school not only in determining how much a student improves in math tests between 10th and 12th grades, but also in shaping racial gaps in math achievement growth.	Gyehoon	 Oh
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Does Segregation Create Winners and Losers? Education and Spatial Segregation on the Basis of Income and Race	This study examines the relationship between spatial segregation on the basis of income and race groups and educational attainment. Data are drawn from 1990 Census Microdata, the October Current Population Survey, and tract-level data from the 1990 Census summary tape files. The results from multilevel modeling indicate that black and poor respondents who resided in more black/white and poor/nonpoor segregated metropolitan areas, respectively, were more likely to drop out of high school and less likely to then continue on into college. But white and nonpoor respondents in more segregated areas were not more likely to graduate from high school or go on to college. Results are unchanged by the use of spatial-based segregation measures or instrumental variable estimation.	Lincoln	 Quillian
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Border Enforcement as a Deterrent of Illegal Immigration: Evidence from Return Mexican Migrants	Over the past several decades, border enforcement has intensified with the intent to reduce unauthorized Mexican immigration into the United States. While previous studies, e.g. Kossoudji (1992), document the persistence of undocumented Mexican immigrants trying to cross the border, past research has been restricted to small return migrant samples pre-IRCA. In this study, we examine how border enforcement deters repeated crossing attempts. However, unlike earlier studies, we are able to use a large representative sample of undocumented Mexican migrants interviewed upon their return to Mexico over the 1993-2003 decade – a period of time during which a variety of border enforcement operations were implemented. We first estimate the probability of crossing based upon previous apprehensions or changes in border enforcement intensity. Subsequently, using sample selection and count models, we examine how border enforcement, along with wage gains and migration costs, influence the number of crossing attempts.	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Cynthia	 Bansak
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Temporary Guestworker Programs and the Displacement of Undocumented Migrant Workers in Spanish Agriculture	Following its transition from a labor-exporting to a labor-importing country, Spain has enacted bi-national agreements with a number of countries in an effort to secure labor for key industries. In addition to meeting labor market needs, these programs have been part of the ongoing effort to control undocumented migration into the region. Advocates assert that guestworkers are simple substitutes for undocumented workers; however, the case of Spain’s fruit, vegetable, and horticultural (FVH) sector shows that the answer is not so simple. Demographic analysis evidences that in developing these programs Spanish growers have preferenced Eastern European women over the North African men who have characterized the undocumented and regularized agricultural workers upon which the industry has depended. Although guestworker programs have helped stabilize the FVH sector and reduce Spain’s significant underground economy, undocumented workers are not necessarily deterred by guestworkers but often displaced by them—creating new problems while solving old ones.	Jennifer	 Blakeslee
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Immigration in Italy: The Great Emergency	Like most South European countries, Italy has experienced  a strong immigration pressure for several years, coming from the South and from the East. A great part of these flows is illegal immigration from North Africa, Tunisia, Morocco and Libya. These countries are becoming meeting points of huge masses of people who escape from sub-Saharan Africa, because of wars, epidemics, persecutions, etc. Because of the intensification of such flows, Italy has become a country with a net migration rate of 5 x 1000. At the present rate, in ten years’ time, Italy will have 7-8-million immigrants out of about 58 million inhabitants. These facts are examined in this paper, as well as the problems connected to immigrants’ integration, and possible strategies of cooperation with the countries of origin of the illegal flows.	Giuseppe	G. De Bartolo
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Day Labor and the Search for Work--Findings from the National Day Labor Survey	The day labor population is growing not only in size, but also in prominence in media and policy circles. Yet little is known about this population aside from metro-area studies or from field interviews. This study utilizes the first nationally representative survey of day laborers, the National Day Labor Study, to consider several questions. This study examines what are the most important factors affecting weekly earnings: hourly wages, hours worked per day, or number of days worked? Next this study compares day laborer earnings by undocumented status to consider how undocumented day laborers would fare in the formal labor market if they had the legal right to do so. The results suggest that number of days worked is the most important variable affecting weekly earnings, and that undocumented status is not associated with differences in earnings between legal and undocumented day laborers.	Arturo	 Gonzalez	Abel	 Valenzuala
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	“Bad Jobs” and Health: Do Negative Work Exposures Work Together?	Employment is central to most adults’ lives, providing economic sustenance as well as self-esteem and identity, but some aspects of jobs are harmful. Researchers have explored long-standing and emerging hazards at work, but have focused on the health consequences of one negative aspect of work at a time. Attached to any job are a bundle of exposures, negative and positive, that may act together to influence health. In addition, bad jobs may cluster over the career for some people, particularly those with lower education or fewer skills, while more socioeconomically advantaged individuals may have limited or no exposure. Accumulation of work exposures may help explain the SEP, work and health connection but has received relatively little attention. This study will begin to explore the connections by comparing two large cohort samples and using a variety of methods to examine career exposures and health outcomes over the life course.	Sarah	A. Burgard
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	A Dynamic Approach of SES Mortality Differentials: Recent Evidences on the Link between Mortality and Occupational Careers in France	This new study goes beyond the well-established correlation between mortality differentials and occupational status, to focus on the impact of occupational careers on mortality risks. It shows heterogeneity in the mortality risks in the early 2000s within occupational classes, strongly related to the type of occupational moves experienced between 1990 and 1999.    For men, the mortality risks of movers are between the risks in the class they left and in the class they joined. For women, downward occupational moves, or becoming inactive, are associated with mortality risks higher than in the class they left and often higher than in the class they join; upward mobility is not correlated with mortality, and becoming active reduces risks. Mortality heterogeneity within occupational classes is often linked to past professional mobility and this correlation has been reinforced with time. The study confirms that a dynamic approach helps explain social differences.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Caroline	 Laborde
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	Does the Effect of Income on Health Still Increase with Child Age?	Previous research suggests that income becomes a more important determinant of child health as children age, but it is not known whether this is due to more frequent health insults or inferior access to care. Using data from the NHIS, this paper investigates the effect of expansions of public health insurance on the relationship between income, health, and child age, in order to assess the importance of access to care. Federally mandated expansions of public health insurance were phased in gradually over the past 20 years and covered progressively older children. State-to-state variation in the timing of the expansions is used to identify their effects. We show that these mandates reduced the overall relationship between income and child health, and the extent to which the relationship strengthens with child age. In 2001-2005, the relationship between income and health is the same for the youngest and oldest children.	Janet	 Currie	Wanchuan	 Lin
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	The Evolution of the Schooling-Smoking Gradient	We explore how the schooling-smoking gradient has evolved over time. Using data from 11 Gallup Surveys conducted between 1954 and 1999, we find that the schooling-smoking gradient first emerged in tandem with a schooling-information gradient. As early as 1957, a schooling-information gradient developed, with 62 percent of college graduates agreeing that smoking was a cause of lung cancer, compared to only 46 percent of those with less than a college degree. After the mid-1970s, the schooling-information gradient began to flatten but the schooling-smoking gradient did not. To further explore patterns of smoking behavior, we next econometrically analyze data on individual life-course smoking histories from retrospective information available in six cycles of the Tobacco Use Supplements to the Current Population Survey (TUS-CPS). With these data we estimate discrete-time hazard models of smoking initiation and cessation as functions of schooling, measures of the health information environment, and other control variables.	Donald	 Kenkel	Alan	 Mathios
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	The Declining Multiple Race Population of the United States: The American Community Survey, 2000 to 2005	The biggest change in the federal measurement of race occurred in 2000. The Office of Management and Budget ruled that the Census must allow persons to identify simultaneously with more than one of five major races: white, black, American Indian, Asian or Hawaiian. In 2000, one American in 40 identified with two or more races: 2.5 percent.  Demographers predicted the multiple-race population would grow rapidly because of increasing racial diversity, more interracial marriage and the prominence of multiple-race persons.  The American Community Survey annually asks the racial questions used in 2000. Surprisingly, there has been a consistent decline in multiple race identification. In 2005, one American in 53 identified with multiple races: 1.9 percent. This paper describes changes in racial identification and emphasizes that the driving force behind changes in the reporting of race is the sharp increase in the percentage of Hispanics who use a Spanish term for their race.	Ren	 Farley
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	A Practical Approach to Using Multiple-Race Response Data: A Bridging Method for Public-Use Microdata	Revised federal policies require that multiple-race responses be allowed in all federal data collection efforts, but many researchers find the multitude of race categories and variables very difficult to use. Important comparability issues also interfere with using multiple-race data in analyses of multiple datasets and/or multiple points in time. These difficulties have, in effect, discouraged the use of the more nuanced new data on race. We present a practical method for incorporating multiple-race respondents into analyses that use public-use Microdata. We extend prior work by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) in which they use multiple-race respondents’ preferred single race and other characteristics to develop a model predicting preferred single race (if forced to choose). In this paper, we apply the NCHS-generated regression coefficients to public-use Microdata with limited geographic information. We include documentation and dissemination tools for this practical and preferable method of including multiple-race respondents in analyses.	Carolyn	A. Liebler	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	Estimating the Effects of Parental Characteristics on the Identities of Multiracial Children	This paper estimates the effects of education and other parental characteristics on the relative likelihood that  children will be assigned a multiracial identity. The analysis uses two sources of data. One is the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey and the other is the public use version of the 2000 decennial microdata file. These two files were selected because they offer complementary strengths and off setting weaknesses. The PUMS census data is a very large file from a questionnaire-based survey with little control over who completes the instrument. The ECLS data is a much smaller data base personal interviews and ostensibly it is more accurate than the PUMS data. While these two sources of information display roughly comparable results, the analyses of these data also show a striking pattern of divergent, even contradictory results.	C.	Matthew  Snipp	Candy	M. Ku
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	Will “Multiracial” Survive to the Next Generation? The Racial Classification of Children of Multiracial Parents	This paper explores how likely multiple-race classification, and thus multiracial identity, will be transmitted from parents to children. Using 5% PUMS file of the 2000 U.S. Census, I examine the likelihood of a multiracial identity for children in “traditional” interracial families (two single-race parents) compared to families where at least one parent is multiracial. The pooled analyses show that multiracial classification is most likely when two multiple-race parents are present. I then stratified the sample among households where one parent is White, Black, or Asian. In general, presence of a multiracial parent increases the likelihood of multiracial classification when the multiracial parent does  not “share” a race with their single-race spouse, but this tendency varies depending on the racial composition of the household. Overall, the results suggest that multiracial identity may be passed on to the next generation but mostly in contexts of heightened racial difference.	Jenifer	 Bratter
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Economic Incentives and Foster Child Adoption	In 1998, over 286,000 children entered the foster care system. Many of these children were reunited with biological parents, or quickly adopted. However, a significant number faced long-term foster care, some of whom were eventually adopted by their long-term foster parents. A foster parent’s decision to adopt a foster child carries significant economic consequences—forfeiting foster care subsidies and assuming responsibility for medical and educational expenses, to name a few. Since 1980, states began offering adoption subsidies to offset some of these expenses, effectively lowering the cost of adoption. This paper  presents empirical evidence on the role of economic incentives in a foster parent’s decision about when, or if, to adopt a foster child. We find that lowering the cost of adoption increases adoptions overall, particularly among children with the lowest adoption rates. These children tend to be older, have behavioral problems, and live with single foster parents or with relatives.	Laura	M. Argys	Brian	 Duncan
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	When Children Have Two Mothers: The Antecedents and Consequences of Adolescents' Relationships with Nonresident Mothers, Stepmothers, and Resident Fathers	Using data from a sample of 294 adolescents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health who live with a biological father and have both a resident stepmother and a nonresident biological mother, this study examines the prevalence, antecedents, and consequences of adolescents’ closeness to each of their parents. Findings demonstrate that adolescents vary in their likelihood of having close relationships to resident fathers, resident stepmothers, and nonresident biological mothers, but when they can do so, they appear to benefit. Close relationships with both resident fathers and nonresident mothers are associated with fewer adolescent internalizing and externalizing problems, with ties to resident fathers being particularly consequential. Closeness to resident stepmothers, however, is unrelated to these two outcomes.	Valarie	 King
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Stepchildren Adopted by Their Stepparents: Where Do They Fit?	Stepchild adoption is the most common form of adoption in the United States. Very little is known about the circumstances under which stepchildren are adopted by their stepparents and how they fare relative to other children. This study draws upon the 2002 National Survey of America’s Families and investigates the sociodemographic characteristics and well-being of adopted stepchildren. Adopted stepchildren in married parent households are compared to children with two married biological parents, two married adoptive parents, and children with one married biological parent and one (non-adoptive) stepparent. Preliminary results indicate that adopted stepchildren have an increased risk of negative outcomes in the area of behavior and emotional problems. Results indicating that adopted stepchildren are most similar to children with two adoptive parents as opposed to one biological parent and one stepparent suggest that researchers need to be cautious about treating adopted stepchildren as stepchildren.	Susan	D. Stewart
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Mortality, Mobility and Schooling Outcomes among Orphans: Evidence from Malawi	This study investigates the impacts of parental death on children’s survival risks and migration behaviors, as well as schooling outcomes, by using panel data from Malawi, which has the eighth-highest HIV infection rate in the world. A number of studies have analyzed the association between parental death and children’s school enrollment, but very few have considered mortality and mobility of orphans. Empirical results show that maternal orphans, as well as double orphans, tend to face higher survival risks and lower schooling outcomes than paternal and non-orphans. This is especially so for boys. Similarly, maternal and double orphans tend to move to other households more frequently. Compared to adolescent orphans, the impact on younger orphans is more muted, suggesting the possibility that free primary education policies may have mitigated shocks of parental death. These empirical results are robust to sample  attrition due to mortality and mobility.	Mika	 Ueyama
2007	26	Union Formation	The Role of Religion in the Family Formation Processes of Young Adults	This paper examines the role of religious beliefs and behavior in adolescence in shaping subsequent family formation choices. Data are drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. We explore the role of three dimensions of religious life—affiliation, attendance, and religious fervor, both singly and in combination for the transition to either marriage or cohabitation. We find that while each dimension of religiosity strongly predicts subsequent union formation, it is the particular combination of these dimensions that is especially important for understanding the likelihood of cohabiting. Given that over a third of religiously inclined adolescents end up cohabiting, we explore whether religion affects patterns of subsequent cohabitation. Modest evidence exists that religious adolescents are likely to have shorter cohabitation spells that end up in marriage.	David	 Eggebeen	Jeff	 Dew
2007	26	Union Formation	Kin Connection: The Association between Parental Kin Involvement while Growing Up and Union Formation in Adulthood	Substantial research has explored race-ethnic variation in union formation focusing on the availability of marriageable men, earnings, and the stability of employment. Although the findings from this body of work clearly demonstrate the importance of these factors, they also suggest that other factors must contribute to this variation. Drawing on a diverse body of ethnographic and quantitative research we investigate a new, non-economic factor that might help to explain race-ethnic variation in the formation of stable unions: the kinship group. To explore this possible connection, we examine the influence of parental kin involvement experienced during childhood and adolescence on adult union formation using the first and third waves of the National Survey of Families and Households. We find that kin involvement in the family of origin is associated with marriage patterns later in the life course and that this association varies by race.	Kelly	 Raley	Charles	E. Stokes
2007	26	Union Formation	Children and the Union Formation Process: Using the NLSY79 to Examine Relationship Status for Men and Women over the Life Course	Marriage and parenthood in the U.S. have become increasingly decoupled during the 20th century, making children an active part of adult lives not only after marriage but also throughout the union formation process. However, the effect of children may differ significantly for men and women, largely due to the residential status of children. This paper investigates the role of children in union formation processes, focusing on the gender differences associated with the effect of children on the types of unions formed over the life course.     Data from NLSY 1979 (1979-2004) are used to estimate a series of multinomial logit approximations of event history models to determine the odds of entering a specific relationship type for each year of a respondent’s life. Results show the effect of children is similar in direction for both men and women, but is stronger for men even when child’s residential status is taken into account.	Carrie	E. Spearin
2007	26	Union Formation	Desperation or Desire? The Role of Risk Aversion in Marriage	The effect of an individual’s risk aversion on time to marriage is examined using survival analysis. The financial risk aversion measure is based on a series of hypothetical gambles over family income that were offered to respondents of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. A search model predicts that the more risk averse the individual, the shorter the time to first marriage. The estimates support the theory, indicating that risk aversion significantly affects time to marriage, with more risk averse respondents marrying sooner than their more risk loving counterparts. Within-family analyses using sibling data reveal a similar pattern. In addition, the effect of risk aversion on time to marriage is larger in magnitude and more statistically significant for men. One possible explanation for the different results between the sexes is that women value risk aversion as a desirable trait in potential mates.	Christy	 Spivey
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Is Cohabitation Bad for Children? Assessing the Causal Impact of Legal Marriage on Child Outcomes Using a Siblings Analysis	This paper examines children who live with both biological parents and analyzes whether parental marriage confers educational advantages to children relative to cohabitation. Cohabitation is more common in Sweden, and few studies have analyzed whether outcomes differ by parents' marital status. We control for the self-selection of marriage by estimating family fixed effects. Since siblings differ in age and over half of Swedish children are born to cohabiting parents who may or may not eventually marry, siblings will differ in the fraction of childhood lived with cohabiting and married parents. We use Swedish register data on over 100,000 full siblings born 1972 – 1980 and measure children’s educational outcomes by grade point averages (GPA) at age 16. Preliminary results indicate that children born to cohabiting unions have lower educational outcomes without controlling for family fixed effects. Future empirical results will determine whether legal marriage confers educational advantage.	Donna	K. Ginther	Marianne	 Sundström
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Mothers, Fathers, and the Link between Adolescent Family Experiences and the Transition to Adulthood	Using new data from the National Survey of Families and Households, we examine the influence of family life on children’s academic achievement, substance use, and early family formation and dissolution. We focus on the role of mothers’ and fathers’ parenting and relationships with children to assess the link between family structure and parental conflict in adolescence and subsequent transitions to adulthood. We investigate the independent influences of mothers and fathers, as well as inconsistencies in parenting. Our preliminary analysis indicates that adolescents who are exposed to conflict experience weaker relationships with parents and more harsh discipline. We investigate contrasts between behaviors and bonds of mothers and fathers and the conditioning effect of conflict on parents’ influence over children. While past work shows the importance of families, identifying the ways in which adolescent experiences in families are linked to young adult outcomes provides insight into how family influences extend into adulthood.	Ann	 Meier	Kelly	 Musick	Larry	 Bumpass
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Effects of Early Life Nutrition and Poverty on School Attendance and Completed Schooling of the Vietnamese Adolescents	The most controversial conclusions focus on the causation that poor nutrition in childhood, especially in the first two yeas of life leads to delay in primary school enrollment,  repeated grades, impaired cognitive development, and negative school outcomes (Glewwe et al. 2001, Daniels and Adair 2004).   This paper discusses the effects of middle childhood nutrition status and level of household poverty on school attendance and completed schooling using an individual-based subsample of 1,517 children aged 15 to 17 in 1998 from the VNLSS of 1992-93 and 1997-98. Results from multivariate analysis reconfirm that parental education still remains the most important determinant of school attendance and educational attainment. The level of household poverty and stunting at middle childhood have significant effects on probability of school attendance and educational achievement. However, these effects lose statistical significance when the household poverty level is controlled in the model.	Phuong	L. Nguyen
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Childhood Family Structure History: Links to Relationship Turbulence and Early Union Formation in the Transition to Young Adulthood	This project examines the intergenerational link between childhood family structure history and relationship turbulence and early union formation during the transition to adulthood. The study contributes to the existing research base by taking a longitudinal, intergenerational approach to understand how parents’ union formation and dissolution behaviors ultimately affect their children’s own early union formation behaviors. The proposed study investigates: 1) which dimensions of family structure turbulence are most predictive of children’s later relationship patterns; 2) how childhood family structure turbulence influences young adults’ own relationship turbulence and early union formation; and 3) how the association between family turbulence and young adulthood relationship turbulence and union formation may differ by subgroups. The project uses data from three waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, which includes detailed information on the respondents’ parents’ relationship histories as well as relationships the respondents themselves formed in their adolescent and young adult years.	Suzanne	 Ryan	Kerry	 Franzetta	Erin	 Schelar
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Path to Replacement Fertility in Egypt: Acceptance, Preference and Achievement	This paper uses data from the 2004 Stalled Fertility Transition survey, a follow-up to the 2003 Egypt Interim DHS, to investigate obstacles to achieving replacement fertility. The analysis adopts a framework with the acronym APA: Acceptance of a two-child ideal, Preference for that ideal, and Achievement of preference, positing a hierarchy among the three and hypothesizing that each depends on a set of factors, including gender stratification, economic expectations, perception of children’s costs and benefits, and the costs of fertility regulation. The results indicate that son preference, gender attitudes, and optimistic economic expectations are major obstacles to the acceptance of the two-child family. Given acceptance, son preference, perception of many benefits for children, and fear of contraceptive side effects are associated with low preference for two children. Given preference, women from better socioeconomic strata and women with weaker son preference are more likely to achieve the ideal of two children.	Laila	 El-Zeini
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Risk Preferences and the Timing of Marriage and Childbearing	In this paper, I examine the role that risk aversion plays in women’s choices regarding marriage timing and fertility timing. I use survey questions in the PSID designed to measure risk aversion to address the following questions: (1) Do women who are highly risk averse marry earlier in life to control for the risk of not finding an acceptable mate? (2) What effect do risk preferences have on fertility timing? I find evidence that measured risk preferences significantly affect women’s marriage timing. In addition, risk preferences have an independent effect on fertility timing, and that this effect varies by age, marital status, and education. These findings may have broader implications. Early first marriages are more likely to lead to divorce. Early first births are often associated with negative child outcomes, while excessive delay of first births could lead to permanent infertility. Risk preferences may therefore have real effects on well-being.	Lucie	 Schmidt
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Stage of Change Theory and the Practice of Female Genital Cutting: Research Findings from Senegal and the Gambia	Female genital cutting (FGC) involves the partial or complete removal of the external genitalia, and affects an estimated 132 million women worldwide. Despite decades of intervention efforts, scholarly consensus finds that there has been greater success at raising awareness of adverse health consequences than in eliminating the practice, motivating interest in theoretical models of behavior change. Drawing on extensive qualitative data collected in Senegambia, the research reported here explores whether and how the “Stage of Change” model (aka Transtheoretical Model) can be applied to FGC. Our findings suggest that individual readiness to change is a complex construct, simultaneously capturing behavior, motivation, and features of the environment in which the decision is being made. Consequently stages identified in this research reflect the multidimensional nature of readiness to change the practice of FGC. Limitations of this model as applied to FGC and its utility in quantitative population research will be discussed.	Bettina	 Shell-Duncan	Ylva	 Hernlund
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Fertility in Times of Crisis: The Case of the AIDS Epidemic	Despite the extent of the AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa, one of the remaining regions with high actual and desired fertility, little is known about how it influences fertility preferences. However, as the epidemic matures, earlier infections are felt, and HIV testing spreads, there is reason to believe that fertility intentions might change considerably. This paper uses mixed methods to explore this relationship. Specifically, I draw on longitudinal data and in-depth interviews from rural Malawi to investigate how learning one’s HIV status alters childbearing intentions. Particular attention is paid to how AIDS-related changes in fertility preferences differ by sex and across the reproductive life course and how such changes are mitigated by local knowledge about antiretroviral medicines. Identifying the size and nature of these changes will be critical for anticipating the demographic and epidemiological future of the region as well as the specific reproductive health requirements created by the disease.	Sara	 Yeatman
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	The Quantum and Tempo of Life-Cycle Events	This study develops and applies a general framework for the analysis of the period quantum and tempo of life-cycle events, extending methods developed previously by the authors. The existence of tempo distortions is demonstrated in selected period quantum measures such as the total fertility rate and in period tempo measures such as life expectancy. A tempo distortion is defined as an inflation or deflation of a period quantum or tempo indicator of a life-cycle event, such as birth, marriage, or death, that results from a rise or fall in the mean age at which the event occurs. Period measures derived from life tables are also found to be subject to tempo distortions. Methods to remove these tempo distortions are then developed and applied.	John	 Bongaarts	Griffith	 Feeney
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	A “Lineage” Matrix Population Model of the Rendille of Northern Kenya	The Rendille tribe of Northern Kenya is an “age-group society” in which cohorts of similarly aged males known as “age sets” are organized along periodic lines of descent. This paper develops a matrix population model that reveals the genealogical dynamics inherent in the Rendille social organization. The rules governing marriage as they relate to lineage considerations substantially reduce the size and the growth rate of the population; they also induce periodicity in the demographics and dramatically favour one of the age-set lines. More generally, the analysis suggests that matrix population modeling is a powerful tool for analyzing the social dynamics of age-group societies.	Merwan	H. Engineer	Ming	 Kang
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	Health, Survival and Consumption over the Life Cycle: An Optimal Control Approach	In recent years most industrialized countries have allocated increasing shares of their GDP to health, while at the same time, life expectancy has continued to increase. The ongoing debate in health economics is on whether too much is spend on health care. In this paper we offer a framework that allows us to determine how a social planner as opposed to an individual allocates resources to consumption versus health investment over the life cycle, assuming that health investment positively affects longevity. By introducing age as a second dynamic variable in addition to time, we are able to study the age patterns of the optimal health investment and consumption paths as endogenously determined by the population structure and age-specific productivity. Applying the concept of the willingness to pay for mortality reductions, we derive the social versus private value of life.	Michael	 Kuhn	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Stefan	 Wrzaczek	Gustav	 Feichtinger
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	On Fisher’s Reproductive Value and Lotka’s Stable Population	As Caswell (2001) states, Reproductive Value (RV) as presented in Fisher’s (1930) book is an obscure concept. Fortunately, Crow (2002) found the paper in which Fisher (1927) originally introduced RV, and he noted one important clarification: the assumption of ascribing the value of unity to newborns is not intended to be an absolute definition. Crow’s disclosure is of importance because it implies that RV, stable equivalent, and population momentum are only different faces of the same demographic tool. (I prove this statement in this paper). Furthermore, one letter from Lotka (1927) to Fisher’s editor explains that all points made in Fisher's paper were already present in his stable population theory. I revisit the original assumptions stated by Lotka, how they were present in Fisher’s work, and how can they help us to avoid confusions and misinterpretations of RV, stable equivalent, and population momentum.	Carlos	 Galindo
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Determinants of Support among Older People: A Comparative Study of Costa Rica, Spain and England	Global population ageing has led to considerable disquiet about future support for frail older people; however, the determinants are poorly understood. Our study compares Costa Rica, Spain and England because they provide an opportunity to compare family support across cultures that have all experienced similar changes in family behaviour (e.g. fertility declines and rises in divorce) yet differ in terms of the degree of familism and the prevalence of informal unions. Using data from the 2005/6 Costa Rican Estudio de Longevidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CRELES), the 2005 Spanish Procesos de Vulnerabilidad en la Vejez (PVV), and the 2002/3 English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), we investigate the relationship between family structure (e.g. number and types of kin), union type, other key socio-demographic determinants (e.g. health) and support (i.e. coresidence, contact, and receipt of help) in later life. Preliminary results show considerable variation across countries in support received and its determinants.	Karen	F. Glaser	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Maria	Dolores  Puga	Emily	M. Agree	Teresa	 Castro Martin
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Demographic Change and the Living Arrangements of the Elderly: The Case of Brazil	The demographic transition Brazil has been through in the 1960s and 1970s resulted in unprecedented increases of cohorts of older adults and smaller family sizes. As population ages and family size declines, it becomes crucial to understand how families adjust to their changing social and demographic environment. In particular, the well-being of older persons is a growing policy concern worldwide. Yet, the consequences of these demographic shifts for the elderly often are not well understood, especially in developing countries. This study uses unique nationally representative data collected yearly over a period of three decades to employ a cohort analysis in which the living arrangements of several cohorts of elderly are traced. This study’s cohorts were of childbearing ages prior to, during, and after Brazil’s rapid fertility decline. Smaller families mean fewer children for support and exchange later in life, which may result in fewer intergenerational households.	Leticia	J. Marteleto
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Reciprocity and the Provision of Personal Care by Adult Children to Their Elderly Parents in Mexico	I use data from the Mexican Health and Aging Study to consider the role of reciprocity in the provision of care by adult children to their frail elderly parents in Mexico. This paper a) explores the effects of prior parental transfers of money and time on a child’s probability of providing personal care and b) considers the possibility that frail elderly parents may themselves be reciprocating the care they have received by providing time or money to children who previously assisted them. Results show that receipt of prior parental financial assistance is associated with an increased probability of care-giving by an adult child. Adult children were also found to reciprocate for the prior receipt of time from a parent, although the magnitude of this latter effect was smaller. However, parents were not found to be more likely to transfer time or money to children having previously provided care for them.	Claire	M. Noel-Miller
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Old-Age Wealth in Mexico: The Role of Early-Life Reproductive and Human Capital Decisions	This paper examines the effects of early-life decisions regarding human capital, family formation and work activities on wealth of the elderly in Mexico, using the 2001 Mexican Health and Aging Study. We examine correlates of wealth across three cohorts: 50-59, 60-69, and 70+. These cohorts have experienced enormous changes in social, economic and institutional context, such that behaviors at certain points in the life course may translate differently into effects on later-life wealth. The paper describes this changing context, and provides a theoretical foundation for our research, an overview of the options for wealth accumulation for older adults in Mexico, a description of the net worth patterns across groups, and presents the results of multivariate models. We draw conclusions regarding whether the economic wellbeing of older adults in Mexico varies significantly across age cohorts and gender, and how early-life decisions impact old-age economic wellbeing as measured by wealth.	Rebeca	 Wong	Deborah	S. DeGraff
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Older Persons in Urban Areas of Latin America and the Caribbean: Active Life Expectancy and Multidimensional Disability Profiles from Sabe	We estimate active life expectancies for older persons in 6 urban areas in Latin America and the Caribbean, incorporating cognitive, emotional and physical domains of health of these individuals. Data come from the Health, Well-Being and Ageing in Latin America and the Caribbean (SABE) survey, a cross-sectional survey conducted in Buenos Aires (Argentina), Bridgetown (Barbados), Sao Paulo (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Havana (Cuba), Mexico City (Mexico) and Montevideo (Uruguay) in 2000. Grade of membership model is used to identify multidimensional disability profiles and to get the prevalence of these profiles in population. The analyses show that although life expectancies at age 60 are similar in the selected urban areas, active life expectancy varies significantly. The analyses also show that although women have higher life expectancy than men, they present lower active life expectancy, as well as lower proportion of remaining life time without disabilities.	Dulce	 Baptista
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Social Institutions and Health Inequalities: A Cross-National Perspective	This paper uses nationally representative samples of adults over 50 from the United States, United Kingdom, and ten European countries to address two objectives: (1) assessing the association of national social and health policy (e.g., measures of income replacement for unemployment, healthcare access and quality, and Esping-Anderson typology) with health inequalities and (2) assessing whether these associations support derived hypotheses about the causal relationship between SES and health. Our approach takes advantage of the substantial variation in country-level social welfare policies and benefits, using data from the Health and Retirement Survey, English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), and the 2004 Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). Preliminary results suggest that the extent of heath inequalities by income is more strongly related to broader social policy, such as income replacement rates for unemployment, than it is to health policy, such as health care benefits.	Megan	 Beckett	Marc	 Elliott	Marika	 Suttorp
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Explaining Cross-National Differences in Inequality of Mortality	In this paper, we study country differences in relative mortality inequality. Why is the total number of available life years in some countries distributed more equally among the population than in other countries? To what extent is mortality inequality related to national expenditures on health, the government’s share in health expenditures, educational level of the population, economic wealth and other forms of inequality? We construct a measure of relative mortality inequality in adult populations (aged 15+) for almost 200 countries in the year 2000. By standardizing by level of life expectancy, we are able to compare developed and developing countries. In multivariate regression analyses, we examine the association of relative mortality inequality with country characteristics on health expenditures, economic indicators and inequality indicators.	Christiaan	 Monden	Jeroen	 Smits
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	The Effect of Obesity and Diabetes on Mortality among Older Adults in Latin America and the Caribbean: Is It a Different Phenomenon than in the U.S.?	The excess mortality due to obesity has been acknowledged and investigated in the U.S. In Latin America it also needs to be carefully analyzed because of the high prevalence and the rapid growth of obesity in the region, and because obesity and overweight are frequently combined with frail conditions among those populations. The aim of the present study is to measure mortality differentials in Latin America and the U.S.A. in terms of years of life expectancy lost, excess deaths attributable to obesity and overweight, and the relative effect (on the mortality differentials) of the main non-communicable diseases related to obesity and overweight. We used data from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our results suggest that mortality differentials between overweight or obese people are greater in Latin America than they are in the U.S.	Malena	 Monteverde	Beatriz	 Novak
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Cohort Fertility Patterns and Breast Cancer Mortality among U.S. Women	Epidemiological research has shown that women who have early births and numerous births have reduced risks of being diagnosed with breast cancer. We examine whether cohort fertility patterns are associated with breast cancer mortality rates in the U.S. We use negative binomial age-period-cohort models, and data from U.S. Vital Statistics and the U.S. Census to examine the relationship between breast cancer mortality rates among women aged 40 and older (in five-year age groups), and age-specific cumulative first birth rates, age-specific cumulative second birth rates, and completed birth rates at ages 35 to 39. Our results show that cohorts marked by higher rates of childlessness at ages 15 through 24, and lower cumulative second birth rates at ages 20 through 29, have higher rates of breast cancer mortality. Further, cohort fertility patterns appear to dampen the rise in breast cancer mortality rates in the 1970s through the 1990s.	Patrick	M. Krueger	Sam	 Preston
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Unwanted Fertility, Contraceptive Technology and Crime: Exploiting a Natural Experiment in Access to the Pill	Donohue and Levitt (2001) explain over 50% of the recent decline in U.S. crime rates with the legalization of abortion undertaken in the early 1970s. While these findings are being heavily debated, they point to unwanted fertility as a potentially important determinant of a cohort's criminality. In that spirit, I exploit a natural experiment induced by policy changes during the '60s and '70s. After the introduction of the contraceptive pill in 1960, single women below the age of majority faced restricted access to this new contraceptive method. Mostly as a by-product of unrelated policy changes, these access restrictions were lifted differentially across states during the '60s and '70s. This induces exogenous variation that can be used to identify the causal effect of unwanted fertility on crime. Preliminary results show that greater flexibility to avoid unwanted pregnancies reduces crime two decades later, when undesired children would have reached their criminal prime.	Juan	 Pantano
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Better Later than Never? The Increase in Very Late Childbearing in Europe, Japan and the United States	Although the shift to later childbearing in advanced societies has been studied extensively, fertility trends at late reproductive ages remain largely unexplored. Our study provides a comprehensive exploration of very late childbearing (in our definition, ages 40+) in Europe, Japan and the United States. By the early 2000s, the trend reversal in fertility rates among women aged 40+ took place in almost all advanced societies. Although the absolute frequency of very late childbearing remains relatively low in comparison with the historical levels, the analysis of detailed age-parity data reveals that there was a ‘genuine’ increase in the intensity of childbearing at ages 40+. This reversal is attributable especially to the behavioural change among nulliparous women and women at parity 1.	Tomas	 Sobotka
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	The Impact of Changes in Maternal Age on the Wellbeing of Children	The primary objective of this paper is to examine how recent changes in maternal age at first birth have impacted the health and wellbeing of children, accounting for changes in other factors associated with both age at first birth and wellbeing. An additional objective is to determine whether these relationships vary for children from different race/ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds. We use individual and contextual data from the 1995 and 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) to explore these questions. These data allow us to examine differences in health and wellbeing for two birth cohorts (1988-1992: high teenage fertility and 1998-2002: relatively lower teenage fertility). Specifically we look at birth cohort differences in birthweight, birth intendedness, and breastfeeding for children. We control for a variety of individual and contextual level characteristics that may also have changed over this time period.	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith	Frank	 Furstenberg
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	India and China: Demography, Human Capital, and Socioeconomic Transformations	Because of steep fertility decline, China now has declining population in the young working age groups. India’s demographic transition is more gradual. Labor force continues growing in both countries. China and India have masses of extremely low productivity workers; both struggle to provide enough modern employment opportunities.  China’s workforce continues growing due to fast increases in population and workers in their forties and older. But sharply increasing human capital, educational attainment, and talent are concentrated among China’s younger workers. India has benefited for decades from its higher educational system modeled on Britain's, so the high quality workforce is spread broadly across working ages.  This paper shows how the demographic transitions and changes in labor force quality in China and India are affecting economic competitiveness and socioeconomic inequalities. They are compared regarding fertility and age structure changes, educational attainment, labor force trends, and socioeconomic impacts of these demographic trends.	Judith	 Banister
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Why Has China’s Economy Taken Off Faster than India’s?	We investigate the determinants of the modest economic takeoff in India and the rapid economic takeoff in China after 1980. We do this by fitting a model of the growth of income per capita to cross-country panel data for 1960-2000. The model, which predicts reasonably well the “takeoffs” in China and India after 1980, highlights the importance to economic growth of improved health and longevity and an elevated labor force per capita due to falling fertility rates and dependency ratios. We also analyze the welfare benefits of gains in health and find that improvements in health in India mean that full income has risen about 50% more since 1980 than is suggested by economic growth figures. Almost all the welfare gains in China since 1980 have been due to rising consumption with little improvement in population health	David	E. Bloom	Linlin	 Hu	Yuanli	 Liu	Ajay	 Mahal	Winnie	 Yip
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Prevalence of Child Poverty in India and China	It is well known that when one compares infant and child health indicators, India lags China by a large margin. This paper focuses on child poverty, an issue gaining increasing attention. We review the literature on estimates of child poverty in China. We provide estimates of absolute and relative child poverty in India for the years 1993-94 and 1999-00. Comparability issues aside, it appears that that prevalence of child poverty is markedly higher in India compared to China. While absolute child poverty declined significantly in India during the reform period, relative child poverty decreased only marginally in rural areas. In fact relative child poverty increased in urban areas. One conclusion that can be drawn is that children in India are much more deprived along multiple dimensions (health and economic) compared to children in China.	S.	 Chandrasekhar	M.H.	 Suryanarayana
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Can Policy Interventions Reduce Excess Female Child Mortality in China and India? Lessons from South Korea	Like China and India, South Korea has shown a pattern of strong son preference, reflected in excess female child mortality, especially prenatally. In all three countries there have been strong policy interventions aimed at reducing parents’ preference for sons, but nevertheless sex ratios at birth continued to rise. Now Korea has shown some reversal of this trend. This raises questions for China and India: can social policies play a role, or will sex ratios normalize only when they reach Korea’s very high levels of urbanization and development? We explore these questions using the Korean family and fertility survey 2000. We decompose the net effect on son preference of (1) changes in the proportions educated and urbanized and (2) attitudinal shifts. We find that attitudinal shifts play much the larger role. This suggests that social policy can do much to reduce excess female child mortality.	Woojin	 Chung	Monica	 Das Gupta
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Sex Ratio Imbalances among Children at Micro-Level: China and India Compared	Sex ratio imbalances found in Asia are primarily due to the increasing proportions of sons among children in China and India: the level of gender discrimination in several regions of East China and Northwest India may be extremely pronounced and tends to display a high level of spatial concentration. Comparable data from the last censuses (2000, 2001) can be mapped at the local level, using counties (xian) for China and sub-district units (tahsil, taluk, etc.) for India.  In this paper, we first present comparable statistics and maps for both countries using these detailed administrative divisions (2300 and 5500 units) and then use both statistical and geostatistical analyses to contrast the geographical distribution of gender discrimination in China and India and their main social and economic correlates. The paper ends with a discussion of the theoretical and policy implications of these findings.	Christophe	Z. Guilmoto	Sébastien	 Oliveau
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Accounting for Trends in the Labor Force Participation Rate of Older Men in the United States	After nearly a full century of decline, the Labor Force Participation Rate (LFPR) of older men in the U.S. leveled off in the 1980s and began to increase in the late 1990s. We use synthetic panel data from 1962 to 2005 to model the LFPR of older men in order to explain for these trends. We find that the decline in the LFPR of older men cannot be explained by demographic trends, changes to Social Security and private pension rules, health, or health insurance availability. We attribute the increase in the LFPR in recent years mainly to changes in the distribution of education among older men. Our results also suggest that increases in the Social Security delayed retirement credit, increased employment of the wives of older men, and the shift from Defined Benefit to Defined Contribution pension plans all may have contributed to the recent LFPR gains.	Ryan	 Goodstein
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Who Works Later in Life? A Cross-National Analysis of Employment Rates and Work Hours among Older Adults	Population aging and pressure on social budgets has sparked intense interest in increased work at older ages in both the U.S. and Europe. Using data from the Luxembourg Income Study (c.2000), we investigate employment rates and work hours among adults aged 55 to 74 in the U.S., in comparison to their counterparts in ten European countries.     The paper includes two lines of analysis, both of considerable interest to demographers.     First, we ask: which adults remain in employment later in life? We assess whether adults who work in their later years are more economically advantaged than their prime-age counterparts, or more disadvantaged, or whether the pattern is one of bifurcation.     Second, we analyze the usual work hours of those who remain employed after age 55. Extending our employment analysis, we ask: Which older workers work long(er) hours? Are longer hours among older workers associated with economic advantage or disadvantage? Finally, is there evidence of phased retirement, and where?	Janet	C. Gornick	Traci	 Schlesinger	Gary	 Burtless	Timothy	 Smeeding
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Labor Supply Effects of the Recent Social Security Benefit Cuts: Empirical Estimates Using Cohort Discontinuities	In response to an earlier crisis in Social Security financing two decades ago the U.S. Congress implemented an increase in the Normal Retirement Age (NRA) of two months per year for cohorts born in 1938 and after. These cohorts began reaching retirement age in 2000. In this paper I  study the effects of these benefit cuts on recent retirement behavior. The evidence strongly suggests that the mean retirement age of the affected cohorts has increased by about half as much as the increase in the NRA. If older workers continue to increase their labor supply,  there will be important implications for the estimates of Social Security trust fund exhaustion that have played such a major role in recent discussions of Social Security reform.	Giovanni	 Mastrobuoni
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Retirement Transitions of the Self-Employed in the United States and England	Motivated by high rates of self-employment among older workers, we examine how public and private pension and health insurance systems affect the retirement transitions of self-employed older workers compared to wage and salary workers using longitudinal data from the U.S. Health and Retirement Study and the English Longitudinal Survey of Ageing. These panel data have the advantage of collecting comparable demographic, economic, and labor market data on workers in the two countries and allow us to exploit cross-national variation in pension and health insurance systems. We find evidence that workers in the two countries respond strongly to incentives provided by key retirement ages in the public system and in private defined-benefit pensions. Health insurance coverage is also important in the United States for understanding differences in the probability a self-employed worker and a wage and salary worker exit the labor force.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Lynn	 Karoly	Nicole	 Maestas
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Transition to Parenthood: The Role of Social Interactions and Endogenous Networks	This paper investigates how the decision of having an additional child is influenced by an individual's peer group. We show via agent based simulations how social interaction creates interdependencies in the individual transition to parenthood and its timing. We build a one-sex model and provide agents with four different characteristics. Based on these characteristics agents endogenously form their network. Network members then may influence the agents’ transition to higher parity levels. The agents compare the share of agents with a higher parity than their own within their peer group with the same share on the aggregate level. Our numerical simulations indicate that accounting for social interactions is important to explain the shift of first birth probabilities in Austria over the period 1984 to 1994.	Belinda	 Aparicio Diaz	Thomas	 Fent
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Reevaluating the Socioeconomic Effects of Teenage Childbearing: A Counterfactual Approach	Despite the debate over 30 years on the socioeconomic effects of teenage childbearing, the consensus on its “true” effects is still unsettled. The debate is centered on theoretical considerations of early motherhood as a harmful event and/or teen mothers’ preexisting socioeconomic disadvantages, and methodological challenges against selection bias. Alternative models have been developed, but tend to rely on strong assumptions and unrepresentative samples. This study extends this literature by employing a counterfactual approach using propensity score matching, and data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). The counterfactual analysis attempts to obtain the causal effects of teenage childbearing by identifying better comparison groups to teen mothers, based on observed covariates. A sensitivity analysis is conducted to address selection bias on unobserved covariates. Add Health helps to capture recent changes in welfare policy and adolescent population composition. This study expects to produce new insights into the relationship between teenage childbearing and its socioeconomic consequences.	Dohoon	 Lee
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Does Education Delay the Timing of First Birth?	The secular decline in fertility that has occurred over the last thirty years in both developing and developed economies is often attributed to rising levels of education of women. The decline is partly due to a delay in the timing of first birth. The average age of first birth in the United States has increased from 21.4 in 1970 to 25.1 in 2002 (Centers for Disease Control 2004). Whether education plays a causal role or only is an outcome of other unobserved factors remains an open question. We use exogenous variation in college tuition and residential location to investigate a causal effect of education on the timing of first birth. We use individual fertility and educational data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and tuition data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.	Dean	R. Lillard	Ning	 Zhang
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	The Causal Effect of Fertility Timing on Educational Attainment: An Identification Test Using the Longitudinal Structure of Schooling	The strong correlation between educational attainment and fertility timing is well documented. For instance, young mothers seldom go on to earn a college degree. Researchers often use controls for observable characteristics or sibling fixed effects to determine whether this correlation reflects causation or simply unobserved factors. Using the cumulative nature of educational investment, this paper demonstrates that the key identifying assumption behind these approaches does not hold. Mothers and observably similar non-mothers begin college on the same footing, but their paths diverge well before the former enter pregnancy. No such divergence should exist if the causal effect of childbirth is the only reason educational attainment is lower for mothers than similar non-mothers. This finding suggests that time-varying factors that cause women to leave school and then enter parenthood are also behind the correlation. Controls for pre-determined characteristics and fixed effects do not address this temporal source of omitted variable bias.	Kevin	 Stange
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	AIDS Treatment and Intrahousehold Resource Allocations: Children’s Nutrition and Schooling in Kenya	The provision of life-saving antiretroviral (ARV) treatment is a key component of the global response to HIV/AIDS, but little is known about the impact of this intervention on the welfare of children in households of treated persons. We estimate the impact of ARV treatment on children’s schooling and nutrition outcomes using longitudinal household survey data collected in collaboration with a treatment program in western Kenya. We find that children’s weekly hours of school attendance increase by over 20 percent within about six months after treatment is initiated for the adult household member. For boys in treatment households, these increases are closely related to decreases in their market labor supply. Similarly, young children’s short-term nutritional status—as measured by their weight-for-height Z-score—also improves dramatically. Since the improvements in children’s schooling and nutrition will affect their socio-economic outcomes in adulthood, the provision of ARV treatment is likely to generate significant long-run macroeconomic benefits.	Markus	 Goldstein	Joshua	 Graff Zivin	Harsha	 Thirumurthy
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Within-Family Program Effect Estimators: The Impact of Oportunidades on Schooling in Mexico	This paper explores the use of dynamic panel data models and sibling-based estimation procedures for evaluating the effects of educational interventions aimed at children or youth. The frameworks presented provide a way of directly assessing short-term program impacts and of simulating longer term impacts that may extend beyond the program exposure times observed in the data. This paper also proposes a new estimation approach for the model, which combines matching, differencing and instrumental variables in a way that minimizes the need for parametric modeling assumptions. The approach uses retrospective data on older siblings’ schooling histories to identify how an educational intervention affects younger siblings. We apply the proposed method as well as other methods to study the effects of the Mexican Oportunidades conditional cash transfer program. Simulations based on the dynamic model indicate that long-term exposure to the program increases educational attainment by about half a year.	Susan	 Parker	Petra	 Todd	Kenneth	 Wolpin
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Nature and Nurture in the Intergenerational Transmission of Socioeconomic Status: Evidence from Swedish Children and Their Biological and Rearing Parents	This study uses an extraordinary Swedish data set to explore the sources of the intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status. Merging data from administrative sources and censuses, we investigate the association between sons’ and daughters’ socioeconomic outcomes and those of their biological and rearing parents. Our analysis focuses on children raised in different family circumstances: raised by both biological parents, raised by the biological mother/father without a stepfather/stepmother, raised by the biological mother/father with a stepfather/stepmother, and raised by two adoptive parents. The most remarkable feature of our data set is that it contains information on the biological parents even when they are not the rearing parents. We specify a simple additive model of pre-birth (including genetic) and post-birth influences and examine the model’s ability to provide a unified account of the intergenerational associations in all six family types. Our results suggest substantial roles for both pre-birth and post-birth factors.	Anders	 Björklund	Markus	 Jantti	Gary	M. Solon
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Is Mortality in Developing Countries Procyclical? Health Production and the Value of Time in Colombia's Coffee-Growing Regions	The inability to smooth consumption in developing countries is thought to make health vulnerable to sudden economic downturns. However, studies suggesting this relationship often examine shocks that directly influence health independently of economic conditions (such as flooding or grain price fluctuations). This paper investigates how world coffee price shocks influence infant and child mortality in Colombia’s coffee growing regions. As in wealthy country studies, we find evidence of procyclical mortality and countercyclical health investments that are linked to changes in the opportunity cost of time. These results suggest that in rural Colombia, (1) Any adverse health consequences of incomplete consumption smoothing during bad economic  times are dominated by increases in time-intensive health investments, and (2) The relative price of health is a more powerful determinant of mortality than wealth.	Grant	 Miller	Piedad	 Urdinola
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Examining Patterns in Divorced Life Expectancy by Race: An Application of a Bayesian Approach to Sullivan’s Method	A considerable body of research has examined changing divorce rates over the last 40 years. Recently, divorce rates have stabilized at a fairly high level, suggesting that individuals may spend a significant proportion of their lives in a divorced state. However, little has examined how long individuals can expect to spend divorced over the life course. In this study, we use a Bayesian approach to Sullivan’s method (1971) of life table estimation to examine divorced life expectancy differences between blacks and whites across a wide range of birth cohorts. Our data come from the 1982-2000 General Social Surveys (GSS) linked to 1982-2000 vital statistics mortality data. We find that blacks, despite being less likely to marry, can expect to spend both more years, and a higher proportion of their remaining years, in a divorced state. The results also suggest that the racial gap in divorced life expectancy has expanded across birth cohorts born from 1900 to 1960.	J.	Scott  Brown	Scott	M. Lynch
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Status and Depressive Symptoms over Time: Modeling the Effects of Status Duration	This study critically examined the relationship between marital status duration and depressive symptoms by marital status and gender. Using data from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), a variety of empirical specifications of marital status duration were tested to determine the implications of modeling status duration in various ways. Overall, the duration analyses show a ‘crisis’ effect of marital dissolution for both men and women. However, the majority of the adaptation to this new role occurs within the first six months, and persistence in this state over time leads to increases in depressive symptoms after adjustment for widowed men and women and separated/divorced women. Based on the findings in this study it is clear that a single continuous indicator of marital status duration is a misspecification of the effect of marital status duration and results in biased and unstable estimates of marital status differences in depressive symptoms.	Tracey	A. LaPierre
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Disruption, Disability and Longevity	In this paper, we combine insights from two strands of literature to explain differences in health, disability and longevity among elderly persons with different marital history and family type. One strand, focusing on biological and psychological mechanisms, provides evidence that social support affects health outcomes. Other literature reveals that marital disruption affects the nature of intergenerational relations. Since children represent an important form of social support for elderly parents, we conjecture that changes in parent-child relations arising from marital disruption will affect the incidence and trajectory of disability and mortality of older persons. We expect these effects to work directly (through divorce/remarriage) and indirectly (through family structure and quality of relations between parents and children). Multivariate models that control for socio-economic and health characteristics of elderly persons and their families are applied to data from the first five waves of the Health and Retirement Survey to test the empirical implications of the model.	Barbara	 Schone	Liliana	E. Pezzin
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Status, Marital Transitions, and Body Mass: Gender, Race, and Life Course Considerations	In this study, we adopt a life course perspective to understand how body mass changes over time. We direct particular attention to marital status and marital transitions in relation to change in body mass over the life course. Moreover, we consider whether and how marital and body mass patterns vary by race and gender over the life course. Results from a national 3-wave panel survey in the U.S. (the Americans’ Changing Lives Survey) covering an 8-year period suggest that 1) the transition into marriage is associated with weight gain for men and women—especially when first marriage occurs at older ages; 2) the transition out of marriage due to divorce or widowhood is associated with weight loss, but this effect occurs more profoundly for men; and 3) we find no race differences in the impact of marital status/transitions on body mass.	Debra	J. Umberson	Hui	 Liu
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Structure and Stress: Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms across Adolescence and Young Adulthood	This paper models trajectories of depression across adolescence and young adulthood. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, latent curve models (LCM) examined variation in mean depression trajectories, and the effects of childhood socioeconomic status (SES) and stressful life events (SLE), across racial/ethnic and gender groups. It was found that while all groups exhibit a curvilinear inverted U-shaped trajectory, significant variation among groups exists in both trajectory intercepts and slopes. For all racial/ethnic groups, women exhibited higher depression levels, with larger gender gaps among minorities. Racial disparity was found for both genders, with whites generally exhibiting lower levels than minorities. Childhood SES was primarily influential on the intercept component of the LCM, although there was considerable effect heterogeneity across groups. The effect of SLE generally decreased over time. Overall, the results indicate considerable heterogeneity among racial-gender groups for both normative depression trajectories and covariate effects.	Daniel	 Adkins	Lin	 Wang
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Depression, Self-Esteem, and Multiracial Adolescents: The Role of Socioeconomic Status and Family Structure	In light of the growing number of investigations of racial disparities in mental health, there has been an increased interest in multiracials. They are changing the meaning and measurement of race itself. The objective of this study is to investigate differences in depression and self-esteem by examining the role of individual characteristics and family structure. The analysis uses Wave I of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, a nationally representative sample of 20,743 students ages 12-18. Depression is dichotomized using a modified version of the CES-D. Self-esteem is assessed using the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Logistic regression and linear mixed models are used for the analysis. I find that Asian-White multiracials have the lowest self-esteem and highest risk of depression net of socioeconomic status and family structure, and Black-White multiracials cannot be differentiated from their single-race counterparts. These findings open up new avenues for research on the wellbeing of multiracials.	Jamie	Mihoko  Doyle
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Is Overweight a Heavy Burden for Teenagers? New Evidence about Adolescent Body Composition and Psychological Distress	Prior research investigating relationships between adolescent body composition and psychological well-being has surprisingly yielded null findings. We reexamine this association using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate whether unexplored complexities explain these unexpected findings. More specifically, we predict multiple aspects of psychological distress, evaluate how being underweight as well as overweight is related to distress, and assess whether relationships between body composition and distress vary by gender, age, and race/ethnicity. Results suggest few associations between body composition and psychological distress among female adolescents. Among male adolescents, underweight is more distressing than overweight. Furthermore, both age and race/ethnicity moderate relationships between body composition and psychological distress.	Michelle	 Frisco	Jason	 Houle	Molly	A. Martin
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Gender Differences in Adolescent Depression: Social Integration into the Normative School Context	This study investigates gender differences in adolescent depression associated with different levels of social integration into the normative high school environment. Previous research stresses the importance of social integration for positive mental health outcomes, but assumes girls are more responsive to social networks. If this is true, gender differences in depression should be weaker in situations of good fit and stronger in situations of bad fit because social integration into the school should be more beneficial for girls and social isolation more risky. To test this assumption, a multilevel model is used to predict CES-D depression scores with data from waves I and II of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Independent variables will include both individual- and school-level measures. Fit indexes assess social integration, and cross-level interaction terms (gender * each fit index) detect gender differences.	Kurt	A. Gore	Robert	 Crosnoe
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Social Fathers in Fragile Families: Involvement and Associations with Child Well-Being	Previous research documents that married stepfathers tend to be less involved than married biological fathers with their co-resident children, and suggests that such lower levels of engagement may translate into worse outcomes for children. Little research to date has examined the well-being of children born to unwed parents living with one biological parent and that parent’s romantic partner. This paper uses longitudinal data from a recent cohort of children born to unwed mothers to examine how these young children fare when their mothers form new cohabiting or marital relationships. After comparing levels and types of involvement by mothers’ new partners (social fathers) with that of biological fathers, I ask if and how such involvement is associated with behavioral and health outcomes for these young children, and identify potential mediating factors.	Sharon	 Bzostek
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	The Unexamined Stable Family: An Examination of Child Well-Being in Stable-Single Parent Families	We find in an analysis of a merged mother-child NLSY79-C dataset that after controlling for characteristics of the child, mother, and family, children of married parents reported higher quality home environments and higher math and reading scores than children living with stable-single (never married or cohabited) mothers. Further, children born to cohabiting parents who either remain cohabiting or eventually marry were in homes with better environments than children living with stable-single mothers, but these unions did not appear to benefit children in terms of behavior or academic outcomes. We also find that unions, regardless of type, appear to benefit children who were born to single mothers in terms of their home environment and math scores. Even after these unions dissolve, children living with their newly single mother who has previously experienced a union still have higher math and reading scores than children still living with their stable-single mother.	Claire	M. Kamp Dush	Rachel	 Dunifon
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Should We Get Married? Effect of Parents' Marriage on Children Born to Cohabiting and Visiting Parents	Using a representative sample of children born out of wedlock drawn from the FFCWS, we investigate whether marriage after childbirth has a causal effect on early child cognitive ability, using a treatment outcome approach to account for the selection into marriage. Comparing children with similar backgrounds and parental mate-selection patterns who differ only by whether their parents marry, children whose parents marry score significantly higher on the PPVT at age three than children whose parents remain unmarried. Contrasting the estimates from potential-outcome and OLS models indicates that the marriage effect is greater for children whose parents transition into marriage. Those parents are found to be less well-matched. Without a legal arrangement, they may face lower incentives in allocating resources toward the child and experience greater difficulties in coordinating and monitoring their investments. As a result, children of parents who transition into marriage could have faced higher risks of receiving suboptimal investments had their parents remained unmarried.	Shirley	H. Liu	Frank	 Heiland
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Transitions in Family Structure and Children’s Wellbeing	A considerable body of research explores associations between marital dissolution, single-parent family structure, and child wellbeing. Although about 30 percent of children will spend some time in stepfamilies, the effects of maternal re-partnering on children’s wellbeing have received much less scrutiny. We use longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and Hierarchical Linear Models (multilevel models) to estimate the effects of family structure transitions, with a specific focus on maternal re-partnering, on children’s achievement and behavior trajectories. We consider whether these effects vary by children’s ages and assess whether they are transitory or persist over time. Moreover, we focus on whether there are differences in these effects when maternal “re-partnerings” constitute cohabitations or marriages, as well as whether they differ by maternal education level. This research has implications for policies and programs regarding marriage and family formation and those that promote child wellbeing for children in complex families.	Katherine	  Magnuson	Lawrence	M. Berger
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	The Sources of the Racial and Ethnic Composition of the American Population: Past, Present, and Future	There are contradictory popular images of the origins of the American population and the demographic processes that led to its creation. In the classic demographic balancing equation, population change can occur only through natural increase, mortality, and migration. Racial and ethnic groups are largely treated as discrete subpopulations. Yet the popular “melting pot” image presupposes intermarriage of persons from different populations, the natural results of which are offspring with mixed ancestry. The fragile foundations of racial and ethnic measurement, both past and present, coexist with a social structure where even deeply flawed categories are strongly correlated with socioeconomic status, life expectancy, and multiple indicators of individual and collective well being. This enduring reality motivates the present exercise to better identify sources of racial and ethnic composition while explicitly accounting for wide margins of uncertainty in racial classification and measurement.	Charles	 Hirschman	Anthony	D. Perez
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	The Many Dimensions of Race: A Latent Variable Approach for Quantitative Research	Typically, race is measured through self-identification and included in quantitative research as a set of “dummy” variables that serve as controls in regression-type analyses. This implies several strong assumptions, including that race is a static characteristic of individuals and that it can be described by mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories. I propose a new approach to analyzing race in quantitative research in the hopes of bringing research practice closer to current social science theories of race. Using a statistical technique called latent class analysis, I combine measures of observed race, self-reported race and self-reported ethnic origins into a single variable that better captures the complexity of an individual’s experience of race and ethnicity in the United States. The latent variable consists of multiple racial classes, or categories, and can be used in subsequent studies as either a dependent or independent variable.	Aliya	 Saperstein
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	Determinants of Race Reporting by Hispanics in a National Health Survey	According to the 2000 Census, Hispanics are the largest racial/ethnic minority group in the United States (12.5% of the U.S. population). Nearly half (42%) of the Hispanic population selected “some other race”. Among persons who reported their race as “some other race, most were Hispanic (97%). We utilize data from the 1999-2005 National Health Interview Surveys to examine factors associated with the race of Hispanic persons. Preliminary findings show that none of the hypothesized determinants of race selection explain the Hispanic – non-Hispanic differential. Hispanics remain overwhelmingly more likely to be in the “other race” category. Preliminary results also show that Hispanic subgroups differ greatly in their racial profiles. These results underscore that race is an extremely complex dynamic for Hispanics in the U.S.	Jacqueline	W. Lucas	Elizabeth	 Arias
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	Rethinking U.S. Census Racial and Ethnic Categories	How do high levels of immigration and a growing multiracial population challenge census racial and ethnic categories? We begin by discussing the relationship between race, ethnicity, and ancestry and their measurement in the census. We examine data from the 2000 Census 5 percent IPUMS to compare racial responses of native- and foreign-born Hispanics, Asians, and Middle Easterners, and native-born multiracial Hispanics, Asians, and Middle Easterners, by ancestry. For some groups, for example, Europeans and Africans, ancestry and race are expected to overlap well. However, we expect current census racial categories to be problematic for the growing numbers of people who reported Some Other Race (SOR) alone or in combination with another race, a diverse population that we found to include multiracial Hispanics, Middle Easterners, and Asians. We conclude with a discussion of possible changes to the census questions on race, Hispanic ethnicity, and ancestry in light of these challenges.	Sharon	M. Lee	Sonya	 Tafoya
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Romance and Sexual Initiation among Never-Married Young Men in Vietnam: A Multi-Method Analysis	Young men represent the highest proportion of sexually experienced unmarried population in Vietnam. Increasing levels of sexual activity, combined with reported low levels of knowledge about sex, HIV/AIDS, and STIs and an aversion to using contraceptives, suggest that they are ill-prepared to deal with Vietnam's emerging HIV epidemic. This study uses a multi-method approach to assess sexual activity and attitudes concerning romantic love among never-married men. I analyze the nationally representative Survey Assessment of Vietnamese Youth to examine patterns of emotional relationships and physical behaviors preceding young men's sexual initiation as well as determinants of premarital sex and an aversion to contraceptive use. Additionally, I analyze data from in-depth interviews to address social contexts in which sexual activities of male adolescents take place. Vietnam’s economic liberalization, which enhanced personal freedom and lessened parental control over children, combined with its cultural predisposition towards romantic love may explain the recent rising trends in sexual activities among young Vietnamese.	Puk	Bussarawan  Teerawichitchainan
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Transactional Sex among Adolescents in Sub-Saharan Africa amid the HIV Epidemic	Using national survey data collected in 2004 in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi, and Uganda with 12- to 19-year olds and focus group data with this same population, we examine the prevalence of transactional sex (i.e., sex in exchange for money or material goods): how it is experienced by adolescents and its association with their social and economic vulnerability. Receiving something in exchange for sex is very common among sexually active, unmarried female adolescents, but there are no consistent differences by household economic status or age difference between partners. The qualitative data suggest that transactional sex is not necessarily a coercive force and can be a routine aspect of dating and that there is the expectation of females getting something before having sex. Multivariate analyses show either no association or a positive association (in Uganda) between transactional sex and using any contraceptive method, including male condoms.	Ann	M. Moore	Ann	E. Biddlecom
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Male Circumcision and HIV Infection in Rural Malawi	Observational studies in various settings have found consistent, significant, and negative associations between male circumcision and HIV infection, and circumcision’s protective effect has been confirmed recently by randomized control trials in South Africa, Uganda, and Kenya. Yet population-based data from husbands and wives (N=2240) from the 2004 wave of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP) present an interesting anomaly. When comparing HIV prevalence rates across the MDICP’s three study sites in the country’s three main administrative regions, we find that the region home to the highest HIV prevalence (8.6%) is also where most husbands (80%) are circumcised. Individual-level analyses using logit/probit models within this region, southern Balaka, do show a negative relationship between circumcision and infection status, but our data further find that certain behaviors, and possibly STI status, supersede the protective effect of male circumcision. These findings are expected to be important considerations for prevention policies.	Michelle	 Poulin	Adamson	 Muula
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	The Protective Effect of Male Circumcision on HIV in Kenya	This paper uses data from the 2003 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, a nationally representative sample, to examine the association between male circumcision and HIV infection. The results show that 4.6 percent of men were HIV positive; 85 percent of all men in the sample were circumcised. The prevalence of HIV was significantly higher among uncircumcised men (12 percent), as compared to the circumcised ones (3 percent). We also found significantly higher prevalence of HIV among richer men. The logistic regression results show that male circumcision is the most important and significant predictor of HIV in Kenya. Net of the effects of socio-demographic variables and age at first sexual intercourse, uncircumcised men were 80 percent more likely to be HIV positive than circumcised men. The wealth impact became non-significant in the logistic regression model, suggesting that some of the independent variables may have mediating effects that we need to examine further.	Yanyi	K. Djamba	LaToya	S. Davis
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Who’s the Decider? How Different Dimensions of Power Are Related to Partner Belief about Control over the Couple’s Method Choice	A defining characteristic of most research on fertility regulation is women’s primacy in contraception decision making. With the growth of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, there has been greater emphasis on understanding men’s roles in the reproductive health of couples. This shift has led to a developing body of research directed at men, but has been less successful in generating research based on couples, where reports are obtained from both partners. This paper uses data from a new large-scale survey of married, cohabiting, and dating heterosexual couples in the United States (n=930) to examine whether who makes the contraceptive decisions in a couple is related to partner differences along various dimensions of power including status characteristics (age, education, personal income), gender role ideology, relationship commitment, and relationship alternatives. Preliminary analyses suggest that partners’ relative power does influence perceptions about who primarily makes the contraceptive decisions in a relationship.	Lisa	 Cubbins	Lucy	 Jordan	Virginia	E. Rutter	Koray	 Tanfer
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Decision-Making Patterns and Contraceptive Use: Evidence from Uganda	We differentiate two decision-making patterns in which  women have a voice—joint decisions and wife-dominated decisions—and test whether these as well as husband-dominated decisions each have distinct effects on contraceptive use. We confirm that wife-dominated decisions are the most likely to result in contraceptive use: in Uganda where fertility is high, joint decisions were more likely to result in traditional reproductive behavior. We also identify important community-level effects: in communities where husband-dominated decision-making is more common, the wife holding autonomous views does not promote contraceptive use as much as it does in more egalitarian settings.	Laurie	 DeRose	Alex	 Ezeh
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	The Role of Relationship Power in Couple Decisions about Contraception	In this study of couple decisions about contraception we investigate how each partner’s level of power in the relationship affects his/her influence over the couple’s contraceptive choices by affecting the relative weight that  method-related ratings, desires, and perceptions have in the decision-making process. We also examine the influence on this process of other partner and relationship characteristics. The data supporting this analysis are from a new, in-person survey of approximately 1,000 married, cohabiting couples and dating couples in which the female partner is aged 20-35, neither partner is sterile, and the couple is not currently pregnant or attempting to conceive. This survey obtained separate, parallel reports from each partner on the power relations, birth desires, and method-related expectancies, values, perceptions, preferences, and behaviors of men and women making contraceptive choices within the context of an intimate heterosexual relationship.	William	R. Grady	Daniel	H. Klepinger	John	O.G. Billy	Lisa	 Cubbins
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Gender Differences in the Fertility Intentions of Italian Couples	Recently demographic studies have paid increasing attention to the formation process of reproductive intentions.   Since having a birth is a joint decision of both partners, the analysis of partners’ preferences combination takes a central role in the analysis of the family formation process.   In this paper we focus on the determinants of childbearing intentions considering female and male partner separately, but taking into account the characteristics and preferences of the other member of the couple.  In Italy the total fertility rate is around 1.3 children per woman, while the average desired family size is slightly higher than 2. How much does the possible disagreement within the couple contribute to this gap? What is the influence of late family formation on the couple's childbearing intentions?  We used the data of the nationally representative survey Family and Social Subjects, carried out in 2003.	Alessandro	 Rosina	Maria	Rita  Testa
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Family Life Course Transitions and the Economic Consequences of Internal Migration	Family life course events (i.e. marriage, childbearing,   separation/divorce) are seldom carefully conceptualized and measured as determinants of both internal migration and the economic well-being outcomes of family migration. The more usual focus of the demographic literature is on family and household STRUCTURE rather than on family life course PROCESSES. Based on life course transition theory and longitudinal population survey data from the 1996-1999 and 2001-2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, we utilize event history difference-in-difference models that consider time since migration to provide new evidence on how before- and after-migration life course transitions affect post-migration welfare receipt, employment, poverty status, and family earnings gains and losses of inter- and intra-state migrant families.	Gordon	F. De Jong	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Movin’ on Up? Residential Mobility, Gender and Coupled Work Careers	Theoretical perspectives on residential mobility typically view household outcomes as reasonable approximations of the outcomes for all individuals in the household. For many couple-headed households, however, residential mobility has different implications for the careers of each partner. We use matched data from the 2000-2005 March Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey to investigate the relationship between family status, residential mobility and short-term labor market outcomes for working-age couples in the United States. We find that, on average, the short-term impact of residential mobility on household income is insignificant. However, dual-earner couples who move out of state become more equal with respect to hours and earnings.	Claudia	 Geist	Patricia	A. McManus
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Sex Asymmetry in Family Migration: Familial Gender Roles or Occupational Inequality?	Despite significant increases in women’s labor force attachment, occupational prestige and proportionate contribution to family income, the empirical evidence indicates that long-distance family migration continues to be motivated disproportionately by the employment dynamics of the male partner in married-couple families. Researchers have attributed this sex asymmetry to one of two influences: (1) individual-level human capital disparities between spouses or (2) familial gender role inequality. I test the human capital and gender-role explanations against Mincer's (1978) structural explanation. The structural perspective attributes sex asymmetry in family migration decision-making to sex inequality and segregation the labor market. This analysis uses individual- and family-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), occupation-level data from the 1970-1990 U.S. Decennial Censuses Integrated Public Use Micro Samples (IPUMS), and discrete-time event history models to estimate the influence of individual-, family- and occupational-level characteristics on family migration events.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	U.S. Family Migration: Do Housing Costs Matter?	The rapid increase in the cost of housing has recently been identified as a motivation for significant migration flows down the urban hierarchy. However, little empirical work has established the relationship between differential costs of living and migration flows, particularly for families. In this paper we measure the difference in the cost of living between origin and destination for all migration flows across the United States at the county level from 1995-2000. Particular focus is given to the top 0.1% of population flows (magnitude) to examine the cost-of-living outcomes for these exchanges. We then assess the impact of housing cost differentials on interstate migration specifically. Lastly, using the 2000 PUMS we assess the cost-of-living adjustments experienced by migrant families. The paper provides convincing evidence that cost-of-living adjustments are a critical component of understanding recent long-distance flows and family migration strategies.	Suzanne	 Withers	William	A.V. Clark	Tricia	 Ruiz
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in Rural China	In this paper, we investigate how reductions of barriers to migration affect the decision of middle school graduates to attend high school in rural China. Change in the cost of migration is identified using exogenous variation across counties in the timing of national identity card distribution, which made it easier for rural migrants to register as temporary residents in urban destinations. We show that timing of ID card distribution is unrelated to local rainfall shocks affecting demand for migration, and not related to proxies reflecting time-varying changes in village policy or administrative capacity. We find a robust negative relationship between migrant opportunity and high school enrollment. The mechanisms behind the negative relationship are suggested by observed increases in subsequent local and migrant non-agricultural employment of high school age young adults as the size of the current village migrant network increases.	John	T. Giles	Alan	 de Brauw
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	The Effect of Migration on Health of Adults Left Behind in Indonesia	As a large number of migrants remit income back to households they left behind, an increasing body of literature begins to examine the influence of migration on the well-being of left-behind household members and whether such effects extend to health. Results from previous studies are inconsistent, and depend on the subgroup of people and the specific aspect of health examined. The inconclusive findings may result from offsetting consequences of migration, which are seldom evaluated, and because of failure to address the potential endogeneity of migration. Using high-quality longitudinal data collected in Indonesia, I relate migration to the health of the left-behind population at origin (focusing on adults) through various mechanisms and distinguishing different dimensions of health. I also seek to address the potential endogeneity by incorporating macro-level information as a source of exogenous variation in migration decisions, using the instrumental variable approach.	Yao	 Lu
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Parental Migration and Child Health in Mexico	This study uses nationally representative, longitudinal data from Mexico to examine the effect of parental migration on child health in sending communities. I compare children within households who experience parental migration at different key periods of physical development. This comparison provides an estimate of the migration effect net of those family characteristics that are related both to migration and to child health. Using this type of approach addresses the concern that parents who choose to migrate are selected on a number of key characteristics that also affect child well-being. Initial results suggest that, in the short run, parental migration negatively affects child height-for-age, a long-term measure of child nutritional status and illness.	Jenna	 Nobles
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Moving Forward, Looking Back: The Impact of Migrants’ Remittances on Assets, Consumption, and Credit Constraints in Sending Communities in the Rural Philippines	Using a longitudinal data set from Bukidnon, Philippines, this paper explores the impact of remittances on assets, consumption expenditures, and credit constraints of households in origin communities. We use instrumental variables regressions to examine the impact of remittances on parent and child households. Remittances have a positive and significant effect on parents’ livestock holdings and educational expenditures per adult equivalent. For migrants’ siblings, remittances have a weak negative impact on land and livestock, but a positive and significant effect on food, clothing, and footwear expenditures. While remittances do not affect current credit constraints, they have a stronger impact on households that were credit constrained in 1984/85. Among constrained households, remittances have a positive and significant effect on livestock, the value of land and assets, and educational expenditures. Remittances also have a greater impact on children whose parents were credit constrained, increasing values of housing, consumer durables, and total nonland assets.	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Scott	 McNiven
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	The Role of Privatized Prison Industries in Post-Release Labor Market Reintegration	As the prison population has rapidly expanded, the share of inmates participating in educational and vocational prison programming has declined. Collaborations with private organizations have the potential to provide new funding sources for prisoner rehabilitation. Since 1981, Florida has outsourced all of its prison industry programs to Prison Rehabilitative Industries and Diversified Enterprises, Inc.  (PRIDE). PRIDE does not receive any public funding, but instead finances its operations and training activities with the revenue from its prison industries. Using administrative data from the Florida Department of Corrections, I compare the post-release employment outcomes of offenders who participate in the PRIDE program to those of similar offenders who do not. While the OLS results suggest that PRIDE participation increases earnings by 10 percent, this effect disappears when I correct for selection into treatment by exploiting conditional random assignment to initial prison facility.	Jillian	 Berk
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Employer Access to Criminal History Data and the Employment of Young Black Men	Criminal background checks have become a routine part of pre-employment screening. Since black men are overrepresented in the criminal justice system, increasing use of criminal background checks might have a significant employment effect for black men. Using a unique dataset on state availability of criminal history data over the Internet, I find that the relative employment of young black men was lowered by more than 2% in states that made the records of former criminal offenders available on the Internet compared with states that did not.	Keith	 Finlay
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion	This paper analyzes the relationships between juvenile justice system interactions and high school graduation. When controlling for a large set of observables as well as state- and household-level unobservables, arrested and incarcerated individuals are about 10 and 25 percentage points, respectively, less likely to graduate high school than non-arrested individuals. The effect of arrest, however, disappears when there is minimal selection on unobservables; in contrast, the incarceration effect is less sensitive to such selection and can be more readily interpreted as causal. An exploration of the mechanisms underlying the incarceration effect points most consistently toward an education-impeding stigma.	Randi	 Hjalmarsson
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Longitudinal Evidence on the Impact of Incarceration on Labour Market Outcomes and General Well-Being	This paper examines the impact of being incarcerated on labour market outcomes and general well-being using longitudinal data from the nationally representative Household Income and Labour Dynamics of Australia (HILDA) survey. We estimate OLS regression on the entire population, regression models that examine changes in outcomes before/after incarceration for individuals that have been incarcerated, and propensity score matching models that examine changes in outcomes before/after incarceration for individuals that have been incarcerated compared to changes in outcomes for individuals with similar observable characteristics over the same time period. The second and third type of models allow us to control for individual unobservable traits that may simultaneously cause certain individuals to commit crimes and put them at higher risk of poor outcomes. By comparing the OLS estimates to those from the other models, we are able to examine the extent to which individuals that are incarcerated in Australia are negatively selected.	Steven	 Stillman	Malathi	 Velamuri
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Men's Differing Work Trajectories and Fatherhood	In this paper we ask whether U.S. men can be usefully classified into distinct groups with respect to their trajectories of work effort from adolescence to adulthood. In addition, assuming such groups can be distinguished, we ask how their patterns of fathering differ across these groups. Our data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort, and our methods are latent class analysis.	Nan	M. Astone	Jacinda	K. Dariotis	Freya	 Sonenstein	Joseph	H. Pleck
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Fatherhood and Men’s Everyday Time Use in Sweden 1990-2000	Research in many countries confirms that the transition to parenthood intensifies gendered patterns in time use and strengthens a traditional division of labor in which women do more housework and caring than men. This is also the case in Sweden today. This paper investigates the impact of fatherhood on men’s everyday workload and how it changed over the 1990s by analyzing data from two Swedish Time Use Surveys, undertaken by Statistics Sweden in 1990/91 and 2000/01. Specifically, we ask: In what way do children affect the everyday workload of mothers and fathers? Do fathers have a greater workload than childless men? What are the determinants of time use among different groups of men? The results show a clear impact of fatherhood on men’s time use and that there has, over time, been an increasing reconciliation of gender roles but there is still a traditional specialization according to gender.	Martin	 Dribe	Maria	A. Stanfors
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Active Fatherhood Policy and Fertility in the Nordic Countries: A Comparative Study on the Impact of Fathers' Use of Parental Leave on Continued Childbearing in Norway and Sweden	In the Nordic countries gender equality is an explicit political goal integrated in present family policies. Norway and Sweden both offer paid parental leave for approximately one year with earnings-related benefits, with certain periods reserved exclusively for the father. This paper examines the relationship between fathers' use of parental leave and continued childbearing among couples in Norway and Sweden. These countries represent similar family policies, but differ concerning (political) context. While Sweden has a one-sided policy concerning gender relations, Norway has a less consistent policy giving incentives to both gender-equality and childrearing in the home. The analysis is based on longitudinal information on registered parental-leave use and childbearing of all intact unions during a 10-year period. A hazard rate model is used to explore whether fathers’ parental-leave use is positively associated with  couples' continued childbearing. We expect that paternal involvement has a stronger positive effect on childbearing in Sweden than in Norway.	Trude	 Lappegård	Duvander	 Ann-Zofie
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Employment and Earnings across the Transition to Fatherhood: A Life Course Perspective	Existing studies support the hypotheses that married fathers are likely to work longer hours for pay than their childless counterparts, and to earn more money. In this study, I draw upon the life course perspective in asking whether married men respond to becoming fathers for the first time in the same way regardless of the age at which fertility takes place. Fitting fixed effects models to data from the NLSY79, I test several competing hypotheses particularly focused upon delayed fathers, or those who become first-time parents in their thirties and after. Preliminary findings suggest that while delayed fathers’ employment and earnings are not affected by parenthood, there is a significant (but small) disjunction among older men based on their attitudes toward gender egalitarianism. The results appear to have implications for the study of work-family linkages and for discussions of delayed fathers and the “new fatherhood”.	Matthew	 Weinshenker
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	Revisiting the 'Opt-Out' Question		Heather	 Boushey
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	The End of the Gender Revolution? Trends in Employment, Occupations, Earnings and Attitudes, 1950-2004.		David	A. Cotter	Joan	M. Hermsen	Reeve	 Vanneman
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	The Impact of Changing Gender Role Attitudes on Fertility Decisions		Nicole	 Fortin
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	Who's Opting into Housewivery? Gender Employment, and Household Labor		Liana	C. Sayer	Sanjiv	 Gupta
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	After the Storm: Return Migration and Neighborhood Change in Post-Katrina New Orleans	In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, what remains of New Orleans is a smaller geographic footprint, where some neighborhoods are booming while others struggle to recover, each being transformed not only by the biophysical events that occurred but also by a combination of changing market forces, government action, and citizen activism. The objective of this study is to analyze this unprecedented process of urban change through the migratory lens of displaced and undisplaced residents themselves, focusing specifically on racial and class differences in network and institutional assistance. Data come from over 500 interviews conducted with pre-Katrina residents of New Orleans during the first six to twelve months of post-Katrina recovery. Preliminary results indicate substantial changes in the historical fabric of the city, as certain types of displaced residents use network ties to crowd into less damaged neighborhoods as they await the opportunity and resources needed to return home.	James	R. Elliott
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	Post-Katrina New Orleans as a New Migrant Destination	Latino migrants have been arriving in New Orleans to participate in the clean-up and rebuilding of the city ever since the floodwaters of Hurricane Katrina receded. While many southern cities have witnessed large increases in Latino migrant populations, this had not been the case in New Orleans until after Katrina. In this research I investigate the socio-demographic characteristics of this newcomer population to understand how it differs from migrant populations in other destinations in the U.S. The data I use for this research comes from two sources, a sample of New Orleans migrants interviewed between March and May of 2006 and a sample of migrants interviewed in the U.S. in 2004. I find some differences between migrants in New Orleans and those in other destinations, but these results suggest that they are more alike than not. More interesting differences exist between Latinos of different national origins in New Orleans.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	The Displaced New Orleans Residents Pilot Study	The Displaced New Orleans Residents Pilot Study was designed to examine the current location, well-being, and plans of people who lived in the City of New Orleans when Hurricane Katrina struck on 29 August 2005. The study is based on a representative sample of pre-Katrina dwellings in the city. Fieldwork efforts focused on tracking respondents wherever they had moved, including back to New Orleans. Respondents were administered a short paper-and-pencil interview by mail, by telephone, or in person.    In this paper, we present the preliminary results from the pilot study. We describe the study design and report on our ability to locate and successfully interview displaced New Orleans residents. We also describe the migration experience, mental health, socioeconomic status, and future plans of the respondents. We end with a discussion of the lessons learned from the pilot study. Our conclusions highlight the challenges and opportunities of studying this unique population.	Narayan	 Sastry
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	Katrina-Related Health Impacts on Vietnamese New Orleanians: A Longitudinal Analysis	A wide range of self-reported and objective health measures collected for a Vietnamese immigrant sample living in the greater New Orleans area just weeks before Hurricane Katrina struck possess extraordinary potential as baseline measures for investigating how immigrants fare after such disasters. We assess the short-term (1 year) effects of a natural disaster upon the health of a recent immigrant population by comparing pre-event and post-event physical and mental health assessments for working age (20-49) Vietnamese-American New Orleanians. Individuals in our sample underwent a 90-minute health assessment during June and July 2005 (n=125); the majority of these same individuals have been located and re-assessed during August and September of 2006 (current n=75 and increasing). Our working sample is these 75 individuals for whom we now have both pre- and post-event physical and mental health measures.	Mark	 VanLandingham	Fran	 Norris	Lung	 Vu	Hongyun	 Fu
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Crime Load and Mental Health Decline: Longitudinal Evidence from the Mexican Family Life Survey	The literature on crime and victims’ mental health provides descriptive evidence of the association between the two, but there is very little causal evidence on the effect of victimization on individual health. We contribute to filling  this gap using nationally representative, longitudinal data from the Mexican Family Life Survey to examine the impact of victimization on mental health status of the population. We find evidence that crime poses a significant burden on several dimensions of health. Among asymptomatic individuals, victims are more likely than non-victims to develop an anxiety disorder. Symptoms that were absent before victimization, such as frequent nervousness, fear, pessimism, obsessiveness, headaches, and chest pain, tend to appear after it. Impacts vary across genders—females seem to endure a harder impact on mental health, being significantly more likely than males to start exhibiting anxiety symptomathology following crime.	Facundo	 Cuevas	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Marital Status and Psychological Wellbeing of Filipino Women	In developing countries like the Philippines, little is known about the association of changes in marital status from a married state and women’s psychological health. Using data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey of some 2,000 childbearing women in Metro Cebu, Philippines, this study examines the relationship between marital transitions from a married status and psychological wellbeing. We classify marital status transitions as: 1) still with first spouse, 2) widowed, 3) separated, and 4) remarried. Wellbeing is measured in terms of: 1) an index of depression symptoms experienced in the last month and 2) an index of violent acts done by, and done to, women in the last year. Logistic regression results show that transition to widowhood increases the likelihood of depression but reduces that of domestic violence. Remarriage increases the odds of being a victim of violence but is unrelated to depression and the perpetration of violence.	Socorro	A. Gultiano	Graeme	Ferdinand D. Armecin
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Domestic Violence as a Risk Factor for Psychosis in Bolivia	The experience of domestic violence is positively associated with depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and substance abuse. While research suggests that traumatic, victimizing events are partially causally associated with psychosis, few studies have explored the association between domestic violence and psychotic symptoms, particularly in a developing country context. Using data from the 2003 Bolivia DHS, logistic regression is used to discern the risk factors for self-reported psychotic symptoms. Women who report domestic violence are 43% more likely to hear voices speaking to them than those who have not experienced domestic violence. Women whose mothers were beaten by their fathers are 20% more likely to report hearing voices, and women who were severely punished as children were 14% more likely to hear voices. These findings highlight the importance of the provision of mental health services that are also capable of addressing the problem of domestic violence, and vice versa.	Kiersten	 Johnson
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Why Women Attempt Suicide: The Role of Mental Illness and Social Disadvantage in a Community Cohort Study in India	The goal of this study was to describe the risk for attempted suicide in women associated with social disadvantage and mental disorder. The data is based on a cohort study of 2318 women in Goa, India. Information was collected at baseline on socioeconomic adversity, gender disadvantage, and physical and common mental disorders (CMD). The main outcome was self-report attempted suicide (AS) over the 12-month study period and the main method of analysis was exact logistic regression. Gender-based violence (OR=5.04, 95%CI: 1.69-15.45), CMD (OR=3.50, 95%CI: 1.04-10.90) and indebtedness (OR=2.89, 95%CI: 1.02-8.89) were the strongest independent predictors of incident AS cases. Experiencing both gender-based violence and CMD increases the risk of AS 25-fold when compared with women who have experienced neither risk factor. Strategies to reduce gender-based violence and discrimination, provide debt relief and improve the recognition and treatment of common mental disorders may reduce the population burden of attempted suicide.	Joanna	 Maselko	Vikram	 Patel
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Record Measures of Longevity	This study reviews the trend over time in three measures of typical longevity: life expectancy at birth, and median and modal ages at death. It also examines trends in record values observed for all three measures. Record life expectancy at birth increased steadily from a level of 44 years in 1840 to 82 years in 2004, and record median age at death showed a similar increasing pattern. However, record modal age at (adult) death remained at a plateau around age 80 until the 1940s. In more recent years, the mode has shown the same pace of increase observed for the other record measures. This trend in the modal age at death reflects a fundamental change over time from a dominance of child mortality reductions to a dominance of adult mortality reductions. It is argued that mortality forecasts based on shifting ages at death must take this change into account.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	John	R. Wilmoth
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	The Narrowing Sex Gap in Life Expectancy: Effects of Sex Differences in the Age Pattern of Mortality	Using data from the Human Mortality Database for 29 high-income national populations (1751-2004), we review trends in the sex gap in e(0). Widening of the sex gap during most of the 1900s was largely due to slower mortality decline for males than females, which previous studies attributed to behavioural factors (e.g., smoking). More recently, the gap began to narrow in most countries, which researchers tried to explain with these same factors. However, our decomposition analysis reveals that for the majority of countries recent narrowing is primarily due to sex differences in the age pattern of mortality rather than declining sex ratios in mortality: the same rate of mortality decline produces smaller gains in e(0) for women than men because female deaths are less dispersed across age (i.e., survivorship is more rectangular). This study demonstrates that sex differences in the age pattern of mortality affect trends in the e(0) sex gap.	Dana	A. Glei	Shiro	 Horiuchi
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Evaluating the Performance of Death Distribution Methods for Estimating Death Registration Completeness: Applications to Data from High-Income Countries	In countries where vital registration systems are underdeveloped, mortality estimates derived from conventional methods can be badly biased. Analytical methods that estimate levels of death registration completeness are among the alternative approaches used for mortality measurement in these contexts. Although the use of such methods is increasing, few empirical studies have evaluated how they perform. One evaluation strategy is to apply them to settings where the recording of deaths and population is thought to be essentially complete. In this paper, we evaluate how three death-distribution methods perform with accurate data from the Human Mortality Database, and explore whether additional information can be used to improve performance. We also assess the sensitivity of death registration methods to the age groups used to estimate adjustment factors, and examine the association between registration completeness estimates and net international migration flows.	Kevin	J.A. Thomas
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Verbal Autopsy Methods with Multiple Causes of Death	Verbal autopsy procedures are widely used for estimating cause-specific mortality in areas without medical death certification. Data on symptoms reported by caregivers along with the cause of death are collected from a medical facility, and the cause of death distribution is estimated in the population where only symptom data are available. Current approaches analyze only one cause at a time, involve assumptions judged impossible to satisfy, and require time-consuming or unreliable physician reviews, expert algorithms, or parametric statistical models. By generalizing current approaches to analyze multiple causes, we show how most of the difficult assumptions underlying existing methods can be dropped. These generalizations also make physician review, expert algorithms, and parametric statistical assumptions unnecessary. With theoretical results, and empirical analyses in data from China and Tanzania, we illustrate the accuracy of this approach. As a companion to this paper, we offer easy-to-use software that implements the methods discussed herein.	Gary	 King	Ying	 Lu
2007	53	Contraception  	Contraceptive Trends in the Developing World: A Comparative Analysis from the Demographic and Health Surveys	This study examines trends and differentials in key family-planning indicators in 35 developing countries. The study investigates how knowledge and utilization have changed; whether public/private, urban/rural, and other socioeconomic differentials in contraceptive use have narrowed; and whether women are making informed contraceptive decisions. It also examines discontinuation and switching and men’s involvement in family planning. Results indicate that knowledge levels are near universal in most countries, yet knowledge of multiple methods, despite increases over time, remains considerably lower, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Current use has been increasing consistently in most countries, but levels remain lower in sub-Saharan Africa. About half of current users are informed about alternative methods and side effects. Most women have switched methods. Discontinuation rates are particularly high in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, urban/rural and educational differentials in current use are narrowing, but remain substantial in sub-Saharan countries.	Shane	 Khan	Vinod	 Mishra	Fred	 Arnold	Noureddine	 Abderrahim
2007	53	Contraception  	Women’s and Men’s Social Networks and Contraceptive Use Dynamics: Longitudinal Evidence from Ghana	This paper examines the effects of social network experience on contraceptive use dynamics in six communities in southern Ghana. The data permit assessment of the explanatory power of both women’s and men’s social network experience. Men’s social networks have been largely neglected in research on social interaction and reproduction in developing countries, despite the fact that in most of these societies men have a decisive voice in reproductive decision-making. Panel survey data are analyzed for roughly 900 women and their male partners covering five years of observation. The monthly probability of use of modern contraception is modeled as a function of conventional demographic and socioeconomic variables and separate sets of social network variables specific to the woman and to her male partner. The regression modeling includes strategies for dealing with the endogeneity of social networks and unobservables that might bias the estimation of social network effects.	Peter	 Aglobitse	John	B. Casterline
2007	53	Contraception  	Adapting, Scaling Up, and Sustaining a Family Planning and Reproductive Health Model: The Willows Foundation Outreach Program in Turkey	The world is keenly interested in how successful family planning/reproductive health (FP/RH) models can be adapted to other settings and scaled up. Building on lessons of Matlab and other community-based approaches, Willows Foundation’s community-outreach and referral program has increased poor urban women’s access to FP/RH information and services in Turkey. Over 800,000 women were reached by 979 field educators between 1999 and 2005; the project worked simultaneously to improve government health services.    In 2004-2006, the program was externally evaluated in six urban areas of Turkey to assess the effects of the program on both clients and project staff regarding contraceptive use, FP/RH knowledge, familiarity with and use of preventive services. The evaluation details the successes of this scaled-up and intensive model of community-based education, counseling and referral. In establishing links between poor women and government services, the project provides important insights into both obstacles and needs regarding women’s access to health services.	Demet	 Gural	Hacer	 Nalbant	Aysen	 Bulut	Janet	M. Turan	Elaine	M. Murphy
2007	53	Contraception  	Interactions between Genes and Social Context for Contraceptive Use in Adolescence and Young Adulthood	Demographers studying contraceptive usage have heretofore emphasized elements such as relevant individual knowledge and motivation, and relationship and general social contexts. However, to date no work has examined potential genetic contributions to contraceptive behaviors which may interact with the environment, as with other risky behaviors (Caspi et al. 2002, 2003). Using genetic and behavioral data from three waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), our study investigates possible relationships between theoretically relevant genetic polymorphism - including DRD2, MAOA, DRD4, and DAT1 - and contraceptive self-reports among adolescents and young adults.  Our preliminary results suggest that contraceptive behavior is structured both genetically as well as socially. Different genetic polymorphisms influence contraceptive usage at first sex, most recent sex, and more general patterns of contraceptive usage. Furthermore, the nature of these genetic effects appears to vary by social groupings, suggesting a strong possibility of gene-environment interactions.	Guang	 Guo	Jonathan	 Daw
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	The Consequences of Multi-Partnered Fertility for Parental Involvement and Relationships	At the nexus of major changes in marital and fertility behavior in recent decades is a new reality of contemporary family life - the fact that a significant fraction of adults today (will) have biological children by more than one partner, referred to as ‘multi-partnered fertility.’ This increasing family complexity creates challenges for managing parental roles and responsibilities important to the effective care and socialization of children. In this paper, we use new data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study with propensity-score matching techniques to explore the consequences of multi-partnered fertility for family relationships about three years after a baby’s birth in large U.S. cities. Overall, we find that a sizeable fraction of couples have one or more previous children and that these parental obligations are strongly linked to the focal couple’s ability to stay together and co-parent effectively. Fathers’ having previous children is particularly deleterious - at least from mothers’ perspectives.	Marcia	J. Carlson	Frank	 Furstenberg
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	The Structure of Intergenerational Exchange in the U.K.	In this paper, I analyse recent survey data on the exchange of practical support and assistance between adult children and their non-coresident parents. Using latent class analysis, three types of exchange relationships are identified: (1) those who rarely exchange assistance with their parents (low-level exchangers), (2) those who regularly exchange assistance with their parents (high-level exchangers), and (3) those who mainly give support to their parents (givers). Since low-level exchangers account for three-fifths of the sample, it is fair to say that, in contrast to previous research, the overall level of intergenerational exchange in contemporary U.K. is rather modest. However, the associations between latent class membership and other covariates are broadly consistent with previous research. Finally, members of all three latent classes report substantively similar levels of subjective well-being and overall social support received.	Tak	Wing  Chan
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	Divorce, Intergenerational Solidarity, and Perceived Support	Using two waves of the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, I examine how parental divorce and remarriage affect parent-child relationships and exchanges in midlife, and consequently how parents’ ties with their children affect parental perceptions of support availability in late life, with particular attention to gender differences. This analysis shows that parental divorce lowers parent-child solidarity in midlife, particularly for fathers. Divorced parents are also less likely than married parents to name their adult children as potential sources of support. Remarriage and having stepchildren do not improve parental beliefs about potential support from adult children. Surprisingly, the association between parental divorce and perceptions of support cannot be explained by intergenerational solidarity in midlife.	I-Fen	 Lin
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	Time and Money Transfer to Elderly Parents: Family Assistance and Labor Market Behavior	This paper examines the extent to which the baby-boom generation assists aging parents with time and money and how the helping behavior affects the helpers' labor market activities. We also compare behavior of the baby boomers to that of their predecessors. Patterns of assistance are similar, with one exception: the gender difference has narrowed. Sizable fractions of these individuals provided assistance to their elderly parents at some time during 1992. Time help was much more common than money help and health-related help tended to constitute a small part of the help to parents. Evidence indicates that baby boomers are assisting their elderly parents without changing the amount of time they spend working in the labor market. The findings suggest it is the challenge of juggling these activities collectively, rather than possible lost time at work, that merits the concerted attention of researchers, employers, and policy makers.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Minority Language Status, Generation, and the Educational Performance of Immigrant Children	The educational achievement of immigrant children is central to their success, but within the American educational system, they must overcome at least two major obstacles. One, the majority of recent immigrant families have lower SES than native students’ families, yet SES is key to parents’ ability to promote educational achievement. Second, immigrant parents often speak a language other than English; thus their children may begin schooling with a limited knowledge of the language used for instruction. Research has suggested that recent immigrants have higher achievement than native-borns, but studies finding this effect lack concrete data on students’ English ability. Using English language assessment data from the ECLS-K, this study tests whether generational effects on fifth-grade academic outcomes are mediated by early English ability. Results show that English skill is a suppressor on the generational effect, giving support to the “immigrant optimism hypothesis,” suggesting that this effect is evident among elementary students.	Rachel	E. Durham	George	 Farkas
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Where Do Trajectories Diverge? Nativity and Ethnic Differences in Home Environment and Very Early Cognitive Development	Racial and ethnic disparities in educational attainment have their origins in differential access to resources in early childhood. This paper addresses differences in early cognitive development and asks whether differences in socioeconomic resources and parenting practices mediate the relationship among mother's nativity, language use, ethnicity and early cognitive development even before children encounter formal school settings. Analyses of the first two waves of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth cohort (ECLS-B) indicate significant racial and ethnic differences in the home environments of young children. Mother's nativity, age at arrival and home language background are also associated with more disadvantaged home environments in multivariate models. Overall, home environment plays a significant role in explaining differences in cognitive development by ethnicity and nativity by the second wave of data. Further, mother's age at arrival and parenting practices do not have the same relationship to early cognitive development in all ethnic groups.	Jennifer	E. Glick	Littisha	 Scott
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Impact of Parental Involvement on the Gap in Kindergarten Math Scores between Children of Immigrants and Children of Natives	Children of immigrants are the fastest growing segment of the young child population in the United States (Hernandez, 1999). This population is quite diverse and is overall performing less well than their native counterparts. (Magnuson et al., 2006; Han, 2005; Crosnoe, 2005). Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey - Kindergarten Cohort, this paper analyzes whether differences in parental involvement can explain part of the gap in math scores between children of immigrants and children of natives in the fall and the spring of kindergarten. Controlling for parental involvement reduces the gap for children of Mexican parents and increases the advantage of children of Chinese parents. From the fall to the spring of kindergarten, the negative impact of speaking a non-English language at home decreases and even more so with the inclusion of parental involvement variables. Finally, going to kindergarten all day instead of half day increases the math scores.	Claudia	 Lahaie
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Global Nutrition Patterns and Overweight among Young Children of U.S. Immigrants: Why Nutrition Assimilation Pathways Vary across Groups	Empirical efforts to assess the relationship between exposure to U.S. society and overweight among children have been hampered by a tendency to treat acculturation as a linear process. Global nutrition patterns and new formulations of assimilation theory suggest that variation in immigrants’ national origins and socioeconomic statuses are likely to generate variations in generational patterns in the prevalence of overweight. We analyze generational patterns in overweight among Hispanic, Asian, and non-Hispanic white children ages five and six using the Kindergarten cohort of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (N = 11,719). We find that the relationship between socioeconomic status and BMI reverses from positive to negative across immigrant generations. For children of newcomers, the relationship is positive for those from poor countries but negative for those from wealthier countries. National origin differences diminish among children of settled immigrants, and the relationship between SES and overweight becomes negative among children of natives.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Kelly	 Balistreri
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	A Life Course Study of Racial and Ethnic Differences in Women’s Labor Market Exit Patterns	Do Black, Hispanic, and White women experience different rates of retirement, work-disability, and death? If so, what are the specific life course factors underlying racial and ethnic differences in women’s labor force exit behavior? We draw on life course themes and panel data from the HRS to examine race differences in women’s labor force exit pathways, with particular attention to the mediating effects of education, earnings, work and family patterns, wealth, and health. Findings show that women’s labor market exit pathways are diverse and vary by race and ethnicity. We find that while minority and White women have comparable retirement transition rates, Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to exit the labor market due to a work-disability. Additionally, Blacks are more likely than Whites to exit the workforce due to death. A wide array of life course factors account for these race differences in labor force exit pathways.	Tyson	H. Brown	David	F. Warner
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Understanding Racial Inequality in Homeownership: A Dynamic Approach	This analysis is interested in understanding why racial differences in homeownership have persisted in the past three decades and how they could be diminished. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics allows the opportunity to study the dynamics of the process of transitioning into and out of homeownership and answer many questions about the occurrence and timing of these flows. Using event history models I assess the effects of race and various other factors in the occurrence and timing of becoming an owner, buying subsequent homes and returning to renter status. An emphasis is placed on how these effects have changed over time and how they vary across cohorts. These estimates are then used in simulations to examine what accounts for the racial gap in aggregate homeownership levels and what changes might close this gap.	Vanesa	 Estrada
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Race/Ethnic Disparities in Cause-Specific Infant Mortality Change over Two Decades	It has been argued that “the past two decades have witnessed the most profound alterations ever recorded in the structure of infant mortality patterns in the United States” (Gortmaker and Wise 1997: 152). But despite the fact that race/ethnic disparities have increased during a time period when infant mortality was falling for virtually all groups, no research exists that examines changes in cause-specific infant mortality by race/ethnicity over this crucial time period. Here we document and model black-white change in infant mortality for 1983-2001 using the NCHS linked files. We also use data for the 10 states (including all four border states) that included Hispanic identifiers throughout this time period to carry out an analysis paralleling the one just mentioned. Preliminary results indicate substantial variation in race/ethnic changes in cause-specific infant mortality and identify several important inflection points in the trends.	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Race-Ethnicity and Unhealthy Body Mass: A Quantile Regression Analysis	This paper examines racial-ethnic disparity in BMI using the 2005 NHIS. Quantile regression models are used to estimate the partial effect of race-ethnicity at the CDC standards for malnourishment, overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity.  Separately for men and women and controlling for age, income, immigrant arrival cohorts, marital status, and Food Stamp use, our analysis shows: (1) The black-white disparity is stronger in the overweight and obese ranges among women, whereas there is little black-white disparity among men. (2) Compared to whites, Hispanics generally have higher BMI over the full distribution: Hispanic men are particularly heavier in the extreme obese range while Hispanic women are so in the overweight and obese ranges. (3) Overall, Asians have lower BMI than whites: Asian men are particularly thinner than white men at the overweight and obese ranges whereas Asian women are particularly thinner at the obese and extreme obese ranges.	Lingxin	 Hao	Julie	 Kim
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Parental Incarceration, the Prison Boom, and the Concentration of Disadvantage	In an era of historically high imprisonment rates, parental imprisonment may have emerged as a novel experience for disadvantaged black children. Despite the possible effect of the prison boom on childhood inequality, no estimates of the risk of parental imprisonment exist. This paper estimates the risk of parental imprisonment for American children born between 1978 and 1990. Estimates show that: (1) three percent of children born in 1978 and six percent of children born in 1990 experienced parental imprisonment; (2) one in five black children and one in 40 white children born in 1990 had a parent imprisoned; (3) race and class inequality in the risk of parental imprisonment is growing; and (4) 40 percent of black children born in 1990 to high school dropouts experienced parental imprisonment. Estimates using longitudinal data confirm that parental imprisonment is a novel form of childhood disadvantage that concentrates disadvantage among black children of low-education parents.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2007	57	International Migration	All in the Family: Generational Acculturation among Immigrant Parents and Children	Over the past decade, a burgeoning literature has sought to determine how the “new” immigrant second generation is adapting to their host society. Acculturation is an important intervening variable in this assimilation process. However, little research has paid serious attention to theory-driven measurement of acculturation. I argue that acculturation can be viewed as a process that happens to families, not just to children. With the Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Survey, I measure familial acculturation and examine its determinants. Analyses first suggest that nationality status and variables measuring parental skills and resources combine to determine the likelihood that families will experience consonant acceptance, consonant rejection, and differences in the rate of acculturation. Second, there is little consistent evidence that the effects of parental resources on these measures of familial acculturation differ by nationality status or race of the child, a result that supports the expectations of straight-line assimilation theory.	David	A. Cort
2007	57	International Migration	What Role Does Religion Play in the Migration Process? And Vice Versa? Evidence from the New Immigrant Survey	We use data from the New Immigrant Survey to describe the composition of religious preference among the new legal immigrants. In a previous paper, the religious preference of immigrants was analyzed using the NIS-Pilot data. This paper extends that work, using a nationally representative prospective-retrospective study, to support the robustness of the previous results and to analyze and describe new findings of the different faith traditions and interrelations among the religions of the respondents, and of their spouses and offspring, as well as changes in faith over time. We pay particular attention to the immigrants’ behaviors across immigration visa categories, countries of origin, educational attainment, gender, and migration history. This focus is particularly relevant in the context of analyzing the characteristics of the major faith traditions as well as the immigration directions. We draw conclusions and make comparisons with the literature regarding the religious composition of the native-born U.S. population.	Monica	E. Higgins
2007	57	International Migration	Migration and Schooling among U.S.-Born Children of Mexican Parents	Second-generation migrants are invariably analyzed under the assumption that, having being born in the U.S., they grew up living in the U.S. The main aim of the present study is to explore the cases among U.S.-born Mexican children for which this assumption is not true. It describes their US-Mexico migration patterns during childhood, whether these moves involve parent-child separations or reunions, and differences in their school enrollment status by age when living in the U.S. or Mexico. It is the first study to provide direct evidence on these topics using national-level data. This is achieved by combining microdata from the U.S. and Mexico censuses of 1990 and 2000, including the place of residence 5 years ago question in both countries' censuses. Substantial proportions migrate to Mexico at pre-school ages and these children experience both higher parent-child separation and higher enrollment through the school-age years than do their peers.	Michael	 Rendall
2007	57	International Migration	Why Do Immigrants Re-Migrate from One Affluent Country to Another? Immigrants’ Opportunity Structure in Comparative Perspective	This research examines the causes of, and motives for, an emerging type of international migration: secondary migration, or re-migration, from one affluent country to another. Focusing on the secondary migration of West Indians and South Asians from the U.K. to the U.S. in comparison to Latin American and East Asian migratory flows from Japan to the U.S., I attempt to identify the trend of secondary migration in general, and re-migratory flows from the U.K. and Japan to the U.S. in particular. Why do immigrants re-migrate from Japan or U.K. to the U.S. despite the countries’ relatively comparable economic status? Who re-migrates?   In this paper I analyze how secondary migration relates to the opportunity structure for immigrants in each country. I hypothesize that the opportunity structure is related to immigrants’ racial/ethnic integration and that second migrants are more likely than primary migrants to be highly skilled and educated.	Ayumi	 Takenaka
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Exploring Access to Maternal Health Services and Infant Mortality Regional Differentials Peru 2000	This paper explores a new methodology to calculate regional estimates of the relationship between access to maternal health services, mainly the use of prenatal care, and infant mortality rates. Using geographic weighted regression and point-spatial autocorrelation techniques on DHS geo-referenced cluster data for Peru 2000, the strength of this relationship is tested when controlling for social factors such as the proportion of rural, indigenous and low-education women. The results show significant regional variations of the impact of public health policy even within regions inside the South Andean, Coast and Jungle parts of Peru that are not captured when using non-spatial statistical modeling methods based on survey data. An argument is made for the contribution of spatial techniques to analyze inter- and intra-regional variations.	Lissette	 Aliaga Linares	Thomas	W. Pullum
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Explaining Spatial Homogamy: Spatial, Socio-Economic and Cultural Aspects of the Partner Market in the Netherlands	Spatial homogamy, or the similarity concerning geographical background, is a dimension that has been underexposed in homogamy studies. This paper gives a complete picture of the level and variation of spatial homogamy in the Netherlands, and the factors influencing it. The data used is a unique set of micro data on all cohabiters in the country, including their stage in the life course, socio-economic status, and cultural resources. Explorative Spatial Data Analysis is used to detect interesting spatial patterns in spatial homogamy and to construct hypotheses on spatial regimes. With the GeoDa software, a spatial regression explains geographical variation in the spatial homogamy coefficient, taking into account demographic, socio-economic, and cultural attributes of couples. The spatial model of the partner market identifies which specific (spatial) factors explain spatial homogamy.	Karen	 Haandrikman	Leo	 van Wissen
2007	58	Spatial Demography	The Impact of Spatially Proximate Population Concentrations on Migration	Migration research often fails to explicitly consider the impact that large concentrations of population in spatial proximity have on migration patterns. We develop a measure that estimates the impact of spatial population concentration on migration for each of the 3100 U.S. counties, using a gravitational potential model with a negative exponential distance decay function. We use a multivariate GWR model incorporating the demographic, economic and amenity characteristics of a county together with this measure of the spatial population concentrations to predict migration. Our research objectives are: to develop a measure that explicitly takes into account the influence of spatially proximate population concentrations on migration; and to incorporate our measure of spatial population proximity into a model that estimates the impact of a variety of demographic, economic and social characteristics of a county on migration.	Kenneth	M. Johnson	Paul	R. Voss	Roger	B. Hammer	Guangqing	 Chi
2007	58	Spatial Demography	A Space-Time Model of Fertility and Development in China, 1982-2000	Although China is extremely regionally diverse, and fertility policy is implemented at a local level, research often implicitly assumes spatial homogeneity. This paper applies exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA) and spatial panel regression models to examine county-level variation in fertility rates in China. Spatial regressions reduce bias resulting from spatial and temporal autocorrelation in regression models, while spatial analysis allows detailed examination of relationships between pairs of predictors. Using county-level data from China’s 1982, 1990, and 2000 censuses, I model general fertility rates and changes in rates using variables related to social and economic development characteristics of the counties.	Katherine	 King
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Do Slums Promote High Fertility? Neighborhood Differences in Fertility in Accra, Ghana	Fertility in Ghana is still well above replacement level. Even in the capital city of Accra women are having nearly three children each, and the declines there, as in the rest of the country, seem to have stalled. The average for Accra, however, hides a great deal of variability within the city. Explaining that spatial variability is the goal of this paper. We test the hypothesis that slum characteristics of neighborhoods account for fertility variability within Accra, net of individual characteristics. We do this by using data from a ten percent sample of anonymized individual records from the 2000 census. We group enumeration areas into contiguous slum areas by applying a new spatial clustering technique called AMOEBA. We then evaluate the importance of slum neighborhoods as predictors of fertility at the individual level using logistic regression analysis, and at the neighborhood level using spatially filtered multiple regression analysis.	John	R. Weeks	Allan	G. Hill	Arthur	 Getis	Sarah	 Hinton
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Time Use between Work and Family over the Life Cycle: A Comparative Gender Analysis  of Italy, France, Sweden and U.S.	The aim of this work is to analyse cross-country disparities in time use over the life course in France, Italy, United States and Sweden, using data from the Time Use Surveys. We focus on gender differences in the allocation of time to market work, domestic work, care and leisure at specific stages of the life-cycle on a sample of adults.  First, we describe the evolution of time use according to the major events in the life course, such as exiting the family of origin, family formation, childbearing, and retiring from work. Then, we focus on the correlates of time allocation in paid and unpaid work in a gender perspective with tobit models.  Our results confirm that men's and women's profiles by life stages vary everywhere, but in differing degrees, depending on welfare regime, family and employment policies, as well as tax system. The gender gap is greater in Italy than anywhere else.	Dominique	 Anxo	Lennart	 Flood	Letizia	 Mencarini	Maria-Letizia	 Tanturri	Ariane	 Pailhe	Anne	 Solaz
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Is Gender Inequity in Time Allocation Associated with Low Fertility? A Cross-National Enquiry	Using time use data to highlight the impact of children in the domestic sphere, this paper explores fertility in comparative perspective. It investigates how variation in gendered time allocation to market and non-market work relates to national fertility outcomes. Time use data offer a unique window into how people allocate their labour resources to paid work and family care. Comparative research provides a framework for testing the effects of alternative policy settings. The paper uses the Multinational Time Use Study (MTUS) to analyse time use in seven countries representing four contrasting policy regimes. It uses three measures (total paid and unpaid workload, the gender division of domestic labour, and relative time spent in market and non-market work) to explore the time effects, by sex, of having children in each country. It concludes that gendered time allocation only partially corresponds to standard regime classification, but is more implicated in fertility outcomes.	Lyn	 Craig
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Nonstandard Work Schedules in 12 European Labor Markets: An Analysis of Gender Differentials	This paper examines nonday and weekend employment in 12 European countries, based on data from the 2005 Labour Force Surveys. We present descriptive findings on prevalence, recognizing that variation in work schedule behavior among countries may reflect both differences in the nature of the labor force and cross-national variability in relevant public policies and collective agreements. We then focus on gender differences within countries, and employ regression analyses to assess the effect of gender after controlling for relevant labor force, demographic, and socio-economic factors. A central hypothesis is that nonday employment (usually working evenings, nights, or a rotating shift) is more characteristic of men, whereas weekend employment—which is more benign in its personal and familial consequences and disproportionately entails service-sector jobs—is more characteristic of women. Finally, for a subset of countries with data on parental status, we examine the relevance of children for employment at nonstandard times.	Harriet	B. Presser	Sangeeta	 Parashar
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Fighting Gender Inequalities in the Labour Market: The Role of Family Friendly Policies in OECD Countries	This paper provides a comparison of family-friendly policies in OECD countries and their connection with gender inequalities in the labour market. In most countries, recent evolutions of family-related policies have been driven prominently by the issue of work and family reconciliation. However, the combination of this issue with the other goals of those policies still remains very diverse. To account for this variety, we proceed to a Multiple Factorial Analysis of data on family policies, using the very recent Family database provided by the OECD, and including their different dimensions (development of childcare services; transfers and financial support to families; flexibility arrangements at the workplace) and measure their relation with indicators of child outcome, poverty and gender labour market differences. Then we discuss the results of our cluster analysis with regard to standard typologies of welfare states regimes, which are only partially corroborated.	Olivier	 Thevenon
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Intended, Appropriate, and Actual Family Size in Israel: Policy Attitudes and Implications	Israel’s population reflects unique combinations of immigration and high fertility. Arab and Jewish TFRs were 4.0 and 2.7 in 2005 – above Europe, the U.S., and some Mid-Eastern countries. Demographic trends impact Israel’s regional and global political relations. We examine Jewish (79% of Israel’s total) fertility patterns based on a 2005 national survey of married women and men at reproductive ages, comparing actual, intended, and appropriate family sizes in different demographic, socioeconomic, and cultural contexts. Diffuse gaps exist between ideal perceptions (3-4 children) and actual performances (2-3 children). Perceptions of incentives and constraints to family size provide clues to a renewed approach to social policies: preference for private over public motives to family growth, and a demand for better early childcare, cheaper education, housing, and provisions for working women. Israel’s prevailing policies of transfer payments do not meet a persisting demand for children grounded on child quality and women’s equitable status.	Sergio	 Dellapergola
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Are Individuals' Family Size Preferences Stable? Evidence from West German Panel Data	While recent years have brought a renewed interest in fertility preference data, the properties of individuals' wanted fertility, in particular formation and stability, have received little attention. Using panel data of West German men and women, we document that more than 60% of individuals report the same wanted family size across survey waves and that the stability is lower among younger individuals. More than 50% of men and women want two children and up to 30% of those who state a preference for two children initially report a different number in the follow-up survey. Multivariate analysis indicates that individuals' experiences explain little of the person-specific variation in preferences. We find that the second child increases the desired number by 0.2 and that unemployment reduces wanted fertility for women, but there is no evidence that changes in income and marital or partnership status affect preferences. We conclude that researchers can expect some variation in individuals' preferences over time, much of which, however, appears to be unsystematic.	Frank	 Heiland	Warren	C. Sanderson
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Underachieving Fertility: Education, Life Course Factors, and Cohort Change	We use data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Young Women and Youth to examine cohort change in the relationship between fertility intentions, completed fertility, and education. While all women tend to fall short of their childbearing intentions, the gap between intended and realized fertility is greatest among the college educated. We examine what accounts for women’s inability to meet their childbearing intentions, focusing in particular on how such factors differ by women’s education, and whether these factors have changed over time. A common explanation of the education gap in fertility is the better employment opportunities of the more educated, which make time out of the labor force for children more costly. Increasingly, however, more educated women can substitute income for time in child care; their better marriage market opportunities may also mean more help from spouses. Have these changes led to increases the ability of college-educated women to meet their fertility intentions?	Kelly	 Musick	Sarah	 Edgington
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Differences in Health Seeking Behaviour among Urban Poor Women in Nairobi Who Experienced Intended or Unintended Pregnancies	The objective of this paper is to illustrate differences in health seeking behaviour among urban poor women who had intended or unintended pregnancies.     This paper uses data from a nested survey in the Nairobi Urban Health and Demographic Surveillance System (NUHDSS) done in two informal settlements of Nairobi, namely Korogocho and Viwandani. A total of 1927 women aged 12-54 who had a pregnancy outcome in 2004 and 2005 were sampled. Using logistic regression, the paper explores differences in seeking antenatal services and delivery care among women with intended or unintended pregnancies.    Preliminary results suggest that women with unintended pregnancies (31%) were more likely to seek care from unqualified personnel for antenatal and delivery care compared to those who wanted the pregnancies (69%). In addition, women with unintended pregnancies had fewer visits for antenatal care; however, they initiated these visits much earlier compared to those women who had intended pregnancies.	Teresa	V. Saliku
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Religion, Religiosity, and the Decline of Marital Fertility in the United States, 1850-1930	Demographic historians have long suspected that cultural factors played an important role in the historical decline of marital fertility in the United States. This paper relies on the 1850-1930 IPUMS samples of the U.S. census to investigate correlates of marital fertility among native-born white women of native parentage, focusing on the relationship between religion, religiosity, and fertility. Two proxies of religious sentiment are found to be significantly correlated with marital fertility. First, county-level census data indicate that the presence of Congregationalists and Universalists was associated with lower marital fertility, while the presence of Lutherans was associated with higher marital fertility. Second, the proportion of own children with biblical names--believed to be a proxy of parental religiosity--was found to be positively associated with marital fertility. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that “traditional” religious beliefs were an impediment to the adoption of family limitation strategies.	J.	David  Hacker
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Do Congregations Influence Fertility?	Numerous demographic studies demonstrate that individual religious commitment influences fertility and many other studies compare the fertility rates of large religious groups. However, the influence of congregations upon fertility has been largely overlooked by demographers even though congregations are principal mediators of religious instruction, socialization, and practice. Utilizing data from hundreds of American congregations, this paper describes patterns of congregational fertility by denomination and analyzes the determinants of congregational fertility patterns. Multilevel analysis is conducted to specify the characteristics of variation in congregational fertility and to control for regional fertility differences. Preliminary findings reveal that congregations with conservative theology tend to have high fertility and congregations with high education levels tend to have low fertility. High fertility levels are observed in congregations affiliated with several small denominations that are usually overlooked in demographic surveys.	Conrad	 Hackett
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Religiosity and Fertility Differences in the Contemporary U.S.: Evidence from the 2002 NSFG	Using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), we show that women who report that religion is “very important” in their everyday life have both higher fertility and higher intended fertility than those saying religion is “somewhat important” or “not at all important.” Further, net of intended fertility, factors such as unwanted fertility, age at childbearing, or degree of fertility postponement seem not to contribute to religiosity differentials in fertility. This answer prompts more fundamental questions: why do the more religious want more children? Using items available in the 2002 NSFG, we show that more religious women have more traditional gender and family attitudes and that these attitudinal differences account for a substantial part of the initial fertility differential. We speculate regarding other contributing causes.	Sarah	R. Hayford	S.	Philip  Morgan
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Be Fruitful and Multiply: Changing Family Formation Behavior and the Role of Religion, Religiosity and Ethnicity	The concepts of religion and ethnicity are changing over time as is family formation behavior. This paper explores the interlocking roles that religion, religiosity and ethnicity play in the family formation decisions of individuals and how that role has changed over time. Using unique data from the Houston Area Study from 1983 to 2006, the observed relationships are explored in order to elucidate the mechanisms through which religion, religiosity and ethnicity combine to influence socio-demographic behavior. The results show that ethnicity clearly continues to define fertility and family forming behavior, with Blacks and Hispanics displaying elevated fertility compared with Whites, and Hispanics a relative propensity to marriage while Blacks exhibit the opposite effect. Religion, on the other hand, especially Catholicism, is having a declining effect. However, the effect of religion and religiosity on demographic behavior differs according to ethnicity, indicating the importance of the cultural context within which these traits operate.	Petra	 Nahmias
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Married Fathers' and Mothers' Time with Children: Gender Differences in the Role of Parents’ and Their Spouses' Employment	The time that married fathers spend with their children rose over the past 20 years. Mothers’ time with children rose over this period, too, resulting in a narrowed but still substantial gender gap in parental time with children. Given longstanding gender differences in parental time with children, this paper explores how factors that promote parental time investments in children vary by gender, too, paying particular attention to the role of parents’ and their spouses’ employment. Our sample includes 4,770 married fathers and 5,428 married mothers from the 2003 and 2004 American Time Use Survey, a new U.S. time diary data set, which permits detailed analyses of the activities parent engage in while with their children. Using tobit regression models, we find that holding a high status occupation increases fathers’, but not mothers’, time with children and that a spouse’s employment affects mothers’ and fathers’ time with children differently.	Margaret	L. Usdansky	Wendy	 Parker
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Intergenerational Financial Transfers from Older Americans: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study	We know little about the effects of family changes among the older generation on intergenerational financial transfers. Research on marital status effects on social and financial support among the elderly has focused primarily on the effects of widowhood or divorce on the receipt of support by the elderly. Research on intergenerational transfers has focused on the motivations of parents and the competition among children for inheritance. This paper builds on these research traditions by exploring the role of family structure among older adults in transfers to children or grandchildren. To do this, we estimate logistic regression models of making a transfer to any child or grandchild among older adults using data from the Health and Retirement Study. Results show key differences in the determinants of transfers by marital status and gender, and show the inertia of transfer behavior.	Leah	K. VanWey	Shelley	 Nelson
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Intergenerational Transfer Inflows to Adult Children of Divorce	Are adult children of divorce shortchanged when it comes to receiving money from their parents? Though there is evidence that divorce lowers the amount an individual parent might give to an adult child, no study so far has summed the transfers given by both parents. This study takes the adult child’s perspective rather than the parents’ perspective, turning around the typical question in the transfer literature, “How much did the parent give?” and asks instead, “How much did the child get?” It is also the first to explicitly examine the effect remarriage has on this amount. I find no effect of divorce or remarriage on the probability of receiving a transfer, nor on the amount received in a selection-corrected regression. For those children who receive a transfer, however, divorce is correlated with an increase in transfer amount, while the father's remarriage is correlated with a lower overall transfer.	Megan	M. Way
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Inter Vivos Giving over the Lifecycle	Inter vivos cash transfers and bequests among family members total hundreds of billions of dollars each year. They may equalize resources within a generation of a family as well as across family generations. Transfers delayed to the end of life may represent a significant motive for saving. We use longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Study on inter vivos transfers that span up to twelve years to: describe financial transfers made by parents to children and their correlation with donor characteristics, and examine age patterns in giving behavior, the persistence of transfers, and how transfers change in response to changes in marital status, economic status and health. Our empirical analysis is motivated by a dynamic life-cycle model with inter vivos transfers as an argument in the utility function, which generates hypotheses about the age pattern of transfers and how mortality risk, risk aversion and economic resources affect giving behavior.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Michael	 Hurd	James	P. Smith
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Demographic Shifts and the Spread of HIV in China	Much speculation exists as to the role that China’s changing demography will play in contributing to the spread of HIV/AIDS. We employ a bio-behavioral macrosimulation model to assess the potential HIV epidemic impact of two important demographic shifts currently underway in China: (1) the imbalanced sex ratios that alter the market for sexual partners; and (2) the swells in labor migration from the countryside to China’s urban centers that accompany rapid socioeconomic transformation. Simulated scenarios are informed by the available evidence linking masculine sex ratios and migration to shifts in patterns of sexual partnering in both historical and contemporary societies. Results illustrate the influence of similar shifts in sexual behavior on the heterosexual spread of HIV within the context of China’s present and projected imbalanced sex ratios and migration flows between rural and urban areas.	Sara	 Hertog	Giovanna	 Merli
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Sexual Risk Behaviour and Vulnerability to HIV Infection among Young Migrant Women Workers in Urban India	The objective of this study, initiated in January 2005, is to explore migrant women worker’s AIDS-related health information and health care facilities, perceptions about vulnerability, and risk behaviour profile. Data was collected through a pre-tested questionnaire from a random sample of unmarried female migrant workers under 30 years old residing in Delhi, India. Findings suggest that city life, greater independence and social networks mold their behaviour and lure them to lavish lifestyles by having rich boyfriends, acquiring expensive items (e.g. home theatres, computers, luxury cars), visiting expensive restaurants, going to discos and clubs, attending late night parties. To maintain their lavish lifestyle, 20 percent of them had sex with their peers, colleagues or boss for monetary benefits or in exchange for promotion and 10 percent had sex with multiple partners. The high-risk behaviour of these women put them at greater health risk; a substantial percentage of women have been found suffering from various sexual health problems.	Ruchi	 Jain	Kamla	 Gupta	Ajay	Kumar  Singh
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Forced Sex Work in Vietnam: Perceptions and Realities	Many girls from rural areas are persuaded into migration and end up in sex work as a result of need or desire for increased income. Young migrant women are commonly forced into work in the sex industry and are therefore exposed to HIV/AIDS/STIs. Their entry into a high-risk situation is frequently characterized by powerlessness, with  limited to no control over their sexual lives and well-being. Many female youth sex workers are faced with instability, loss of family environment, forced sex, violence, and stigmatisation. As a result, the risk of AIDS does not emerge high on their list of priorities. Drawing on data from interviews with young women now working as sex workers in the city, the young women reported that it was their duty or obligation to stay in the city and accept the risks due to the money it provided to themselves and their families.	Rosanne	M. Rushing
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	HIV/AIDS: Trends, Forecasts, Exploring HIV Policy and Program Alternative Predictions Using Deterministic Asian Epidemic Model	Estimates and projections of HIV infections make an important contribution to public health policy in India. In addition, identification of the right target populations for intervention could be the most cost-effective strategy in the AIDS control program. The epidemiological, behavioral, programmatic, policy, resource allocation and program coverage data from Mumbai was used in AEM, a deterministic model to estimate the current and future course of the epidemic. The results indicate that non-brothel based sex work is increasing in Mumbai. Nine out of every ten infections occurring are due to heterosexual transmission, mainly from non-brothel based sex workers to clients to their wives. Universal coverage and condom promotion among non-brothel based sex workers can avert eighty eight percent of the new infections. Targeting non-brothel based sex workers offers a critical window of hope in responding to the burden of HIV incidence.	Damodar	 Sahu	Niranjan	 Saggurti	Arvind	 Pandey
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Returning Home to Die: Circular Labor Migration and Mortality in Northeast South Africa	The aim is to examine the hypothesis that circular labor migrants who become seriously ill while living away from home return to their rural homes to convalesce and possibly to die. Using data collected by the Agincourt demographic and health surveillance system in rural northeast South Africa, event history analysis is used to estimate the likelihood of dying for residents, recently returned migrants and long-term returned migrants. The annual odds of dying for recently returned migrants are 1.1 to 1.9 times higher than for all other migrant types, and the proportion of HIV/TB deaths among recently returned migrants increases with time. This suggests that increasing numbers of circular labor migrants of working age are becoming ill in urban areas where they work and are coming home to be cared for and eventually to die in the rural areas where their families live.	Samuel	J. Clark	Mark	 Collinson	Kathleen	 Kahn	Kyle	 Drullinger	Stephen	 Tollman
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Child Well-Being, Imperfect Information, and Patterns of Rural-Urban Migration	Urban areas in developing countries are almost universally associated with lower child mortality and better educational opportunities than rural areas. Yet fifty three percent of all biological children of primary school ages born to married migrant men living in the Nairobi slums, are not living in Nairobi. Similarly, adult men outnumber adult women in all age cohorts by as much as 2.7 to 1. This paper, based on data collected in two Nairobi slums in 2004, argues that urban-rural price variation for child-related goods, as well as information asymmetries that can arise within the household when rural families embark upon split migration, are important for understanding migration patterns more generally, and this pattern in particular. With the developing world urbanizing rapidly, the Nairobi situation may become increasingly common.	Joost	 de Laat
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Rural-Urban Migration and Child Survival in Urban Bangladesh: Are the Urban Migrants and Poor Disadvantaged?	This paper analyses the child survival status in urban Bangladesh, and examines whether it is poorer among the urban poor and rural-urban migrants, using data from the 1999-2000 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey. Urban-rural differentials in childhood mortality are  diminishing in recent years, which may be related to rapid growth of rural-urban migration. Under-five mortality is 1.6 times higher among children born to urban migrants compared to lifelong urban natives. Two distinct child morality regimes have been identified, one for natives and one for migrants. The migrant-native mortality differentials fairly correspond to the socio-economic differentials. Like childhood mortality rates, rural-urban migrants seem to be moderately disadvantaged by economic status compared to their urban native counterparts. Within the urban areas, the child survival status is even worse among the migrant poor than the average urban poor, especially the recent migrants. The study underscores the importance of mother’s education, especially beyond secondary levels, to child survival in urban areas.	M.	Mazharul  Islam
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Family Migration as a Vehicle for Urban Poverty and Child Morbidity	This paper aims to establish the main sources of the urbanization of poverty and its consequences on children's well-being in the informal settlements of Nairobi, Kenya. Children in the slums of Nairobi are exposed to enormous risks, health risks in particular. One coping strategy for slum dwellers is to adopt split migration (or temporary migration): wife and children are secured in the home village while the head of household undertakes the migration project. The study seeks to understand the contribution of the alternative strategy of joint migration (or family migration) as compared to the more efficient strategy of split migration in the urbanization of poverty and child morbidity in the two slums of the Nairobi Health and Demographic Surveillance System.	Adama	 Konseiga
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Health Selectivity of Migration: A Longitudinal Analysis of Health and Internal Migration in Indonesia	Previous migration studies have shown that immigrants are generally healthier than the native-born populations of receiving countries, a result generally attributed to the positive selection of immigrants with respect to health.  However, the health selectivity of migrants is often confounded with the causal effect of migration on health.  Using high-quality longitudinal data from Indonesia with rich retrospective histories, we explicitly test the health selectivity hypothesis with respect to internal migration, examining whether pre-migration health status affects the likelihood of migration by comparing those from the sending population who do and do not move.  Adjusting for unobserved heterogeneity (via fixed-effect models) and conducting sensitivity analysis, we find that migrants in Indonesia do tend to be selected with respect to health an that results are relavitely robust to household unobserved heterogeneity.  However, the effect of health on migration varies by different types of migration and distinct dimensions of health.	Yao	 Lu	Donald	J. Treiman
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Genes, Socioeconomic-Cultural Environments, and Health Behaviors in Adolescence and Young Adulthood		Guang	 Guo
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Self-Report, Saliva, and Vaginal Swab: Integrating Multi-Level Data to Understand Cervical Cancer Risk among Older Women		Stacy	Tessler Lindau	Melinda	 Drum	Elyzabeth	 Gaumer	Hanna	 Surawska	Jeanne	 Jordan
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Childhood Obesity, Cholesterol, and Social Inequality		Narayan	 Sastry	Anne	 Pebley
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	A Comparison of Biomarkers across Two Older Populations: Assessment of Consistency and Generalizability	Researchers continue to expand the array of biomarkers of physiological system function collected alongside traditional self-reported measures in population-based social surveys. Still, little is known about the variability of many biomarkers across populations or the consistency of associations between biomarkers and self-reported health measures. We take steps to address this gap using a wide array of traditional clinical and non-traditional biomarkers of physiological system function, together with two self-reported health outcomes (one physical, one cognitive), from two large, comparable, population-based studies of older adults from the U.S. and Taiwan. We provide a comprehensive descriptive assessment of the variability of biomarker distributions across populations, and we test two hypotheses regarding the consistency of 1) associations with the self-reported outcomes and 2) predictive performance both within and out-of-sample. We find mixed support regarding consistency of associations, and evidence suggesting variability in predictive performance.	Christopher	L Seplaki	Noreen	 Goldman	Maxine	 Weinstein	Tara	 Gruenewald	Arun	 Karlamangla	Teresa	E. Seeman
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Young and the Restless: Brain Drain or Life Stage?		Warren	A. Brown	Robert	 Scardamalia
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Second Generation: Coming of Age in the City		Philip	 Kasinitz
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Post 9/11 Economy and Changing NYC Demographics		Rae	D. Rosen
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Population of New York City: A Pre- and Post- 9/11 Look		Joseph	 Salvo	A.	Peter  Lobo	Joel	 Alvarez
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Denominational Differences in Child Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Example of Ghana	Despite the valorization of good heath by all religious faiths, recent events in Ghana have highlighted distinctive denominational subcultures which could impact child survivorship. Using pooled children's data from the 1998 and 2003 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey, this study examines religious differences in child survival. Guided by the particularized theology and selectivity theses, piecewise constant hazard models with gamma-shared frailty are used to explore denominational differences in child mortality, and whether that could be explained through other characteristics. At the bivariate level, children whose mothers identify as Moslem and Traditional are found to have significantly higher risk of death compared with their counterparts whose mothers are Christians. In the multivariate models, the religious differences disappear after the mediating and confounding influence of socio-economic factors are controlled. The findings provide support for the selectivity hypothesis based on the notion that religious variations mainly reflect differential access to social and human capital.	Stephen	Obeng  Gyimah
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Family Allowances and Fertility: Socio-Economic and Religious Differentials	This paper presents the results of an analysis of socio-economic and religious differentials in the effect of family allowances on the fertility of Israeli women using birth histories of women in the last two censuses of 1983 and 1995. Assuming the existence of economies of scale in a family, child allowances may have a larger effect on the birth of higher birth-order children. Hence, separate analyses are performed for each parity. Much of the difference between socio-economic groups occurs in the initial response to an increase in the allowance. The largest religious differentials are found in the third and fourth intervals. No significant religious differentials are found after the fourth interval, probably because most couples after the fourth birth are religious. The strong initial response to an increase in allowances raises doubt about the suitability of models that assume rational decision making in reproductive behavior.	Jona	 Schellekens
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Fertility, Religion and Religiousness in European Muslim Populations	This research builds on our 2006 PAA presentation,  “Religion, Religiousness and Fertility in Europe and the U.S.” which focused on how much higher European fertility might be if women in Europe were as religious as women in the U.S.     Data availability is limited for Muslims in Europe, where the most extensive source will be data on country of origin (available for at least seven countries). An important source of data, however, is sample survey data, mainly the successive waves of the World Values Survey and the European Social Surveys.    The main focus is to determine the extent to which the higher fertility of the Muslim populations, documented in the paper, can be attributed to strong attachments to religion. Preliminary findings suggest that this is part of the explanation, with the other part being stronger traditional family values among Muslim women.	Charles	 Westoff
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Beyond Denomination: New Tests of Whether and How Religion Matters for Family Planning	The present study uses unique data from rural Malawi to extend the socialization hypothesis to clarify the complex relationship between religion and fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. In particular, the study focuses on four important and unanswered questions. First, if contraceptive learning is increased in rural Africa via involvement in a religious community, does religious participation matter? Second, does the effect of religious involvement on social learning extend to Muslim communities (a large and growing subpopulation)? Third, using more precise denominational categories, does the effect of religion or religious participation vary across Christian subgroups? And finally, looking beyond religious denomination, we ask whether the characteristics of a woman’s specific religious congregation are associated with the size of her family planning network. Our results suggest that religion does matter for women’s fertility networks, but that denomination and attendance at religious services are relatively poor ways of examining its influence.	Sara	 Yeatman	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Trends in Contraceptive Use and Condom Use among Single African Women: Evidence from DHS	This paper examines trends in current use of contraceptive and condom use at most recent coitus among sexually active single women aged 15-24 years in 18 African countries that have conducted two or more DHSs since 1990. Trends are stratified by education, place of residence, wealth quintile and age. Condoms have become the most commonly reported contraceptive method, with an absolute annual increase, averaged for all 18 surveys, of 1.4 percent. For 13 countries with relevant information, the annual increase was higher, at 2.10 percent. Large differences were apparent by education and residence but not for age.	Mohamed	M. Ali	John	G. Cleland
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Trends in the Percentage of Children Who Are Orphans in South Africa 1995-2005	There has been great concern about AIDS in South Africa and throughout the world. The welfare of children orphaned by AIDS has increasingly become a policy concern. Thus, there is interest in knowing the percentage of children whose mother's are dead and what the trend has been. This paper estimates the percentage of children age 0-14 who were orphans in South Africa 1995-2005. Through 1998, there was no change in the percentage of orphans, probably because of the long average lag (8-10 years) between becoming HIV-positive and death. After 1998, the percentage of children who were orphans rose rapidly. Children whose mothers were ill (often with AIDS) but alive, were increasingly sent out to be fostered. Through 2005, fostered and orphaned children were overwhelmingly in the care of relatives. Even in 2005, the percentage of non-African children who were orphans remained low.	Barbara	A. Anderson	Heston	 Phillips
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Estimation of Excess in Context of AIDS Deaths and the Probable Causes 1994-2002	Review of sample registration system revealed that age-specific death rates at 25-49 years declined from 1982 till the mid 1990s and after that showed a marginal increase. Hence residence and sex-wise estimation of excess deaths in the major states of India were computed 25-49 age group by adopting Kink Regression method, and effort has been made to link the increase to AIDS deaths. The difference in the observed and estimated death rates from  1982 to 2002 putting a kink in 1993 gave the excess deaths that have occurred from 1994 to 2002. Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu contributed more than 50 percent of the excess deaths. Causes of death were analysed for TB, infectious and parasitic diseases, neoplasms, cardiac and ill-defined illnesses, poisoning, injury and maternal deaths. No significant changes in the rates for the causes are elicited.	Madhulekha	 Bhattacharya	Sutapa	 Neogi	Ruchi	 Sogarwal
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Ghana’s Mortality Profile: With and without HIV/AIDS	The present study seeks to raise awareness and expand knowledge about the deleterious effect of HIV/AIDS on Ghana’s life expectancy. Using multiple- and associated  single-decrement life table techniques, the study estimates the total number of Ghanaians who would die from HIV/AIDS by the time they reach age 75 from a hypothetical cohort of 100,000 live births, assuming that current mortality conditions prevail. The findings indicate that 7.2 percent of babies will eventually die of HIV/AIDS, and 13.0 percent and 23.4 percent of those aged 60 years, and 75 years and above, respectively, will die of HIV/AIDS. Most deaths will come from persons within the reproductive and productive age groups. A remarkable gain in life expectancy of 10 years would result in the absence of HIV/AIDS. The elderly are likely to be the most active persons to manage the family affairs in the event of the death of their adult children.	Chuks	J. Mba
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	New Destination 'Contexts of Reception': Coethnic Concentration and the Earnings of Mexican Immigrants	This paper studies the recent dispersion of low-skilled Mexican immigrant workers away from traditional areas of settlement to new destinations. Theoretical focus is placed on the role played by low-skilled immigrant social networks in facilitating economic incorporation. Using data from the 5% sample of the 2000 Census IPUMS, I examine the effect of coethnic concentration in local labor markets on the earnings of individual Mexican immigrants, and test whether the effects of concentration vary by destination type. I find a strong and statistically significant curvilinear relationship (inverted U-shape) between coethnic concentration and earnings, but only for immigrants in traditional areas of settlement. In conclusion, I highlight the empirical importance of characteristics of the coethnic community for understanding the economic outcomes of Mexican immigrants, and discuss the implications of the dispersion for Mexicans’ economic incorporation more generally.	James	D. Bachmeier
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	New Origins, New Destinations, and Their Pioneers	Using data from Mexican Migration Project, this study investigates two hypotheses: 1) compared to migrants from historic sending regions, migrants heading from newer origins in Mexico are more likely to go to newer destinations in the United States; and 2) within new destinations, the first migrants, or ‘pioneers’, differ in measurable ways from those who follow them. The results generally provide support for the first hypothesis, with migrants from new origins being more likely to head to new destinations. The results regarding the second hypothesis are less straightforward. There is no evidence that early migrants are more likely to be male. Yet the pioneer migrants are more likely to have come from higher skilled occupations in Mexico. Additionally, the data suggest that compared to pioneer migrants, more recent migrants are more likely to have come from communities with longer migration histories, and to have had prior U.S. experience.	Katherine	 Bartley
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	Is the Southeast Different? Interstate Migration and Geographic Assimilation of Hispanics	Amidst a very visible increase in Hispanic migration to the Southeast United States, a less conspicuous, yet far more numerous migration of non-Hispanic Whites and Blacks has occurred within the past two decades. Despite general population growth in the area, very little research has comparatively analyzed the migration flows of distinct racial and ethnic migrants to the Southeast. Merging data from the 2005 American Community Survey with the PUMS census data from 1980, 1990, and 2000, to track spatial patterns of immigration to the Southeast U.S. Moreover, we test whether Hispanic spatial migration patterns to the Southeast differ from Hispanic migration patterns to other areas of the country, and from non-Hispanic migration patterns. The data will allow us to track whether Hispanics are spatially assimilating to the residential movements of non-Hispanics, or whether the Hispanic migration to the Southeast is a distinct migration phenomenon.	Alexis	 Silver	Ted	 Mouw	Jacqueline	 Hagan
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	To Leave or Not to Leave: Exploring the Benefit of Exiting the South during the Great Migration	The exodus of millions of southerners between 1910 and 1970 is largely attributed to the economic and social push factors in the south combined with pull factors in other regions. Researchers generally find that participants in the Great Migration were positively selected from their origin, in terms of educational attainment and urban status. Although a considerable amount of attention examines how these migrants fared in their destinations, to fully measure the success of migrants, a comparison to those who remained within the south is necessary. This paper compares inter-regional migrants (i.e. migrants who left the south) with their southern contemporaries they left behind. Our findings indicate that although positively selected, migrants who left the south did not benefit appreciably in terms of employment status, income, or occupational status. In fact, in many instances, inter-regional migrants fared worse than did southerners who moved within the south or who remained sedentary.	Stewart	E. Tolnay	Trent	 Alexander	Jason	C. Digman	Suzanne	C. Eichenlaub
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	The Changing Demographic Characteristics of the Fastest-Growing Metropolitan Areas: A Comparison using the 2000 and 2005 American Community Survey	Of the top ten fastest-growing metropolitan areas in the U.S. between 1990 and 2000, three have populations of more than 1 million: Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Austin.  Utilizing the 2000 and 2005 American Community Survey, this paper examines the demographic and socioeconomic trends of new domestic migrants versus international migrants in these fastest-growing metropolitan areas. The 2005 ACS shows important shifts in composition due to an increasing proportion of domestic to international migrants. During 2000 to 2005, younger age structure, higher educational attainment, higher income and smaller household size are more prevalent among minorities, especially domestic migrants. However, older age structure and increasing household size are prevalent among Whites. The analyses should shed light on the extent to which young minorities come to these metro areas attracted by the fast economic and social development, while more older Whites come to seek space and sun in these once-sleepy Southwestern areas.	Yun	 Zhou
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Schools, Schooling, and Children’s Support of Their Aging Parents	Intergenerational transfers play an important role for most individuals across the life course. I construct a new theoretical framework for understanding how changes in  educational context influence children’s support of their parents.  I pull together theories on individualization, care of the elderly, intergenerational transfers, the social modes of organization framework, and wealth flows theories to study the relationship between social context and adult children’s support of their aging parents. By examining educational context across the life course this paper provides new information on the mechanisms through which changes in social context influence children’s support of their parents. I find that childhood exposure to schools has long-term effects on receipt of support from children, regardless of parents' educational enrollment, children’s educational enrollment, and later exposure to schools. Findings support (1) a long-term personality effect of early exposure to non-family organizations and (2) Caldwell’s theory of wealth flows.	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	The Behavioral Economics of Altruism, Reciprocity and Transfers within Families and Rural Communities: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa	This study examined patterns of transfers between family and non-family members when they played the Trust Games (which allowed for givings and reciprocations) and the Dictator Games (involving only givings), followed by surveys. A total of 240 individuals from 60 families in 20 villages in rural Malawi participated. Strong predictors of transfers behavior during the Trust Game were the amount of expected reciprocation, prior trusting behavior, and belief that others were trustworthy. Wealthier participants gave less but reciprocated more and those who thought the other player was poorer gave more. Participants in better physical health gave more and those in better mental health reciprocated more during the Trust Game.  Participants who thought they had HIV and had high felt-stigma gave less but reciprocated more during the Trust Game. In addition to expectations of reciprocity, wealth, health, HIV and stigma were important predictors of transfers behavior.	Li-Wei	 Chao
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Labor Supply Responses to Large Social Transfers: Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa	We analyze longitudinal data from a demographic surveillance area in KwaZulu-Natal to quantify the impact of the South African old-age pension on the labor force attachment of prime-aged adults in households with pensioner members. With panel data, we are able to compare households and individuals before and after pension receipt, and pension loss, allowing us to control for a host of unobservable household and individual characteristics that may determine labor market behavior. In sharp contrast to earlier work on this topic that relied on cross-sectional data analysis, we find no evidence of a reduction in labor supply in response to pension receipt. Indeed our results suggest that prime-age adults are more likely to migrate either to work or to look for work when pension receipt begins. Our results highlight the importance of including non-resident members in the analysis of household and individual behaviors.	Cally	C. Ardington	Anne	 Case	Victoria	 Hosegood
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Forward Thinking and Family Support: Explaining Retirement and Old-Age Labor Supply in Indonesia	In the developing world, where little formal institutional support exists, older individuals rely on their own labor income and on family support in the form of transfer payments, coresidence, and participation in family businesses. However, the dramatic gains in life expectancy and declines in family size and coresidence that accompany development suggest that these traditional forms of support may break down. In this paper, I estimate a structural dynamic model of labor supply for older men in Indonesia that incorporates these mechanisms, and I find evidence for  families and health playing key roles in these choices. Using the model, I then conduct simulations that show that implementation of a Latin-American-style defined-contribution pension program for government and private sector workers would provide modest welfare gains in Indonesia at a reasonable cost. I also find that these gains might not offset the welfare losses brought by potential declines in family support.	Douglas	 McKee
2007	71	Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Commitment: Is Cohabitation Really Indistinguishable from Marriage in Norway and Sweden?	The Scandinavian countries are often cited as examples of societies where cohabitation is common and largely indistinguishable from marriage. However, an overwhelming majority of young cohabiting couples in both Sweden and Norway expect to get married, and most of them actually do. This might be a signal to others, and to each other, of serious commitment to the relationship. Thus we hypothesize that some ‘distinction’ still remains. In this paper, we take advantage of recent survey data from the two countries to analyze several dimensions of ‘commitment’ in co-residential relationships. Controlling for a number of demographic, socio-economic and attitudinal variables, including length of relationship and presence of children, married couples are found to be significantly different from cohabiting couples on all three dimensions, namely seriousness, relationship satisfaction and break-up plans. Thus they are more serious about and satisfied with the relationship, and less frequently have plans to dissolve the union.	Eva	 Bernhardt	Turid	 Noack	Kenneth	Aarskaug  Wiik
2007	71	Cohabitation	European Latecomers: Cohabitation in Italy and Spain	In this paper we focus on cohabitation as an emerging although marginal trend in southern Europe, with Spain and Italy as case studies. We hypothesize that in this area, cohabitation is selective of women with higher potential for economic independence (employed, with higher education, living out of the parental home). We also discuss the roles that consensual unions may play throughout family formation processes, and whether its meaning is similar in both countries under study.   In order to address these issues, we use both cross-sectional and longitudinal techniques. We first present a description of the situation for our variables of interest at the aggregate level, using data from ISSP surveys, Censuses and National Statistics. Then we carry out a cross-sectional study of current marital status as well as a longitudinal analysis of first union formation, with data from the FFS. Our preliminary results confirm the selection hypothesis.	Marta	 Dominguez	Teresa	 Castro Martin	Letizia	 Mencarini
2007	71	Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Children’s Living Arrangements: New Estimates from the United States	This paper examines recent trends in women’s cohabitation and explores the impact of increased cohabitation for children’s living arrangements. The most recent estimates of children’s living arrangements currently date to 1995. Using the 2002 NSFG, we produce new estimates of U.S. family structure from the perspectives of women and children, replicating (as much possible) Bumpass and Lu’s (2000) analysis of the 1995 NSFG. Preliminary findings show continued increases in cohabitation experience for both adults and children. Additional analyses examine whether rising cohabitation has resulted in growing instability in the unions women form and in children’s living arrangements.	Sheela	 Kennedy	Larry	 Bumpass
2007	71	Cohabitation	The Rise of Cohabitation and Childbearing outside of Marriage in Bulgaria: Who Are the Forerunners of the New Family Model?	The economic and political transition in Bulgaria went hand in hand with considerable changes in the processes of family formation and childbearing. Traditionally, low age at marriage, nearly universal first marriage, and the two-child model prevalence were some of the main demographic features describing the family pattern in Bulgaria during the second half of the 20th century. After the transition in 1989 substantially different patterns are observed. By means of event history analysis using Bulgarian GGS data we investigate whether cohabitation is “institutionalized” among the couples to the level of marital family or is rather recognized as the final stage in a process leading to  marriage. The main stress is laid on the impact of the family background and socio-economic factors on first union formation as well as on the transformation of cohabitation into marriage.	Dora	 Kostova
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Gender and Socio-Economic Residential Segregation in Mexico City	This paper examines the effects of socio-economic residential segregation on precarious employment outcomes in Mexico City, particularly whether there is a gendered effect. The data comes from the 2000 Mexican Population and Dwelling Census. The extent of residential segregation is estimated at the Ageb level (similar to census tracts). Using hierarchical lineal models this paper considers whether residential segregation affects: a) informal employment, b) critical labor conditions, and c) hourly wages. A composite measure was also examined. Overall, the results suggest that residential segregation increases precariousness, even after considering other significant individual variables: age, education, gender, family structure, and occupation. However, its effect varies for the different dependent variables. Residential segregation does not significantly increase the probabilities of informality, while it enlarges those of critical labor conditions without significant gender differences. In addition, residential segregation negatively affects hourly wages and it is more detrimental for men than for women.	Landy	 Sanchez
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Black and Latino Low-Wage Workers and the Social Organization of Metropolitan Labor Markets	The under-employment of black and Latino workers, specifically their concentration in low-wage work, is of keen interest to researchers of labor market inequality. Previous research has identified structural explanations in the larger economy to account for this inequality, namely industrial restructuring, immigration, skills mismatch and minority population size. An ample space and work literature has demonstrated that inequality and the underlying factors that cause it vary spatially, most often examined within and across local labor markets. This paper asks: Does the spatial configuration of blacks and Latinos relative to whites in a metropolitan area (i.e. residential segregation) affect the percentage of blacks and Latinos employed in low-wage work, in conjunction with the structural features of local labor markets described above? To assess the contribution of both individual and metropolitan-level factors, this study utilizes a unique dataset of the structural characteristics of the 95 largest U.S. cities.	Niki	 Dickerson
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	The Effect of Segregation on Crime Rates	In this paper I examine the relationship between segregation (both racial and economic) and crime. In order to control for the potential endogenity of segregation (of either type) with respect to crime, I instrument for segregation using information regarding the manner in which public housing assistance is allocated in each city, as well as variables relating to the structure of local public finance in each city. The results of this analysis indicate that greater segregation (of either type) appears to have very different effects across different types of crimes. Specifically, greater segregation appears to have very little impact on basic property crimes such as larceny and motor vehicle theft, but slightly lowers burglary rates. However, the strongest results indicate that greater segregation appears to lead to large and significant increases in the rate of violent crimes such as aggravated assault and robbery.	David	 Bjerk
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Patterns of Local Segregation: Do They Matter for Crime?	In this paper, we extend recent work on the spatial measurement of segregation to describe the local spatial dynamics of residential segregation by race, ethnicity, and economic status, and explore their consequences for levels of a single social outcome: urban crime. To do so, we construct Wong's asymmetric local segregation indices, which are spatially adjusted P* exposure measures, for 36 large cities in the United States. Maps and summary descriptive statistics are used to explore levels and variability in patterns of non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic White, Hispanic, low-income, and affluent local segregation. We then examine multivariate models to assess whether local segregation of privileged populations (e.g., Whites, affluent households) increases social advantage in the form of reduced urban crime problems, while local segregation of groups lower in the stratification hierarchy of the U.S. (e.g., Blacks, Hispanics, the poor) heightens crime as a neighborhood social problem.	Lauren	J. Krivo	Reginald	 Byron	Catherine	 Calder	Mei-Po	 Kwan
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	Household Disadvantage and Adolescents' Time Use	Adolescents living in single-parent and/or impoverished households tend to have worse schooling outcomes than adolescents in other households. Previous research has focused on parental “inputs” into the production of developmental outcomes, such as parental time, the provision of resources, and parenting practices. In this paper, we explore an alternative explanation that focuses on the time use of the adolescents themselves. We hypothesize that disadvantaged parents may rely more heavily on their adolescent children to contribute to household production and market work than other parents, and that these additional time burdens may come at the expense of such beneficial activities as schooling and sleep. We examine these hypotheses using time-diary data for over 2,400 15- to 18-year-old adolescents who participated in the 2003-2005 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS), estimating multiple-state, multiple-destination hazard models of adolescents’ activity spells conditional on parents’ living arrangements, household income, and other personal, household, and environmental characteristics.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski	David	C. Ribar	Leslie	 Stratton
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	The Time Use of Teenagers	Parents and policy makers often voice concerns about the ways in which teenagers use their time. This paper uses the American Time Use Survey to examine the time use of teenagers ages 15-17. We find very large gender differences, with girls spending significantly more time doing housework, caring for younger siblings, and studying and less time watching television. We also explore the degree to which parent characteristics influence the time use of teenagers, with particular focus given to activities that affect the teenagers well-being such as sleep patterns, eating habits, schoolwork, and television viewing. Our results indicate that teenagers with a single parent spend less time studying and are much less likely to eat dinner with their parent. Children from households with high incomes are more likely to eat dinner with their parents and are less likely to go to bed really late on school nights.	Joseph	P. Price
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	The Effects of Individual, Family and Community Characteristics on Youth’s Engagement in Sports and Volunteering in Mexico	Engagement in civil and community activities and in sports are two activities that are argued to have a positive effect on the development of children and adolescents and on their successful transition to adulthood. In this paper we explore the correlates at the individual and family level of children and youth aged 12 to 24 spending time exercising and in a civil organization. Because engagement in these activities may also depend on unobserved variables at the community and family level, we fit a multi-level probit model that controls for variation at the level of the individual, the family and the community. Data come from a nationally representative survey of time use in Mexico.	Estela	 Rivero-Fuentes	Mercedes	 Pedrero	Silvia	 Luna
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	Over-Scheduled or at Loose Ends? The Socioeconomic Correlates of American Adolescent Time Use in 1977-78 and 2003-05	Adolescence is a period in which time use can provide important developmental experiences that in turn affect an individual’s ease of transition into adult roles. In this paper, time diary data on U.S. youth aged 15-17 gathered in 1977-78 and 2003-05 are used to create portraits of time use in middle adolescence with a focus on answering three questions. First, what does U.S. adolescents’ time use look like and to what extent has it changed over the past quarter century? Second, what roles do socioeconomic factors (e.g., adolescent wage rates, household income, parents’ education levels) play in adolescent time allocation and have these relationships changed over time? Finally, to what extent does the mix of leisure undertaken by today’s adolescents reflect a choice set that favors positive developmental experiences?	Cathleen	 Zick
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Civil War, Crop Failure, and the Health Status of Young Children	Economic shocks at birth have lasting impacts on children’s health several years after the shock. We calculate height for age z-scores for children under age five using data from a Rwandan nationally representative household survey conducted in 1992. We exploit district and time variation in crop failure and civil conflict to measure the impact of exogenous shocks that children experience at birth on their height several years later. We find that girls born after a shock in a region experiencing these events exhibit 0.72 standard deviations lower height for age z-scores, and the impact is worse for poor households. There is no impact of these shocks on boys’ health status. Results are robust to using household-level production and rainfall shocks as alternative measures of crop failure. The analysis also contributes to the debate on the economic conditions prevailing on the eve of the Rwandan genocide.	Richard	 Akresh	Philip	 Verwimp
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Reproduction in Crisis: War, Migration and Fertility in Angola	Demographers have devoted a great deal of attention to studying the impact of migration on fertility. There is also a growing body of literature in recent times on the reproductive health risk and needs of forced migrants. However, research on both fronts fails to make an important distinction between voluntary and involuntary (forced) migrants. We believe the impact of war solicits different demographic responses from these two groups. We draw on old-age security theories of reproductive behavior and its alternative theories to formulate hypotheses for this study. Using data from two peri-urban municipalities of Greater Luanda, Angola, we first use multilevel discrete-time logit models to examine the timing of fertility among voluntary and involuntary migrants and compare it to non-migrants. We further analyze cumulated fertility and preferences for additional births among the different migratory groups. Preliminary findings and implications for Angola and other parts of sub-Saharan Africa are discussed.	Winfred	A. Avogo
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Autocracy as a Form of Sustained Low-Intensity Civil Conflict: Does Age Structure Provide Insights into the Democratic Transition?	Why has there been, during the latter half of the 20th century, a tendency for partial democracies to stall or retreat along the path to full democracy? We approach this question by assuming that autocracy is a form of low-intensity civil conflict perpetuated by states on non-state actors and hostile state-factions, and that full democracy is civil peace (a cessation of violence, coercion and intimidation). This assumption allows for adapting the “youth bulge model of the risk of civil conflict” to investigate the democratic transition. Our analysis reports a consistent inverse relationship between the regional proportion of young adults and the proportion of countries that have attained full democracy. We use this relationship to generate a likelihood of full democracy, which can identify geographic regions and individual countries that, before 2015, are projected to experience a significant degree of demographic opportunity to achieve full democracy.	Richard	 Cincotta	Christian	G. Mesquida
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	The Increasing Incidence of Civil Wars in Sub-Saharan Africa: Assessing the Role of Democratization and Age Structure	During the 1990s, sub-Saharan Africa experienced an increased incidence of civil war. Collier & Hoeffler (2002) find that worsening economic conditions during the period help account for this trend. This paper extends their analysis by focusing on the role of governance and youthful age structure in civil war onset. A combined model of youthful age structure, polity scores, and economic conditions is applied to data on the worldwide incidence of civil wars from 1961 to 2001. I find that exogenous changes in democratization and youthful age structure contributed to the rising incidence of civil war in sub-Saharan Africa during the 1990s. This is true even after accounting for economic conditions. My finding is consistent with literature suggesting that large incoming cohorts of young adults who cannot be sufficiently accommodated by the labor market and educational system experience increased dissatisfaction and alienation which in turn increase the likelihood of civil unrest.	Sarah	E. Staveteig
2007	75	Abortion I	Sex Selection and Fertility Choices: Analysis and Policy	This paper identifies sex selection via infanticide and abortion as the principal explanation for the sex ratio distortion in Asia, and rules out competing explanations such as biology. I outline a model of a mother's fertility choice when she has access to a sex-selection technology and faces a mandated fertility limit. By exploiting variation in fines levied in China for unsanctioned births, I demonstrate that higher fine regimes discourage fertility but are associated with higher sex ratios among those who choose to have an additional child. Estimation of the model using China's 2000 census indicates that a son is worth 2.90 years of income more than a daughter, and the premium is highest among less educated mothers and rural families. I conclude with a set of simulations to model the effect on sex ratios and total fertility of a proposed subsidy to families who fail to have a son.	Avraham	 Ebenstein
2007	75	Abortion I	Reporting of Induced and Spontaneous Abortion in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Population estimates of the incidence of pregnancy outcomes are widely used demographic measures, yet prior research demonstrates that both induced and spontaneous abortions are substantially underreported in surveys. We find that less than one-half (47%) of induced abortions performed in the United States between 1997 and 2001 were reported by women in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). Hispanic and low-income women were among the least likely to report their abortions, as were women in their 20s. Second-trimester abortions were more likely to be reported than first-trimester terminations. The levels of reported spontaneous abortion measured in the 2002 NSFG are consistent with the accumulated body of research, though substantially more pregnancy losses were reported on self-administered surveys than in face-to-face interviews. Our findings suggest that abortion reporting has not improved, and survey research involving pregnancy outcomes should be adjusted for unreported induced abortions.	Rachel	K. Jones	Kathryn	 Kost
2007	75	Abortion I	Methodological Issues in the Evaluation of Parental Involvement Laws: Evidence from Texas	The number of states that require parental involvement in a minor’s decision to terminate a pregnancy has more than doubled since 1988. The academic literature has not reached a consensus as to the impact of such abortion restrictions, mainly due to methodological limitations caused by the inability to measure cross-state travel and misclassification of exposure. Using detailed data on abortions and births from Texas, we demonstrate that these limitations led researchers to overestimate the decline in minors’ abortion rate, underestimate the increase in their birth rate, and to miss an important behavioral response to the law, which is the tendency to delay the abortion among a group of older minors. Correction of these methodological problems is important given the controversy surrounding abortion and the need of voters and policymakers to accurately assess the likely impact of these laws.	Theodore	 Joyce	Silvie	 Colman	Robert	 Kaestner
2007	75	Abortion I	Incidence and Recent Trends in Legal Abortion Worldwide	Abortion incidence is an important demographic and public health indicator, yet the quality of data on abortion can be problematic even in countries where the procedure is legal. Using data from government statistics, nationally representative surveys and other data collection systems, we present the most recent available estimates of induced abortion incidence in 58 countries and territories where abortion is broadly legal. Data are relatively complete (i.e., are deemed to fall within 20% of the true number) for 30 of these countries. We analyze trends from 1996 to 2003 and find that dramatic declines in incidence occurred in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, but these countries still have some of the highest rates in the world. The abortion rate in the United States declined modestly but remains higher than in many Western European countries. Rates are variable in developing countries where the procedure is legal. Possible explanations for trends are discussed.	Gilda	 Sedgh	Stanley	K. Henshaw	Susheela	D. Singh	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Joanna	 Drescher
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Scale of Questions and Scale of Answers: The Role of Remote Sensing for Public Health Policy	Currently, imagery resolution can be as precise as 0.61m or as coarse as 8Km. While one could argue that any image could be used for policy purposes, different questions would be answered by each sensor. Applications at coarse resolutions are useful to offer an overall picture and to identify potential critical areas/processes that need further investigation. These studies are not designed for decision making or for guiding spatially targeted interventions. Although this seems intuitive, the literature shows that, unfortunately, the issue of scale is largely overlooked. In this paper we describe the potential application of varied imagery, suggesting their suitability at different levels (national, regional, district, local) and environments (urban/rural). Although the paper has a focus on public health, we ultimately propose a grid that offers guidelines to social scientists on the appropriate scale for purposes of planning, monitoring, and assessment of policies and processes operating at different levels.	Marcia	C. Castro
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Eyes from Above: Remote Sensing and Virtual Globes in Spatial Demography	In the past few decades, research in spatial demography has revealed important patterns and disparities in fertility, mortality, and migration across space. The ability to visualize the place-based differences evident in choropleth maps has helped to attract demographers to study both the dynamic processes and persistent clustering of events and characteristics evident in populations. This paper explores the intersection of remote sensing and spatial demography by discussing the characteristics of gridded population data in contrast to residential populations often summarized in terms of political or administrative areal units and borders. The strengths and weaknesses of each type of measurement are considered, as are the ways in which differing data types may be combined. The implications of map making are also considered, from images of the earth, to digitally produced population maps, to virtual globes. Both concerns and opportunities related to global GIS systems and virtual globes in demography are discussed.	Lisa	M Jordan
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Spatial Sampling for Collecting Demographic Data	This article demonstrates the application of geographic information systems and remote sensing to construct a sampling frame and stochastic random point simulation in this sampling frame for a demographic survey. The proposed methodology was tested for the sampling of households in Delhi Metropolitan. Since a household sampling frame was not available, the sampling frame of residential areas within different air pollution strata was constructed, and the residential area weighted 2000 random points were simulated within the identified frame. The simulated random points were transferred onto a street map and into a global positioning system (GPS). These points were then navigated using GPS to identify households at the simulated location and acquire their consents. A total of 1576 of 2000 simulated locations were found suitable and households at these locations participated in the survey administered during January and April 2004.	Naresh	 Kumar
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Adding Structural Variables to Space-Time Interaction Tests: An Application to Fertility Transition in Brazil	A long debate in the fertility transition literature concerns the relative strengths of ideational diffusion and economic development. Spatial statistics have always been implicitly important in this debate, but they have recently moved to the foreground. Bocquet-Appel and Jakobi (1998) suggested using Knox’s space-time interaction test for a study of demographic transition in Great Britain. The Knox test is widely used in epidemiology, but it has a serious drawback for demographic applications. Specifically, it does not account for structural variables that also change in space and time. Consequently, the Knox test is too likely to find evidence for ‘epidemic’ patterns of fertility diffusion when local economic development levels are changing. We propose an improved space-time interaction test and illustrate with data from four Brazilian censuses. We also show how this method can be adapted to produce maps showing where and when diffusion effects seem strongest, net of covariate effects.	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Renato	M. Assuncao	Joseph	E. Potter
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Urban Bias and Labor Market Inequality: Trends in a Sub-Saharan Setting	This paper examines the sources and trends in labor market inequality stemming from rural parentage. While these differences are often attributed to variation in levels of human capital versus differences in returns to human capital, this paper attempts to empirically assess the importance of each factor and to examine how the relative contributions of each change over time within both the formal and informal labor markets. The paper advances previous studies in two ways: Conceptually, it recognizes the concurrent influences of both levels and returns to human capital. Methodologically, it examines these inequalities in historical perspective, applies fixed-effects methods to control for the possible influence of unobserved features of families, and decomposes inequality in labor market access to that which is due to variation in levels of human capital versus that which is due to differences in returns to human capital. Findings show a convergence in the occupational attainment prospects of rural and urban children over time.	Sarah	 Giroux
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Occupational Gender Segregation and Wage Differentials among Filipino Youth	The tendency of men and women to work in different occupations contributes to the persisting gender wage gap. This effect is suggested to be greater at younger ages as people begin their careers. However, this has not been ascertained in the Philippines because of data paucity, particularly among the youth which account for one fifth of the country’s employed population. Using 2005 Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey data on 924 employed youth ages 19-21 years, we examined the: (1) extent of occupational gender segregation using KI index; (2) demand and supply side factors associated with occupational choice; and (3) effect of segregation on wage rate. Multivariate regression and Heckman selection models were employed. Results showed that there is occupational gender segregation that is worst among rural residents and those who are still schooling. Occupational gender segregation is significantly associated with wage rate inequality, even after controlling for human capital.	Nanette	 Lee	Linda	 Adair
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Job Placement and Job Shift across Employment Sectors in Reform-Era China: The Effects of Education	Using the first wave (1989) and the fourth wave (1997) of the CHNS data, this study investigates the effects of education on job placement among the employment sectors for young workers (age 17 to 24) and the job shift across the employment sectors for older workers (age 25 to 44) in China. The change of these effects on young workers’ job placement from 1989 to 1997 is also examined. It is found that education is important in determining young workers’ employment sectors and older workers’ destination of employment sector if they change jobs, and the better-educated workers are more likely to have access to the state and collective sector. The findings suggest that access to different employment sectors is not equally distributed among Chinese workers. The hierarchy of employment sectors is reproduced through the procedure that assorts individual workers of different education levels to different employment sectors.	Lijuan	 Wu
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Immigrant Wage Gaps in Cross-National Perspective: Immigrant-Specific Disadvantages or Wage Structure?	In this paper, I ask how immigrant/native-born wage gaps differ in two institutionally distinct receiving societies in Western Europe: Sweden, with a comparatively equal wage structure, and the United Kingdom, with a comparatively unequal wage structure. Examining 30 immigrant groups that reside in both countries, I document two varieties of inequality. In terms of wage percentiles, immigrants fare better in the UK, net of human capital, demographic characteristics, and sending country. But immigrant/native-born gaps in terms of logged wages are at least as large in the UK as in Sweden, and for some groups larger, because overall earnings inequality is so high in the UK. These findings complement previous findings on gender wage gaps in cross-national perspective, and suggest that policies to improve immigrant pay must consider immigrant-specific barriers in the labor market and detrimental effects of earnings inequality for immigrants.	Christel	 Kesler
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Household Transitions in Grassland Settlement: The View from Kansas	In the Demography and Environment in Grasslands Settlement project, we hypothesize a human imprint on the Plains environment where the cumulative impacts of household-level processes on landscape-level dynamics were the result of historical give and take between family forms and land use. Building on earlier work that showed a settlement by households at various stages, and key roles for environment and ethnicity, in this paper we explore household lifecycle transitions across Kansas from earliest Euro-American settlement through the development of a land-use system that remains the visible organizing principle of the landscape to this day. We estimate a series of three-level (or mixed) regressions with repeated measures (time is therefore the first-level unit) of household form nested within households and households nested within environmental region, to look at household transitions that model change in household life cycle location between censuses based on household characteristics at the beginning of the interval.	Myron	P. Gutmann	Susan	 Hautaniemi Leonard	Glenn	D. Deane
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Gone with the Wind? Hurricane Risk, Fertility and Education	This paper uses data on hurricanes in Guatemala over the last 120 years combined with a recent household survey to analyse how decisions on education and fertility respond to risk and shocks. For households with land an increase in the risk of hurricanes lead to both higher fertility and higher education, while households without land have fewer children but also higher education. Hurricane shocks lead to decreases in both fertility and education, and although there is a substantial compensatory effect on fertility later in life, that is not the case for education. The paper examines a number of possible explanations for these patterns and finds that the most likely explanation is insurance considerations through increased available man power and migration.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Moving Women: Household Composition, Labor Demand and Crop Choice	Analysis of the Indian census has shown that female marital migration accounts for the majority of the spatial mobility in India. Using a unique panel dataset, I estimate the effect of increases in the value of female labor on women’s marriage market outcomes. Female labor is more valuable in rice farming than wheat farming. I exploit rainfall shocks across rice farming households and wheat farming households to identify the effect of female labor productivity on the marriage market. Consistent with a model of household composition and crop choice in the presence of imperfect markets for female labor, I find that increases in female labor productivity are associated with decreases in the marriage rate of prime age females. Moreover, when female labor productivity is high, dowries paid out by the bride’s family households also decline, indicating a rise in the bargaining power of the bride’s family during dowry negotiations.	Isaac	 Mbiti
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	The Intra-Household Economics of Polygyny: Fertility and Child Mortality in Rural Mali	Building on anthropological evidence, we develop a model of intra-household decision making on fertility and child survival within the framework of the collective household model. We carry out a test of the implications of this framework with data from Demographic and Health Surveys in rural Mali, where polygyny rates among married women are close to 50 per cent. The econometric tests reject the implications of efficient intra-household allocations for junior wives in bigynous households and fail to reject for senior wives in bigynous households as well as for wives in monogamous households. These findings are consistent with existent narrative evidence according to which co-wife rivalry is responsible for resource-consuming struggle and junior wives are the adults with the weakest bargaining position in the household.	Harounan	 Kazianga	Stefan	 Klonner
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	The Impact of Poor Health on Education: New Evidence Using Genetic Markers	This paper examines the influence of health conditions on academic performance during adolescence. To account for the endogeneity of health outcomes and their interactions with risky behaviors we exploit natural variation within a set of genetic markers across individuals. We present strong evidence that these genetic markers serve as valid instruments with good statistical properties for ADHD, depression and obesity. They help to reveal a new dynamism from poor health to lower academic achievement with substantial heterogeneity in their impacts across genders. Our investigation further exposes the considerable challenges in identifying health impacts due to the prevalence of comorbid health conditions and endogenous health behaviors. This distinction between health outcomes from health behaviors is not apparent in earlier empirical studies which estimate equations derived from models where either the parents or children make all the health and education input decisions by themselves.	Weili	 Ding	Steven	F. Lehrer	J.	Niels  Rosenquist	Janet	 Audrain-McGovern
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Long-Term Consequences of Childhood ADHD on Early Adult Outcomes	Even though ADHD is one of the most prevalent mental conditions in school-age children, little is known about the long-term consequences of the illness for individuals and society. This paper uses retrospective ratings of ADHD symptoms in childhood to examine risky behaviors in early adulthood, controlling for a rich set of individual, family, and community level variables. This paper separately examines the effects of the different dimensions of ADHD symptoms, including inattentive, hyperactive, and combined typologies. The results show that both inattentive and hyperactive symptoms increase the likelihood of reporting many types of risky behaviors, in many cases the increases are substantial: However there is little evidence that individuals with symptoms of the combined type of ADHD face a multiplicative risk. Overall, the findings of this paper indicate that ADHD imposes significant long-term costs on both individuals and society and is an important area for future academic and clinical research.	Jason	 Fletcher	Barbara	 Wolfe
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Parental Health Expectations and Children's Educational Attainment in Rural Malawi	Studies on the relationship between HIV/AIDS and children’s educational attainment largely focus on the direct impacts of parental illness and death, overlooking the potential indirect impact that parental perceptions of the HIV epidemic may have on children’s school enrollment. I combine analysis of the 2004 and 2006 survey rounds of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP) with findings from qualitative interviews with parents collected in summer 2006. The analysis examines the role of the parents' health expectations and concern about HIV/AIDS, their perception of HIV prevalence in the community, and their knowledge of their HIV status. Preliminary findings suggest that parental uncertainty about HIV is associated with lower levels of school participation. Interventions that target this uncertainty, such as HIV testing programs, may make a significant contribution to maintaining children’s educational attainment in communities affected by HIV/AIDS.	Monica	J. Grant
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Infant Morbidity and School Performance in Late Childhood in Cebu, Philippines	Diarrhea and respiratory infections continue to be the leading causes of childhood mortality and morbidity in the Philippines. These illnesses may also have long-term effects on surviving children's later health and development among those who survive, but few studies have examined the effects of early child morbidity on school performance. Using the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Study in the Philippines, we examine the associations and independent effects of diarrhea and respiratory diseases in the first 2 years of life on school absenteeism and English and Mathematics achievement tests scores at 10-12 years old. We also explore the combined effects of diarrhea and respiratory illnesses on the same education-related indicators. Analysis reveals that diarrhea and respiratory infections during infancy are associated with more school absenteeism and lower achievement test scores at ages 10-12. The long-term consequences of infant morbidity emphasize the importance of early interventions to improve child health.	Tita	Lorna L. Perez	Marilyn	V. Cinco
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Chinese and Irish Immigrants in Frontier California, 1860-1900	This study attempts to sketch out the social and demographic context missing from earlier studies of Chinese Americans, whose 19th-century migration patterns were precursors of contemporary global labor force exchange. Historical U.S. census microdata for the years 1860-1900 are used for comparisons between Massachusetts and California and, within California, between Chinese and Irish immigrants, who shared demographic, historical, and symbolic commonalities. Successive census cross-sections are used to explore changes in demographic composition, industry and occupation, nativity and place of birth, and living arrangements, with special scrutiny of households or other living arrangements that integrated Chinese with non-Chinese.	Ken	 Chew
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Spatial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Dimensions of Nineteenth Century Mortality: Philadelphia, 1880	Public Health Officials in Nineteenth Century cities linked ethnicity, immigrant status, poverty and mortality spatially—areal units inhabited by African-Americans and/or immigrants were seen as sites of both poverty and disease. I have examined how closely the mortality of an ethnic group was tied to its residential location and found that in Philadelphia in1880, ethnic group members living in areas that had a large concentration of their own group faced better mortality conditions than those living elsewhere in the city. Higher occupational status in ethnic areas may account for some of the spatial difference in life chances for African-Americans. However, other status characteristics of areas do not correlate with the mortality levels for African-Americans, and for the Irish and German populations, spatial mortality differences were not related to any measure of status. These results question both Nineteenth Century notions about urban mortality and our current views of our immigrant past.	Gretchen	A. Condran
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	The Jewish Anticipation of Fertility Control in Nineteenth-Century Europe: A Reassessment	This paper reconsiders the question of the Jewish anticipation of fertility decline in nineteenth-century Europe. The most popular explanations refer to the “characteristics” approach: the Jews retained higher SES, better education, larger income and lower infant mortality than their Gentile neighbors. Such an approach appears unsatisfactory in  several respects: it does not explain why Jewish fertility was lower than that of other groups with similar conditions, nor the different timing of fertility decline among Jewish communities. It also understates the existence of large intra-Jewish fertility differentials. I suggest that the “minority-group status” provides a better explanatory framework. Using residence as a proxy for assimilation, I show that in nineteenth-century Venice the fertility of assimilated Jews was much lower, and that of segregated Jews much higher, than their Catholic counterparts. I also show that the timing of fertility decline among European Jews closely followed the different pace of their emancipation.	Renzo	 Derosas
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Fare Thee Well: Human Capital and African American Migration before 1910	There are several theories that seek to link the decline in the aggregate skill level of the Southern African American population before the Great Migration to migration before World War I. Showing educational selection in migration is complicated since education and other features of human capital are highly correlated with one another. I use IPUMS and the Colored Troops Sample of the Union Army Data to estimate the effects of literacy and health (stock and flow) on the migration propensities of African Americans. I find that literacy and health flows were strong predictors of migration, and the effect of literacy on migration is reduced by one-quarter to one-third once health is controlled for. Additionally, the Colored Troops Sample allows us to measure migration in several ways, with migrations that would and would not be prone to educational selection. The results are robust to the measurement of migration and health.	Trevon	D. Logan
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital: Accounting for Skin-Color Differences	Racial differences in socioeconomic achievement are  commonplace in the United States. Most contemporary observers attribute these differences to a combination of discrimination in the labor market and socioeconomic handicap imposed by slavery and other historical institutions. Discrimination portends to be an issue every time equally skilled individuals are treated differently by prospective employers, while slavery may play a role if the intergenerational transmission of human capital is strongly auto-correlated within the family. In order to better understand the intergenerational transmission process, we investigate the impact of the 19th century slavery abolition on the economic progress of African American families. We  examine how many generations are needed for people in separated groups (free blacks versus slaves) to converge in terms of socioeconomic outcomes after institutional barriers are lifted. We detail our analysis exploring differences within the non-white population that can be associated to complexion/skin-color.	Marcos	A. Rangel	Aaron	 Danielson
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Age, Aging, and Economic Growth: Perspectives on the Second Demographic Dividend	Over the demographic transition changes in population age distribution interact with age patterns of production and consumption to generate the first and second dividends. The second dividend arises from induced variations in aggregate saving and wealth holding, and depends on the relative size and upward or downward direction of intergenerational transfers in an economy. We draw on National Transfer Accounts estimates of transfers, labor productivity, and consumption by age for a number of countries to assess these effects and to estimate the first and second dividends. We derive concrete results for several different theoretical models: first, comparative golden rule steady states and, second, dynamic simulation models. We simulate three different models of saving, life cycle consumption, and economic growth over the transition: individualistic life cycle saving; interdependent altruistic sharing; and an optimizing social planner. We hypothesize that all three simulations will exhibit a second dividend, demonstrating that it is robust.	Ronald	 Lee	Andrew	 Mason
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Does the Demographic Dividend Forecast Economic Growth?	Demographic variables have been established as major determinants of countries’ long run economic performance. In this paper, we take the analysis a step further and test whether demographic variables can be used as a predictor of future economic growth. Applying estimates based on the period 1960 to 1980 to predict economic performance in the period 1980 to 2000, we find that a model including initial life expectancy, fertility and age structure significantly outperforms simple autoregressive models. We decompose the forecast errors into random shocks, parameter mis-estimation and parameter instability over time. The main source of forecast error is parameter instability, particularly a large fall in the intercept due to low economic growth in the period 1980-2000. The forecasting model does much better predicting relative rather than absolute economic performance, and is not improved significantly by the inclusion of an extended set of socio-economic, geographic and institutional variables.	Guenther	 Fink	Jocelyn	E. Finlay
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Demographic Change and Local Labor Market Outcomes in Brazil	This paper estimates the impact of the changing relative size of the adult male population classified by age and education groups on the earnings of employed males living in 502 Brazilian local labor markets during four time periods spanning thirty years. It takes advantage of the huge variation in age and educational structure across these local labor markets, a change that occurred over the 1970-2000 period, to test the impact of the relative size of age-education groups on earnings. This paper is an attempt to contribute to the demographic dividend literature by inserting cohort size and supply-demand frameworks in the determination of the productivity component that appears in the basic equation for per capita income growth. This approach adds another indirect effect of age structure to the per capita income equation, complementing the usual focus on the first and second demographic dividends.	Ernesto	F. Amaral	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Daniel	 Hamermesh	Joseph	E. Potter
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Demographic Dividends and Retirement Pensions in México	Social security should be a main instrument for the building and functioning of demographic dividends. Retirement pensions must build up savings and investments in a first dividend to enable financial resources, economic soundness, educational levels and health programs to guarantee a sustainable second dividend. This paper analyzes the onset and development of social security during the last century, depicting the invalidation of the first dividend through inequality and poor policies. Social security is now facing financial crisis, actuarial deficits, lack of coverage, meager benefits for most, and also allowing pampered retirement for the few. Such circumstances all together cancel the first dividend and jeopardize the second. The adoption of defined contributions in individual accounts is diverting resources from investments in economic productivity, education structures and health systems. Projections are made up to 2025 to suggest possibilities for a first and second dividend requiring strong political will and social commitments.	Isalia	 Nava	Roberto	 Ham-Chande
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Probabilistic Projections of HIV Prevalence Using Bayesian Melding	The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has developed the Estimation and Projection Package (EPP) for making national estimates and short-term projections of HIV prevalence based on observed prevalence trends in antenatal clinics.    Understanding uncertainty in its projections and related quantities is important for more informed policy decision making. We propose using Bayesian melding to assess the uncertainty around the EPP predictions. Prevalence data as well as information on the input parameters of the EPP model are used to derive probabilistic HIV prevalence projections - a probability distribution on a set of future prevalence trajectories. We relate antenatal clinic prevalence to population prevalence and account for variability among clinics using a random effects model.     We discuss the results of the Bayesian melding procedure for Uganda, where prevalence peaked at around 28% in 1990; the 95% prediction interval for 2010 ranges from 1% to 7%.	Leontine	 Alkema	Adrian	 Raftery	Samuel	J. Clark
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Projecting U.S. Household Changes with a New Household Model	Anticipating changes in number, size, and composition of households is an important element of many issues of social concern. To facilitate continued progress in these areas, an efficient household projection model with moderate data requirements, manageable complexity, explicit representation of demographic trends and output that includes the most important household characteristics is needed. None of the existing models meets all the needs. This study aims to specify appropriate models for size-specific headship rates as functions of overall population changes and demographic events. Based on the PUMS data of 1900-2000 and future household projection output using dynamic household model ProFamy, we empirically test the validity of the new proposed approach. Comparing the simulation results under various headship rate models with different levels of complexity, we analyze the importance of considering demographic events in projecting household changes with the new approach and provide recommendations for the development of the most efficient household model.	Leiwen	 Jiang	Brian	C. O'Neill
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Modeling Seasonal Effects on the Lexis Surface	We are modeling how seasonality in deaths changes over age and time using two-dimensional varying coefficient Poisson regression. This analysis represents a novel approach, which allows us to look at the dynamics of seasonal patterns in both dimensions on the Lexis surface simultaneously. Due to the strong and varying annual cyclical behavior over time, sine and cosine regressors model periodicity, but their coefficients are allowed flexibility by assuming smoothness over the age and time plane. The two-dimensional varying coefficient surfaces are estimated using a gridded tensor product B-spline basis of moderate dimension. Further smoothness is ensured using difference penalties on the rows  and columns of the tensor product coefficients. The optimal penalty tuning parameters are chosen based on minimization of AIC. The seasonal effects are summarized with two-dimensional amplitude and phase image plots. An illustrative example is provided using the female respiratory death monthly count data for ages 44-96 during  1959-1999.	Roland	 Rau	Jutta	 Gampe	Paul	H. Eilers	Brian	D. Marx
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Connecting Fundamental Concepts of Human Aging: A Statistical Modeling Perspective	Numerous studies of aging and longevity in humans have accumulated a substantial amount of data about aging-related decline in health/well-being/survival status. Despite substantial progress in studying selected areas of aging, the research potential of these data remains largely under-explored. This is because traditional studies ignore a large portion of related information that might be important for better understanding systemic regularities of the human aging processes. As a result, many important features the human of aging process remain disconnected. Important examples include: age dependence of physiological norm; allostatic adaptation, and allostatic load; resistance to stress, as well as regular and stochastic components of physiological age trajectories. In this paper we describe the new method of statistical modeling that allows us to connect these fundamental concepts of human aging. The properties of this approach and its application to the analysis of Framingham Heart Study data are discussed.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Igor	 Akushevich	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Lucy	 Akushevich	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	The Highest Fertility in Europe – For How Long? Analysis of Fertility Change in Albania Based on Individual Data	Despite dramatic changes in Albanian demographic trends, relatively little is known about the driving forces behind its observed fertility decline. Using individual-level data from 2002, we analyse fertility behaviour over the last five decades, emphasising changes taking place during the nineties, when Albania went through dramatic social and economic upheavals. Using the Albanian Living Standard and Measurement Survey (ALSMS) and survival analysis techniques, we analyse quantum and tempo effects of fertility. The reduction of fertility was mainly due to the improvements in the social agenda, with particular emphasis on female education, as well as the improvement in child mortality. But the analysis also reveals strong period effects during the nineties which mainly affected the higher parities. The persistence of traditional norms and values continue to influence family formation in Albania, while the changes in the social and economic circumstances determine the outcome of childbearing.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Arjan	 Gjonca
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Italian Fertility: Is a Recovery Under Way?	Italy is one of the lowest low fertility countries, often cited as an example of steady fertility decline. However, recent years period fertility seems to have recovered slightly, rising from a minimum of 1.19 child per woman in 1995 to 1.34 in 2005. In the first part of this paper we present these recent fertility developments in Italy, both at overall and regional levels.  We apply a cohort approach, showing changes in cohort TFR and in the timing of births for 1950-1980 cohorts. Signs of recovering are emerging in the more modern northern regions.  In the second part of our paper we focus on fertility after age 35, using individual data. Applying a multiprocess regression approach we investigate the determinants of postponement (propensity to reach age 35 without having had a child) and the determinants of recovering (propensity to subsequently have a child for those reaching age 35 without children).	Maria	 Castiglioni	Marcantonio	 Caltabiano	Alessandro	 Rosina
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Regional Context and Fertility in Contemporary Italy	Several countries have experienced persistent very low fertility. The case of Italy has attracted disproportionate attention, because conditions promoting decline (female-labor force participation, religious secularism, weakening of kin networks) were less in evidence. Nevertheless, Italy has continued to experience fertility rates well below replacement, dipping to a TFR as low as 1.2. What may be less well appreciated is that internal Italian regional differentials, both in levels and changes in childbearing rates, have also been manifest throughout this time. In this paper we examine sources of variation in Italy’s recent childbearing behavior. In so doing we evaluate hypotheses that emphasize structural socioeconomic factors and more cultural factors. To do so we estimate a multilevel contextual event history model, regressing transition to first birth and second birth on an array of personal characteristics, family background, and selected socioeconomic characteristics of the province or region.	Michael	J. White	Giuseppe	 Gabrielli	Laura	 Bernardi	David	I. Kertzer	Sabrina	 Perra
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Continuing Fertility Decline in South Korea	The total fertility rate in South Korea reached the replacement level in 1983 and continued to decline to lowest low level of 1.08 in 2004. Studies on fertility behavior up to year 2000 indicate that the major factor associated with declining total fertility rate is the trend toward later marriage. However, the most recent national fertility data show signs of a new trend: significant decline in marital fertility and increase in childlessness within marriage since 2000. This paper takes a closer look at the first birth interval as well as fertility intentions among South Korean women using the 2003 National Survey of Fertility and Family Health data together with 2000 census (2% sample). We are especially interested in estimating the effects of economic hardship, difficulty in combining work and family life, cost of children’s education, and attitudes on family and childbearing on fertility behavior among South Korean women.	Minja	K. Choe	Seoung-Kwon	 Kim
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Immigration and Generational Trends in Body Mass Index and Obesity in the United States: Results of the National Latino and Asian-American Survey (NLAAS), 2002-2003	Estimates of body mass index (BMI)/obesity in the U.S. rarely consider differences by nativity or country of origin. Using the National Latino and Asian-American Survey (NLAAS) 2002-2003, we generated nationally representative estimates of mean BMI and obesity prevalence and explored changes in the distribution of BMI with generation in the U.S. Analyses tested the association between generation status and BMI, and examined whether this association varied by ethnicity, education, and gender. We found substantial heterogeneity in BMI/obesity by country of origin and an increase in BMI with generation, overall and among most subgroups. The data suggest different patterns for Latinos and Asian-Americans in the nature and degree of distributional changes in BMI with generation in the U.S. Aggregate estimates not accounting for nativity and country of origin may mask significant heterogeneity in the prevalence of obesity and patterns of distributional change, with implications for prevention strategies.	Lisa	M. Bates	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia	Margarita	 Alegria	Nancy	 Krieger
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Social Support, Family Integration, and Health Outcomes of U.S. Immigrants	Research consistently reveals evidence of a health paradox among immigrants. Yet, while theoretical explanations for the paradox abound, actual research examining commonly hypothesized mediators, particularly social support, is lacking. This study examines the relationship between immigrant status and mental and physical health with data from the 2001 wave of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), focusing on the mediating role of social support. Results show clear evidence of an immigrant paradox in physical health, but less consistent support for differences between immigrants and non-immigrants in mental health status. Social support does not explain the bulk of the immigration effect on physical health, but is more successful at explaining effects of race and ethnicity on mental health outcomes. In our discussion, we refine theoretical models of the immigrant health paradox and offer implications these results have for future research on immigrant health.	Bridget	K. Gorman	Elaine	 Ecklund	Holly	 Heard
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Stress and Immigrant Health: The Relationship between Time in U.S. and Allostatic Load of Immigrants	It is well known that most immigrants arrive in this country healthier than comparable U.S.-born persons, but that their health declines with time in U.S. The conventional explanation of this immigrant health trajectory is that immigrants are positively selected on health, which explains their health advantage on arrival, and that assimilation is unhealthy because over time immigrants adopt unhealthy behaviors that adversely affect their health. While there is considerable evidence of a positive selection effect, the evidence is less clear as to the extent and causes of the assimilation effect (Jasso et al. 2004). One potential explanation of the “unhealthy assimilation” effect is greater stress. In this study, I investigate the relationship between stress and immigrant health, and how time in the U.S. mediates this relationship. Specifically, I use a multivariate regression framework to obtain associations between allostatic load and nativity status, and how time in U.S. mediates this association.	Robert	 Kaestner
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Another Mexican Birthweight Paradox? The Effect of Immigrant Enclaves and Neighborhood Poverty on the Birthweight of Mexican Origin Infants	We examined whether Mexican-origin infants in the U.S. exhibit worse health in metropolitan areas (MA) with higher Mexican-American residential segregation. We calculated MA segregation (exposure) indices for Mexican-Americans using Census 2000 data (168 MAs), and merged with Detail Natality year-2000 individual-level birth records (n=490,332). We examined segregation as predictor, mother’s place-of-birth as effect modifier, and birthweight as outcome in cross-sectional 2-level hierarchical-linear-regression, adjusting for individual, MA, and region covariates. Living in highly segregated (isolation) Mas and in MAs where Mexican-Americans had high exposure to poverty (EPOV) and high exposure to foreign born Mexicans (EFBMEX) were associated with lower infant birthweight for U.S. born (USB) Mexican-American mothers. However, foreign-born (FB) Mexican women were buffered against negative infant birthweight associations. Controlling for isolation, EFBMEX exhibited positive associations for both USB and FB. Controlling for EFBMEX, negative effects of isolation intensified for USB. Our findings suggest a paradox: immigrant enclaves exert both negative and positive health associations, further modified by nativity.	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Grandparents Raising Grandchildren: Racial Variations in Mental Health	Over four million children in the United States are being raised by grandparents. Although caring for one’s grandchildren can have benefits for grandparents, it also has potential costs. Previous work has largely failed to investigate whether there are racial differences in the effect of grandparenting on mental health, yet there are good reasons to expect variation. Prior research has documented the prevalence and importance of kin networks and social support for the family life of Blacks, which may ease the burden of grandchild care. However, Blacks have different economic and structural circumstances from Whites, which may impede their ability to care financially for a co-residential grandchild. In this paper, I assess whether there are racial and ethnic variations in the mental health of co-residential grandparents, using data from the Health and Retirement Study.	Jennifer	Roebuck Bulanda
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	How Do Multiple Roles Affect Women's Health? The Impacts of Employment and Family Roles over Women's Life Course	Two theoretical hypotheses regarding the combination of family and work roles are usually applied to explain health differences between employed women and housewives. The Role Accumulation Hypothesis proposes that the benefits of role accumulation on health tend to outweigh any stress caused by multiple roles. The Role Strain Hypothesis proposes that multiple roles cause role overload and role conflict that results in poorer health. Using data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey conducted in year 2000 and 2002, this study investigates the health effects of employment and family roles on health for women in different age groups. Logistic regression models of three health measures are estimated separately for young, middle-aged, and elderly women. Results suggest that although being employed is associated with better health in general for women, the health benefit may vary depending on the type of employment, the nature of family roles, and stage in the life course.	Gang-Hua	 Fan
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Together Forever? Relationship Dynamics and Maternal Investments in Children’s Health	Using Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Data (N=3,798), this paper examines the question of why relationship status matters for a mother's prenatal health behavior choices. The paper argues that a mother's decisions on how much to invest in her child are driven by her romantic relationship, such that the more committed she perceives the father to be, the better her prenatal health behavior decisions. The paper examines late prenatal care, smoking and drinking during pregnancy, and whether the mother breastfed her baby. Results show that several aspects of a mother’s relationship commitment, including multiple partner fertility, relationship quality, and for unmarried mothers, whether she believes she will eventually marry the father, all predict her prenatal health behaviors above and beyond confounding factors. Mothers who perceive a high degree of commitment on the part of the father have better prenatal health behaviors.	Rachel	T. Kimbro
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Growing up with Smokers and Problem Drinkers: A Model of Social Reproduction of Family Environment and Health in Later Adulthood	I examined the life-long impact of childhood health environment (smokers and problem drinkers) on adult health environment, and their joint influences on individual health, using Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. I found that older adults who grew up with smokers or problem drinkers were more likely to smoke long, to have drinking problems, to live with smokers or problem drinker, and to have poorer health (status, height, depression, hypertensions/heart problems, cancer, symptoms, medical conditions). Controlling for one’s own risk behaviors and living with smokers or problem drinkers after 18, the associations remained. Those living with problem drinkers after age 18 or currently exposed to smokers also had poorer health, more diagnosed illnesses, and physical symptoms. The controls included age, gender, child abuse, family configuration, aspirations at age 18, high school performance and IQ, SES, marriage and fertility. None explained or moderated the influences of ever living with smokers and problem drinkers.	Daphne	 Kuo
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	The Transition to Elementary School: Assessing the Impact of Early Learning Opportunities and Classroom Quality on the Achievement Gap	In order to promote school readiness amongst disadvantaged children, developmental psychologists have suggested that high-quality child care centers, in contrast to other arrangements, provide children with the range of stimulating, positive experiences that are most likely to improve children’s cognitive achievement. However, disadvantaged children may be less likely to be enrolled in high quality, center-based care than advantaged children. This difference may represent economic inequalities that limit some children’s access to high quality center care. At the same time, children with more highly educated mothers may be more likely to be in high-quality care because mothers view child care as an investment in children’s development. Analyzing data from the NICHD SECCYD—a national, longitudinal study of 1,371 children—this study looks at how parents’ education structures variations in the types of arrangements children experience, the quality of the arrangement, and the average weekly amount of time spent in each arrangement.	Jennifer	M. Augustine	Robert	 Crosnoe	Aletha	 Huston
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	Endogenous Peer Effects in School Participation	A remaining obstacle in the literature on peer effects has been the inability to distinguish  between peer effects that are determined by a person’s reference group behavior (endogenous peer  effects), and effects generated as a result of specific background characteristics of the groups  themselves (contextual peer effects). This paper identifies and estimates endogenous peer effects on  children’s school participation decisions using evidence from the Mexican PROGRESA program, a  school subsidy program targeted at children of the rural poor. Because program eligibility was randomly assigned, we use this exogenous variation in school participation to identify peer effects on the school  enrollment of ineligible children residing in the same communities. We find that peers have considerable  influence on the enrollment decision of program-ineligible children, and these effects are concentrated among children from relatively poorer households. Our findings imply that educational policies aimed at  encouraging enrollment can produce large social multiplier effects.	Gustavo	J. Bobonis	Frederico	S. Finan
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	Do Public Goods Explain the Relationship between Income Inequality and Birthweight?	This paper examines the relationship between income inequality and birthweight, and delves into one causal pathway through which inequality may operate upon health. The “neo-materialist” relationship between inequality and health argues that income inequality impacts health mainly because inequality affects the distribution of resources in a community. The 1991 and 2001 Natality Detail Files are augmented with community data from several sources, including the decennial Censuses, the Annual Survey of Government Finances and the Area Resource File. I find that public goods are positively correlated with birthweight; and income inequality is associated with higher public goods. Moreover, the inclusion of public goods measures as controls, strengthens the relationship between inequality and birthweight. Inasmuch as income inequality causally increases public goods, public goods dampen the negative effect of income inequality on birthweight. Studies that do not account for the public goods affect potentially underestimate the negative effect of inequality on birthweight.	Aparna	 Lhila
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	The Supply of Birth Control Methods, Education and Fertility: Evidence from Romania	This paper investigates the effect of the supply of birth  control methods on fertility behavior by exploring the effects of Romania's 23-year period of continued pronatalist policies. In 1966, the Romanian government abruptly made abortion and family planning illegal. This policy was  sustained until December 1989 with only minor modifications. The implementation and repeal of the restrictive regime provide a useful and plausibly exogenous source of variation in the cost of birth control methods that is arguably orthogonal to the demand for children. Women who spent most of their reproductive years under the  restrictive regime experienced large increases in fertility. Less educated women had bigger increases  in fertility after policy implementation and larger fertility decreases following the lifting of restrictions in 1989, when fertility differentials between educational groups decreased by almost fifty percent. These findings strongly suggest that access to abortion and birth control are quantitatively significant determinants of fertility levels, particularly for less educated women.	Cristian	 Pop-Eleches
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Making Babies Healthier by Providing a Managed Care Option to California's Poor	During the 1990s, California shifted over half its Medicaid beneficiaries from a fee-for-service health system into managed care. California was not alone as 57 percent of all Medicaid recipients nation-wide were in managed care by 2002. Despite the expansion of Medicaid managed care, there has been little rigorous analysis of the impact on quality of care. This paper investigates whether mandating a managed care option for California Medicaid beneficiaries improves access to prenatal care and birth outcomes in a traditionally fee-for-service system. The research design exploits the phasing in of managed care over time and counties. We use longitudinal birth record information from 1991 through 2001. We find that offering managed care reduced the number of low-birth weight and premature births for some types of managed care but not all. That managed care had positive health benefits is important for public policy given that cost savings have not arisen.	Tania	 Barham	Paul	 Gertler	Kristiana	 Raube
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Disparities in Primary Care by Race and Ethnicity among Medicaid Children in California	Racial and ethnic disparities in primary care for children are well documented, but poorly understood. This study examines variation in preventable hospitalization rates of Medicaid children in California to extend our understanding of racial and ethnic disparity in primary care quality. I estimated a multivariate Poisson model from administrative data. The results show that primary care quality varies substantially by race and ethnicity even after controlling for beneficiaries’ primary language. The domain of primary care that minority children experience varies by race and ethnicity. Compared to white children, African-American children lack continuity and comprehensiveness of care necessary for the management of chronic conditions. Hispanic children, on the other hand have inadequate first contact care. Asian children experience a better quality of care overall. Independent of race, a non-English primary language has a protective effect on preventable hospitalization. The study finds no evidence of linguistic minorities’ disadvantage in managed care.	Arpita	 Chattopadhyay
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Is There Adverse Self-Selection of Children with Special Health Care Needs in the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)?	Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) use more health services than other children; hence health insurance is critical for them. We investigated disenrollment patterns for CSHCN and non-CSHCN in New Jersey’s State Children’s Health Insurance Program (NJ FamilyCare). We used the 2003 NJ FamilyCare Supplement to the New Jersey Family Health Survey. Children were randomly selected from those enrolled in NJ FamilyCare as of May 2002 (N=675). We used the CSHCN Screener – a non-categorical approach to identifying children with special health care needs. Twenty-one percent of children in NJ FamilyCare had at least one SHCN. In binary logistic regressions controlling for demographics and SCHIP features, CSHCN were only one-fifth as likely as non-CSHCN to become uninsured. Multinomial logit will be used to compare odds of (a) finding other insurance, (b) becoming uninsured, and (c) retaining SCHIP coverage. CSHCN were far less likely than non-CSHCN to become uninsured.	Tamarie	 Macon	Jane	E. Miller	Dorothy	 Gaboda	Theresa	 Simpson	Joel	 Cantor
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	The Effects of Head Start Participation on Child Health from Kindergarten to the 5th Grade	The effects of Head Start on child health have been under-studied in the literature and a limited number of well-designed studies show some flaws in research methods. This study examines the effects of Head Start participation prior to kindergarten on child health outcomes from the fall kindergarten through the 5th grade using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K) collected in fall kindergarten (1998), spring kindergarten (1999), 1st grade (spring 2000), 3rd grade (spring 2002), and 5th grade (spring 2004). Using advanced methods (propensity score matching and fixed effects) to address the issue of selection bias and to simulate random assignment with verified Head Start participation data, this study provides reliable findings to update and advance the evidence of Head Start effects on child health for researchers, policymakers, administrators, as well as practitioners.	Fuhua	 Zhai
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	Change in Beliefs or Change in Populations? A Decomposition of Cross-National Trends in Beliefs about Gender Equality.	Using linear regression decomposition, this research documents cross-national change in beliefs about gender equality. The data suggest that change in gender ideology is far from uniform for the cross section of countries included in this analysis and the major world cleavage lies between highly developed western countries, where beliefs about gender equality are the highest and rising, and the rest of the world, where means are lower and, in many cases, decreasing. Beliefs about gender equality in areas such as employment, higher education, and political representation are at best flat among highly populous and rapidly growing countries, and in a number of countries, egalitarian beliefs are on the declining. Decomposition of change into its proximate sources (within and between cohorts) suggest that in many cases, period and cohort effects are offsetting. In nearly all countries, cohort replacement contributed to more egalitarian beliefs, while period effects are negative for many countries.	Shawn	F. Dorius
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	National Context and Task Segregation in Housework, 1965-2003	Recent research explores the social construction of gender in welfare states by documenting the influence of national practices and policies on men and women’s housework time. I extend this research by focusing on how national context may influence the kinds of housework that men and women do, examining sex segregation within household tasks. I analyze 36 time use surveys from 19 countries (spanning 1965 to 2003) combined with original national-level data in multilevel models. I find that men and women spend more time on sex-typical housework in nations where work hours and parental leave are long, and women are less involved in the labor market. They spend less time on sex-typical housework in nations where men are eligible to take parental leave and the public provision of childcare is greater. The results suggest that national context affects not only the amount, but the character of gender inequality in the home.	Jennifer	L. Hook
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	Cross-National Gender Gaps in Educational and Occupational Expectations: A Study of Patterns and Causes	This paper explores the changing gender gaps in educational and occupational expectations cross-nationally. Using data from the 2003 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), it examines gender differences in expectations of 15-year-olds in 30 countries and the sources of cross-national variations in these gender differences. Preliminary results indicate that girls have higher educational expectations than boys in almost all countries. We find a similar pattern for occupational expectations: more girls than boys expect to have white collar occupations, and more boys than girls expect to be employed in blue collar occupations. In addition to mapping the similarities and differences in gender gaps in expectations across many countries, this study seeks to identify the individual-level and country-level variations that explain cross-national differences in the gender gap in educational expectations, thereby advancing knowledge of the changing patterns of gender inequalities in education throughout the world.	Anne	 McDaniel	Claudia	 Buchmann
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	The Apron Strings of Working Mothers? Socialization, Institutionalization, and the Allocation of Household Labor  in Cross-National Perspective	The increase in married women’s paid employment has prompted research on the effects of maternal employment on the children of working mothers. Because women’s paid employment challenges gender conventions, research has focused on childhood socialization and gender attitudes and behavior in the next generation. This paper considers a key indicator of gender parity, the division of household labor. We employ multi-level HLM models with cross-national ISSP survey data from 34 countries. Two hypotheses are evaluated: 1) the micro-level socialization hypothesis that having had a working mother is associated with a more egalitarian division of household labor between husbands and wives, and 2) the macro-level institutionalization hypothesis that growing up in a society where many children have working mothers fosters egalitarian practices consistent with societal processes of lagged accommodation to maternal employment. We find support for both hypotheses.	Judith	 Treas	Tsui-o	 Tai
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	Marital Paths from Welfare to Self-Sufficiency: A Dynamic Analysis of Women’s Marriage Timing and Transitions out of and into Welfare	Promoting marriage as a path out of welfare dependency has become a policy priority. It is unclear, however, how effective marriage can be at stabilizing poor women’s family circumstances. To understand the effect of marriage on welfare transitions, we employ two models. The first model examines whether women exit welfare through marriage. The second model examines whether the timing of marriage affects the probability of return. Do women who marry in subsequent years after welfare exit have lower rates of recidivism than women who marry during a welfare spell? Our preliminary results suggest that women who enter marriage in the years following a welfare exit have lower recidivism rates than women who marry during a welfare spell. However, in the fifteen years following a welfare exit, recidivism rates are high for both groups of women.	Tracy	 Roberts	Steven	P. Martin
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	Getting Married and Exiting Welfare: The Role of Two-Parent TANF Eligibility Rules	We use the 1996 and 2001 Panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and multinomial event history models to evaluate the role of changes in union status in competing-risk transitions from TANF: 1) with employment versus 2) without a job. Results show that becoming married was significantly related to TANF exits between 1996 and 2003, and compared with single women, women who were married were more likely to transition to work than to exit TANF without employment. Stringency in state welfare eligibility policies for two-parent families also affected the likelihood of leaving TANF for employment. Effects of becoming married on TANF exits without employment are conditional on state stringency of these rules. Findings imply that relaxing two-parent rules – providing financial support for marital relationships, in turn promoting employment – is an encouraging policy approach toward achieving self-sufficiency of disadvantaged families.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Shelley	K. Irving	Gordon	F. De Jong
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	The Effect of Child Support on Subsequent Marriage and Cohabitation	We use data from an experiment that resulted in randomly assigned difference in child support receipt to investigate the effects of child support on cohabitation and marriage. Our results suggest that increases in child support received (associated with a policy of full pass-through and disregard of child support) are associated with significantly lower rates of cohabitation between mothers and men who are not the fathers of their child(ren). Thus a higher proportion of women remain single, given that rates of marriage and of cohabitation with fathers are similar. Overall, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that increased child support increases women’s economic independence, reducing the incentive for women to cohabit with men who are not related to their children.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	The Impact of Social and Economic Policy on the Family Structure Experiences of Children in the United States	We analyze the determinants of family structure change. We consider the major proposed explanations for the dramatic changes in family structure in the U.S.: changes in (1) public assistance policy, child support enforcement, divorce laws, and tax laws; (2) labor market opportunities facing men and women; and (3) marriage market conditions. We model the behavior of women who make union and childbearing decisions, but we derive from the model the consequences of these decisions for the family structure experienced by children. We use panel data from the NLSY79 to analyze the fertility, union formation, union dissolution, type of union (cohabiting versus married), and father identity (biological versus step) choices of women born from 1957 to 1964. We use the estimated model to evaluate the impacts of changes in policies and labor and marriage market conditions on the family structure experiences of children growing up during the early 1970s through 2004.	David	 Blau	Wilbert	 van der Klaauw
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Spatially Projecting Local Population Change Using Planning Support Software	This paper is born from an effort to project the spatial distribution of population growth expected in Vilas County, Wisconsin using, GIS-based planning support software. In the course of developing growth scenarios to reflect the impacts of migration, several barriers to producing reliable models have been encountered. These barriers are specific to rural locales in the midst of amenity growth, and include the difficulty in tracking seasonal resident flows, and the limited availability of spatial data in rural municipalities. This research suggests that accurate and locally applicable projections will require greater access to spatial data and a more nuanced understanding of the rate at which second-home owners become permanent residents. Furthermore, in order for local landuse projections to be fully utilized in the policy making process, applied demographers must assuage a political resistance to both landuse models and population projections harbored where population growth remains a contentious political issue.	Shaun	 Golding
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Basic Data for Forecasting Small Areas	Population forecasts of high quality are the best tool for the planning of a municipality, including child care and health care services for the elderly. For these applications it is necessary to make forecasts for smaller areas within municipalities. The statistical material for a single municipality may involve difficulties because it is based on too few observations to be reliable.  Therefore basic data are needed on an overall base for the whole country, which can easily be updated.  Experience has shown that it is best to analyse how risks for out-migration, age-distribution of in-migration and housing density varies for different residential types. Cluster analysis gives a division of different residential types with demographically similar classes. The division is defined by class of housing, tenure, year of construction, size of the town where the building is situated and also the taxation value.	Helen	 Marklund	Jeanette	 Bandel
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Applied Demography for Local Management: An Overview of the Belgian Experience	The field of applied demography is an area of research which fits into decision-making. In this perspective the three following goals seem to be essential: (1) to seek optimisation in the use of the local resources shared by a population; (2) to seek equity when establishing the rights and obligations of all citizens; (3) to ensure transparency in the making of policy decisions in order to guarantee democracy. In this contribution, we consider applied demography at the local level, examining its special features and the problems usually encountered by demographers within the framework of our practical experience at the communal level in Belgium. CYTISE, an interactive database available on the web, is presented and used on line. It represents a real improvement for policy support, providing appropriate and comparative data for the 262 French-speaking communes of Belgium for the period 1991-2005.	Michel	 Poulain
2007	91	Small Area Demography	An Evaluation of Land Parcel-Weighted Areal Interpolation in Small Areas	Small-area population estimates for user-defined boundaries require that administrative areal units be split and re-aggregated. This process of allocation requires a detailed understanding of the distribution of attributes at a greater scale than the finest areal unit. Rather than working with the assumption that attributes are distributed uniformly across areal units, accuracy can be improved by creating a population surface based on additional sources of data related to the true population distribution. Many complex strategies have been developed to estimate population distribution based on land use and land cover classification systems. A more simplistic strategy is accessible to applied demographers. Administrative data, such as land parcels, can be utilized to geo-reference actual housing units, which can then be transformed into a population surface. This paper describes the process of creating a population surface from land parcels and then tests this method of attribute distribution against the more common method of area-weighted areal allocation.	Kyle	 Reese-Cassal
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	The Numbers Question in Feminism: Bridging the Disciplinary Divide	One of the most striking developments of the past decade is an increased distance between scholars working within women’s studies programs and publishing in such journals as Signs and Feminist Studies and those working within more empirically grounded disciplines like sociology and demography. We argue that much of this distance can be attributed to a move away from “numbers” in women’s studies. This is exacerbated by the inability of demographers to make their work relevant to feminists from other disciplines.   Co-authored by feminist scholars in demography, sociology, and anthropology, this paper describes the developments in demography and women’s studies that led to this disjunction. It suggests ways in which fields like demography might increase their relevance to feminist studies as well as ways in which feminist scholarship might broaden itself to regain the lost ground.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Susan	 Greenhalgh	Nancy	E. Riley
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Politics of the Aging Body: Sexuality and Health in Aging Populations	Feminist thinkers assert that the body is reproduced every day by the context in which the physical body is viewed. In keeping with this theme, we examine how the sexual experience fits into the aging process of older individuals by examining two components of the body (physical health and perception of health) in a nationally representative sample. Our primary question is: How does the interaction between physical health and self-perceived health affect the sexual experience of the elderly? To answer this question, we turn to the initial wave (1995-1996) of the National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States (MIDUS). Using this dataset, we analyze a series of regression models that  examine present sexual experience in the combined context of physical and perceived health indicators. In order to capture differences in sexual experience and health by age, we also evaluate a similar set of models by categorical age cohorts.	Niveditha	 Menon	Latrica	E. Best
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Essentially Quantified? Towards a More Feminist Modelling Strategy	For decades, feminist theorists have made a clear and convincing case against the use of gender as a single analytic category. The treatment of gender as a single category has been robustly criticised for erroneously homogenising the experiences of women and for ignoring other important sources of variation that cut across gender in important and complex ways. Moreover, where multiple aspects of identity have been considered, researchers have been criticised for implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) treating multiple dimensions as additive and separable. Notwithstanding some notable exceptions, feminist demographers and quantitative social scientists continue to employ, often uncritically, methods that fail to address these concerns. This paper argues that feminist researchers need to pay greater attention to the assumptions that underlie their choice of method and the models they estimate. Additionally, the paper suggests the ways in which complexity or “intersectionality” might be better accommodated in gender-sensitive empirical work.	Wendy	 Sigle-Rushton	Diane	 Perrons
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Various Aspects of Fatherhood from a Gender Point of View: A Country Comparison - Austria, Germany, Finland, Hungary and Italy	In the context of changing gender relations and current low birth-rates in Europe, this paper emphasises the fathers’ contribution to family work. We compare five countries with different political and gender-specific backgrounds. The portrayals are based on the data in the Population Policy Acceptance Study. Research was addressed 1) changes in gender roles, 2) the influence of fathers on female labour participation and 3) fathers' influence on female attitudes towards desired fertility. The analyses are guided by the feministic hypothesis, according to which the responsibility of women during the reproductive field is decisive for their involvement in the labour market. The study is carried out by using univariate and multivariate statistics. The results show that the theory of the advance of the New Father is only partly true. Furthermore the presence of fathers in the family strengthens the traditional division of roles. Particularly low desired fertility is shown for men in the German-speaking area.	Mariam	Irene  Tazi-Preve	Jürgen	 Dorbritz
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Healthy Life Expectancy in People with and without Diabetes in Latin America and the Caribbean	This paper estimates diabetes-free life expectancy in Latin America and the Caribbean using data from two large surveys (SABE and MHAS). It also investigates the differences in total life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and disabled life expectancy between diabetics and non-diabetics. Results show that elderly individuals are expected to live a large proportion of their lives with diabetes. For example, men and women at age 60 in Mexico City can expect to live about 20% of their remaining years of life with diabetes. Data from Mexico show that diabetes reduces total and active life expectancy (at age 50) in eight years. Diabetics are also more likely to live a higher percentage of their lives with functional disability: disabled life expectancy (measured by activities of daily living) represents 17% of the remaining lives of diabetics and 12% of non-diabetics. Diabetes significantly shortens total and active life expectancy, which imposes considerable economic and social costs.	Flavia	 Andrade
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Retirement Patterns in Europe: The Effect of Health	This paper investigates the retirement decisions of older Europeans using a newly available pan-European dataset, the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). In particular, we analyze the role played by health factors and by social security and pension rules in shaping labor supply and retirement decisions. The preliminary results indicate that institutional differences in welfare systems clearly affect the distribution and age pattern of participation in the labor market and of retirement. In addition, we find that there is potentially huge unused labor capacity in countries such as Austria, Italy and France where “healthy” individuals are not in the labor force.	Enrica	 Croda	Agar	 Brugiavini	Franco	 Peracchi
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Lifestyle Risk Factors and Their Consequences among Older Adults in Mexico and the United States	We examine the determinants and consequences of lifestyle risk factors among older adults comparing the United States and Mexico. We focus on the determinants of: smoking tobacco, drinking alcohol, lack of physical activity, and overweight/obesity. We also investigate the consequences of these risk factors on: impaired physical activity, catastrophic health care needs (hospitalizations), and mortality. The research uses a conceptual framework incorporating the life course and economic model of health production. We use data from two-wave panels of the U.S. Health and Retirement Study 2000 and 2002, and the Mexican Health and Aging Study 2001 and 2003. We present a set of testable hypotheses for the cross-national comparison, descriptive analysis, and multivariate models of determinants and consequences of lifestyle risk factors. We follow with a discussion of results and implications for the likely burden of aging in countries in disparate stages of economic development.	Rebeca	 Wong	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Emily	M. Agree
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Revealing Patterns: A Cross-Country Analysis of the Gender Gap in Mortality	This study intends to uncover explanations of the different country-patterns of the gender gap in mortality (concerning life expectancy at birth). Throughout the 20th century, until the 1970s/1980s the mortality differences between women and men in developed countries were generally increasing  in favor of women. Since then four different patterns arose: a narrowing, a plateau, an increasing, and a roller-coaster pattern. In a first step the Human Mortality Database was used to calculate sex-specific life tables for 26 countries and to decompose the overall differences in life expectancy at birth between women and men into absolute and relative contributions of all single age groups. In a next step we seek to explain those country-specific differences, i.e. the four patterns mentioned above, by an in-depth analysis using SHARE (Survey on Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe) to understand what might be hidden behind those age patterns of the gender gap in mortality.	Nadine	 Zielonke
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	The Most Important Graph in the World: U.S. Life Cycle Deficits, 1888-2003	The life cycle deficit – the difference between consumption and income at each age – is a basic problem of social and economic organization, indicating who needs resources and who has them to give. This paper examines trends in life cycle deficits in the United States reaching back as far as the 19th century up to the present. Over this long period we see increasing deficits for older people as their labor income decreases and their own and Medicare’s spending on their health rises steadily. Deficits for the young rise in the most recent period because of later entry into the labor force for greater education. These deficits are financed through transfers from the labor income of working age people but also through borrowing and asset income. The application of age profiles to study the impacts of these trends is discussed.	Gretchen	 Donehower
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	Cohort Differences in Wealth and Pension Participation of Near-Retirees	As the baby-boomers approach retirement it is important to know how they will fare in retirement relative to earlier cohorts. Many social and economic changes have occurred during the last half of the twentieth century, changes that are likely to affect the retirement well being of recent cohorts in many ways. In this paper we compare retirement economic resources of two cohorts of near retirees. Particularly we look at people born in 1933-1939 who were 55-61 years old in 1994, and the more recent cohort consisting of people of the same age (55-61) in 2004 who were born in 1943-1949. In this study, we take a narrower view, and focus on only two potential income resources for retirement: total net worth and pension participation (a proxy for pension wealth). We use data from Health and Retirement Study.	Howard	 Iams	Irena	 Dushi
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	The Effect of Childlessness on the Economic Status of Elders	An increasing proportion of American adults are childless. If childless elders require greater income support, and childlessness continues to increase, financial demands on public programs will expand even faster than the rising dependency ratio alone would imply. The existence and size of any effects of childlessness on elders’ economic well-being have received little attention from researchers or policymakers. This study examines the relationship of childlessness to elders’ economic status, including income, poverty status, retirement assets, and use of Supplemental Security Income and Medicaid. It presents descriptive data on differences between childless elders and those with children, and regression models to better establish the net association between childlessness and each outcome. The Health and Retirement Survey provides the data.	Robert	D. Plotnick
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	Will Competing Objectives in Germany's Pension and Labor Market Policies Harm Women's Material Well-Being at Old Age?	Until recently, the German pension system assumed the typical German worker works full-time until retirement. Consequently, these workers received sufficiently high pensions during retirement to maintain approximately the same standard of living as when they worked. However, persistent unemployment that followed German reunification has led to reforms that promote so-called atypical low paid jobs and changes in unemployment compensation. Simultaneously, large demographic changes have prompted a sequence of pension reforms. These reforms will alter the level and composition of retirement income. Using a new dataset that merges administrative pension records with longitudinal household survey data, this paper investigates the effects of the confluence of demographic change, pension law reforms and atypical work exemptions on the retirement incomes of various demographic groups using event-history analysis. In particular, we ask whether these changes will undo the successes Germany has had in alleviating poverty amongst the elderly, and amongst elderly women in particular.	Anika	 Rasner	Marjorie	 McElroy
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Sexual Orientation, Earnings, and Occupational Choice	The sexual orientation wage gap is not the same for women and men. It is well-established in the economic literature that a while gay men tend to earn less than their heterosexual counterparts, lesbian women tend to earn more than their heterosexual peers. We use the 2000 Census and compare workers with same sex partners to married and cohabitating heterosexual workers. We show the sexual orientation wage gap varies greatly by age and heterosexual comparison group. We then examine the role occupational sorting plays in the sexual orientation wage differential, specifically sorting into occupations dominated by one sex. Using a DiNardo, Fortin, Lemieux decomposition we are able to estimate the effect of differential occupational sorting into heavily and lightly male dominated occupations in explaining the sexual orientation wage gap for both gays and lesbians.	Heather	 Antecol	Anneke	 Jong	Michael	D Steinberger
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Coresidential Stability among Same-Sex and Different-Sex Couples	Studies documenting numerous advantages to stable marriages and quality relationships explain why the indicators and outcomes of long-term relationship stability are of great interest to social scientists. The bulk of research on relationship stability and duration focuses on heterosexual couples. Many same-sex couples maintain long-term relationships, yet little is known about the degree to which these relationships provide similar advantages. This study uses data from Census 2000 (United States) to compare demographic and economic differences among three different coupling arrangements—different-sex married, different-sex unmarried, and same-sex couples—and explore how these differences correlate and perhaps predict long-term coresidential stability. Findings indicate broad similarity across couple types in predictors of stability. Notably, the odds of being in a long-term relationship relative to different-sex married couples are higher for same-sex couples living in states with sexual orientation anti-discrimination laws, suggesting that supportive social and legal climates do impact relationship stability in couples.	Gary	J. Gates
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Nontraditional Families and Childhood Grade Retention	This paper uses the massive sample size of the U.S. census to compare outcomes for children of different family types, specifically children of same-sex cohabiting couples with children of various types of families headed by heterosexual parents. This paper represents the first (as far as the author knows) large sample nationally representative study of the children of same-sex couples. The results show that heterosexual married couples are the family type whose children have the lowest rates of grade retention, but that the advantage of heterosexual married couples is mostly due to their higher SES. Children of same-sex couples have grade retention rates that are indistinguishable from the children of heterosexual cohabiting couples. In general, differences in grade retention rates between family types are modest. Children of all family types (including children of same-sex couples) have far lower grade retention rates than children living in group quarters. Some implications are discussed.	Michael	J. Rosenfeld
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Explaining Differences in Assortative Matching between Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Couples	Same-sex couples tend to be less homogamous than opposite-sex couples on a variety of characteristics, including age, education, and race/ethnicity. However, no study has systematically investigated the possible sources of these differences. We use data from the 1990 and 2000 censuses to investigate several hypotheses. One possibility is that same-sex couples are less homogamous than opposite-sex couples because there are fewer potential partners from which to choose. Another possibility is that if individuals choose homogamous relationships to ensure that their characteristics are passed on to their children, then differences in expected fertility may explain the lower odds of homogamy among same-sex couples. Finally, same-sex couples may be less homogamous than opposite-sex couples because they are more geographically mobile and thus subject to lower levels of parental influence over their choice of mates.	Christine	R. Schwartz	Nikki	L. Graf
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Is There a Deadline for Parenthood? An Example from Poland	The postponement of childbearing occurs universally across Europe and U.S.A., but still the paths of this trend differ profoundly from country to country. In Poland, similarly to other Central and Eastern European countries, women have their first child still at the relatively early ages. This paper asks the question about the role of the age norms in sustaining the pattern of early motherhood. We investigate young adults’ perceptions of age, in relation to their fertility choices. We find that the age is indeed a salient dimension that structures and regulates individual childbearing plans. The qualitative approach of our study allows for gaining insights in how the age norms are explained, argued about and sanctioned. We also reconstruct the mechanisms of the normative influence of the age limits (deadlines) on the fertility behaviour. Thus, the study not only improves our understanding of the timing of childbearing but also contributes to the general discussion on the age norms.	Monika	 Mynarska
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Becoming Parent in a Post-Communist Society: An Analysis of Ideational Factors	The move from an early fertility to a new, late fertility model is characteristic for each post-communist societies including the Hungarian one, and is the basic reason for low period fertility. The offered approaches explaining the changes, such as the second demographic transition theory, the economic crisis hypothesis, the disorderliness approach, can be located in a space stretching between structural and cultural explanations. Using two waves of an ongoing follow-up survey, we will be able to show “selection” effects of cultural factors on childbearing behaviour and at the same time control for some structural factors. The effects of religiosity, child related norms (ideal age and ideal number of children), individualism- and anomia-scale, and optimism are analysed in our models. Using parallel logistic regression models for male and female respondents, we could show and compare influences of ideational factors.	Zsolt	 Spéder	Balázs	 Kapitány
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	The Importance of Social Context in the Formation of Teenagers' Value of Children: Social Class and Rural Urban Differences in Taiwan	This paper examines how teenagers' values may be shaped by the immediate social context with special reference to social class and rural urban background. The locus of study is Taiwan, a society with drastic declining birth rates in recent years. It is hypothesized that teenagers’ fertility values of having children (or positive values) and not having children (or negative values) are accounted for by the individual, familial and social contextual factors. Data are taken from an island-wide sample of first year senior high students. Field survey was administered from winter of 2005 to early spring of 2006.  The analysis shows that three dimensions can be extracted, with emotional values the most important, followed by physical and social values. Results also indicate that social contextual factors and individual factors contribute to the formation of positive VOC among Taiwanese teenagers. The importance of social context is thus supported.	Chin-Chun	 Yi
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Health Services, Childbearing Beliefs, and Sterilization	The macro-micro link is a fundamental component of sociological theory and empirical research. This paper investigates the relationship between specific dimensions of health services and individuals’ childbearing beliefs and behaviors to help illuminate the mechanisms through which social context influences individual’s behavior. I construct a new theoretical framework that explicitly illustrates how specific dimensions of health services effect behavior and provide new information on the social-psychological mechanisms through which social context influences individual behavior by examining the relationship between health services and attitudes. My investigation focuses on a setting in rural Nepal that experienced dramatic social, economic, and demographic changes over the course of current residents’ lives. Findings reveal (1) social-psychological mechanisms are a key piece of the social context-individual behavior link; and (2) multiple characteristics of health services exhibit independent effects on childbearing beliefs.	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Consistency in the Reporting of Sexual Behavior: An Analysis of an Interview Mode Experiment in São Paulo, Brazil	This paper examines data from a study evaluating home-  versus clinic-based screening and diagnosis for STIs among over 800 women visiting a clinic in São Paulo, Brazil. In addition to random assignment to home or clinic screening for STIs, women were randomized at enrollment to either a face-to-face interviewer-administered survey or an audio-computer assisted self-interview. The enrollment interview included basic questions on the participant’s background, reproductive behavior, sexual behavior, contraceptive use, and prior STIs. At the six week follow-up interview, which was conducted with the computer for all participants, many of the same questions on sexual behavior, partners, and condom use were repeated as were questions on births, pregnancies, and abortion. The objectives of this paper are to investigate the consistency in reporting of sexual behavior at the enrollment interview by interview mode as well as consistency in reporting between enrollment and the six-week follow-up by interview mode.	Barbara	S. Mensch	Paul	C. Hewett	Heidi	 Jones	Carla	 Gianni Luppi	Sheri	A. Lippman	Adriana	 Pinho	Juan	 Diaz
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Research Power and Confidentiality Issues Associated with Combining Data Sets	Considerable benefits are associated with electronically linked datasets for demographic, biomedical and health researchers. Although such databases have substantial benefits, the public’s concern about misuse and the need for appropriate safeguards have sparked national discussions. This paper addresses some of the issues that are associated with combining or linking data sets for demographic research and how they can be addressed. It focuses on the challenges and solutions regarding the relationship with the data contributor. The development of research resources or centers to take the role of linking data sets for research use is explored. The Utah Population Database (UPDB) is used as an example of one possible way to approach these issues. It has existed for over 30 years and has a long history of developing policies and procedures that address such issues. It provides access to about 9 million records and supports 65 projects.	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Jean	E.  Wylie
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Ethics in Demographic Survey Research: Is the Minimal Risk Approach Sufficient in the Indian Context?	In the Indian context, health research involving human subjects is guided by two guidelines, the ICMR guidelines for biomedical research and the NCESSRH guidelines for social science research in health. These guidelines list four major principles of ethical research that are relevant for the protection of human subjects; the principles of autonomy, non-malficience, beneficence and justice. However, much of demographic research in India consists of surveys that are considered minimal risk research and therefore subjected to expedited review processes. Is the assumption of minimal risk tenable in all circumstances? This paper attempts to explore the potential for harm to human subjects who participate in such surveys in terms of violation of these four major ethical principles. It also proposes some possible remedies in keeping with the ideas based on the Certificates of Confidentiality under the U.S. – Common Federal Regulations and the Census of India Act of 1948.	Mala	 Ramanathan	Sajitha	 OG
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Census Confidentiality under the Second War Powers Act (1942-1947)	The Second War Powers Act was enacted in March 1942. One section of this law authorized the Secretary of Commerce to provide information to other Government agencies, including micro data collected under a pledge of confidentiality, if the data were needed “for use in connection with the conduct of the war.” The extent to which this provision was actually used has been disputed.    This paper, based on recent research, provides evidence of specific disclosures made between 1942 and 1947 of micro data collected by the Census Bureau under the confidentiality assurances of Title 13. The examples cited pertain to both businesses and persons, including micro-level information on persons obtained from the 1940 Census. Based on the materials so far located, it appears that Census Bureau staff and management considered such disclosures to be routine. The paper places these disclosures in the context of broader issues related to statistical confidentiality.	William	 Seltzer	Margo	 Anderson
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Disclosure Risk of Contextual Data: The Role of Identified Geography, Spatial Scale, and Nesting of Information in Public-Use Files	This project investigates the ways that contextual data associated with individual-level data in a dataset relate to disclosure risk. Analyzing an array of contextual data at different spatial scales, I simulate models to measure the likelihood of pinpointing geographic location under various distributional scenarios. Specifically, I investigate how disclosure risk for geographic units is affected by (1) spatial scale; (2) providing contextual data at multiple geographic levels; and (3) identifying region and state. Using individual geographic units as well as the “test data collection” as my units of analysis, the amount of disclosure risk as the outcome of interest, and associated experimental traits (e.g., masking technique), descriptive statistics, maps, and multivariate analyses are produced. As expected, disclosure risk increases when the geographic scope of a study is constrained to a sub-national level. Reidentification increases with the spatial scale of contextual data and is compounded when data is provided at multiple scales.	Kristine	 Witkowski
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Trajectories of Couple Relationship Quality after Childbirth: Does Marriage Matter?	This paper uses new data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to examine trajectories in couple relationship quality subsequent to the birth of a child in large U.S. cities. Using latent growth curve modeling, I analyze the level and change in couple relationship quality from the time of birth through five years later, including factors associated with improvement or decline. I compare couples who were married versus unmarried at birth. Then, among those who had a nonmarital birth, I compare those who got married versus those who remained together but did not legally marry. This research sheds light on the extent to which marriage may yield beneficial effects for families with children and has implications for current policy efforts to enhance relationship skills and encourage marriage.	Marcia	J. Carlson
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Economic Disadvantage and Relationship Outcomes among Married Couples	The strong association between economic disadvantage and marital dissolution risks is well documented, but there has been practically no research on why poverty makes it more difficult to sustain marital relationships. In this paper, we use longitudinal data on 4,000 married couples from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to explore the role of economic disadvantage. An initial step in the analysis is to construct two multidimensional indices measuring disadvantage at the couple- and neighborhood-level. Using a regression decomposition technique, the main analysis assesses the degree to which economic disadvantage (1) is associated directly with a wide range of factors hypothesized to affect marital outcomes and (2) moderates the effects of these factors on marital happiness, divorce disinclination, and marital stability. This study is the first, to our knowledge, to explore formally the connections between economic disadvantage and marriage outcomes.	David	J. Fein	Daniel	B. Gubits	Futoshi	 Yumoto
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Welfare to Work and Marriage? How the Transition from Welfare to Work Influences Relationships between Unmarried Parents	While researchers have devoted a great deal of attention to whether welfare influences marriage, they have rarely evaluated how welfare participation and transitions can impact relationship quality. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, this article shows that even though there is a high degree of stability in reports of relationship quality, welfare and employment transitions are associated with changes in both objective and subjective indicators of parental relationship quality. In turn, relationship quality is a highly significant predictor of transitions into marriage and relationship dissolution. However, relationship quality serves as only a modest mediator between employment/welfare transitions and relationship status outcomes. These results suggest that parental relationship quality may be sensitive to welfare and employment transitions in the post-welfare reform era, above and beyond changes in marital or relationship status, but that substantial improvement in relationship quality may be difficult to achieve through policy interventions.	Laura	M. Tach
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Family Structure Changes and Maternal Health Trajectories	Recent trends in births to unmarried parents and the instability surrounding their relationships raise concerns about parental and child well-being when these relationships dissolve. Of particular interest is whether families might be better off if parents married, as current government policies suggest. Using the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWS) we examine trajectories of mental and physical health among mothers, specifically focusing on transitions into and out of residential relationships with the child’s biological father. Mothers who remain married have better mental and physical health than continuously cohabiting or continuously single mothers. For coresident parents at birth, exiting this relationship increases mental health problems and decreases self-rated health. No difference is found for exit from marriage versus exit from cohabitation. For non-residential parents, entering a residential relationship is beneficial for both mental and physical health, but the size of this impact decreases as the child ages.	Sarah	O. Meadows	Sara	 McLanahan	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	Demographic Change and Future Carbon Emissions in China and India	This paper investigates whether expected changes in demographic characteristics of Chinese and Indian households over the next 25-50 years could have a substantial influence on consumption, economic growth, total energy demand, and carbon dioxide emissions, an important greenhouse gas. We develop new household projections for China and India intended to bracket a wide range of plausible outcomes for changes in population size, urban/rural status, age structure, and household size. Benchmark demand for consumer goods, supplies of labor, and capital, are estimated from household surveys and production data for each country. A global energy-economic growth model is used to simulate consumption of various goods, direct and indirect energy demand, and carbon emissions. Effects of demographic change are compared under different scenarios to technical change over the time horizon of analysis. Results show how demographic heterogeneity in China and India could affect future energy use and carbon emissions in these countries.	Michael	 Dalton	Leiwen	 Jiang	Shonali	 Pachauri	Brian	C. O'Neill
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	The Costs of Decentralization: Water Quality Spillovers from the Re-Drawing of County Boundaries in Brazil	We examine the effect of political decentralization on pollution levels in Brazilian rivers. Upstream water use has spillover effects on downstream jurisdictions; greater decentralization (e.g. a larger number of political jurisdictions managing the same river) may exacerbate these spillovers, as upstream communities have fewer incentives to restrain their members from polluting the river at their borders. We use a panel dataset of over 21,000 water quality measures collected at 795 monitoring stations located in all eight river basins across Brazil and the evolving boundaries of the 5500 counties across Brazil to study (a) whether water quality degrades across jurisdictional boundaries, and (b) whether the splitting of counties (i.e. greater decentralization) is associated with larger deterioration in water quality over time. We find that an additional county border crossing leads to a 29% larger decline in water quality after controlling for population levels.	Molly	 Lipscomb	Mushfiq	 Mobarak
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	The U.S. Population and Its Environmental Consequences: At 300 Million, Do the Numbers Count?	This paper examines U.S. population trends (including growth, density, movement, composition or make up) and per capita patterns of resource consumption, and how they effect the nation's environment, ecosystems, natural resources, air, land and water. The newly released U.S. National Report on Population and the Environment is  among the documents used as a discussion document. The new report is a detailed, balanced, easy-to-understand, science-based analysis of major population trends in the U.S. and how they impact the environment, including air, land, water and species. It looks at national, regional and state/local population trends (including growth, density, movement, and per capita resource consumption) and their specific population-environmental impacts. The report is part of a series produced by the Center for Environment and Population (CEP).	Vicky	 Markham	Martha	 Farnsworth Riche
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	Population Growth and Environmental Degradation in India	This paper examines the relationship of population to the environment.  With a growing population, poverty and urbanization is degrading the environment.  An analysis of changes and trends over last fifty years was conducted. The study reveals that the country's population growth is imposing an increasing burden on the country's limited and continually degrading natural resource base. The natural resources are under increasing strain, even though the majority of people survive at subsistence level. Population pressure on arable land contributes to the land degradation. The increasing population numbers and growing affluence have already resulted in rapid growth of energy production and consumption in India. The environmental effects like ground water and surface water contamination; air pollution and global warming are of growing concern to increasing consumption levels. The paper concludes with some policy reflections, the policy aimed at overall development should certainly include efforts to control population and environmental pollution.	Dewaram	A. Nagdeve
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Does Economic Growth Reduce Fertility? The Indian Green Revolution Experience.	A simple economic model is used to structure an empirical analysis of fertility decision-making using a newly available panel data set that constitutes a representative sample of rural India over the period 1971-1999.  The results provide strong support for the importance of increases in the value of time of women and of technical change-induced investments in child schooling that accompany economic growth in accounting for fertility decline, with little role for parental schooling. In particular, we find that aggregate wage changes, dominated by increases in the value of female wages, explain 39% of the decline in fertility over the 1982-1999 period. In combination, changes in agricultural productivity and agricultural wage rates explain fully 80% of the decline.  In summary, the Indian demographic revolution appears to have in large part resulted from, rather than just accompanied, the green revolution.	Andrew	 Foster	Mark	R.  Rosenzweig
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Poverty and Fertility Decline in Rural Pakistan: Results of a Longitudinal Study in Punjab and NWFP.	Since the late 1980’s, fertility has been falling rapidly in Pakistan. Moreover, in the past five years, poverty rates have also been falling, although recent estimates show that about one third of the population remains below the poverty line. In this paper, we plan to use longitudinal data on women of reproductive age collected in 1997 and 2004 in rural Punjab and Northwest Fronter Province (NWFP) to understand some of the factors which may underlie changes in both aspirations and behavior related to fertility in recent years. In addition to examining the complex relationship between changes in economic status along multiple dimensions (e.g. consumption, income and experience of economic shocks) and family building behavior, we consider the recent availability of door to door contraceptives, as well as rising aspirations in a context of globalization and expanded schooling opportunities for children.	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Zeba	A. Sathar	Cynthia	B. Lloyd
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Fertility Transition in the Developing World: Progress or Stagnation?	Over the past quarter century fertility has declined at a rapid pace in many developing countries. Projections typically assume that this trend will continue until the replacement level is reached. However, recent evidence suggests that ongoing declines may have slowed or stalled in a number of countries. The objective of this study is to examine the pace of recent fertility changes in the developing world to determine whether ongoing transitions are accelerating or decelerating. Levels and trends in six indicators of reproductive behavior are examined using data from DHS surveys. The main finding is that the average pace of decline in fertility is lower ca. 2000 than in the mid 1990s. A deceleration of the pace of decline is particularly evident in sub-Saharan Africa. The study concludes with an assessment of implications for future trends in fertility.	John	 Bongaarts
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Falling and Stalling	This paper uses data from the Demographic and Health Surveys that have been carried out in sub-Saharan Africa to:  1) examine the current status of fertility transition in the region, including the extent to which fertility decline has stalled;  2) study the links between contraceptive use, fertility preferences, and socioeconomic development (as reflected in women's education, infant and child survival, and real economic growth), on the one hand, and fertility decline and stalling, on the other; and  3) assess prospects for fertility decline in the region.    We focus on results from the 25 countries that have had multiple Demographic and Health Surveys, since these data, representing over 80 percent of the region's population, provide direct evidence on fertility transition within individual countries. While fertility decline is being experienced in the majority of countries, there are several countries exhibiting stalling of fertility decline, some in mid-transition and others in early transition.	David	 Shapiro	Tesfayi	 Gebreselassie
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Familyhood and Low Fertility in Italy in Comparative Perspective	This paper deals with the relation between strong family ties and reproductive behavior in contemporary Italy. Central to the analysis is the theoretical concept of “familyhood”   (famiglianza), term which expresses the sense of identity provided by being part of a social group of relatives. In particular, we examine the interdependencies between family exchanges and family formation in the two Italian regions of Sardinia and Emilia Romagna, two regions which are characterized by long term divergences in reproductive   behavior and gender role patterns. We use a multi methods approach, taking advantage of two large and regional representative surveys (Famiglie e Soggetti Sociali 1998 and 2003) and rich ethnographic data collected in 2004-5 in the main cities of the two regions. In all datasets both partners are interviewed. First results focus on the differences in the patterns of exchange among family members, the meaning attributed to them and   to family relations in general	Laura	 Bernardi	Alessandra	 Gribaldo	Anna	 Oppo
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Marital and Reproductive Behavior in Italy after 1990: Bridging the Gap with Western Europe?	During 1980-95, Italy shared with most of developed countries, the increasing age at first marriage and the decreasing fertility. On the other hand, behaviors that questioned the centrality of marriage were hardly widespread: cohabitation and out-of-wedlock births did not increase nor did marital separation become common. Moreover, fertility decreased at the lowest level in the world. In this paper we discuss if these Italian “anomalies” are disappearing. Is Italy moving toward marital and reproductive models already quite widespread in most other developed countries? In particular, we observe if in Italy after 1990, cohabitation and marital separations became more pervasive and if the recent increase in fertility may be an indicator of more considerable future changes. The main result is that the gap is bridging, mainly if some northern and central regions of Italy are considered.	Gianpiero	 Dalla Zuanna	Maria	 Castiglioni
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	New Empirical Evidence on the Low Fertility Trap Hypothesis	Recent studies have suggested the existence of a Low Fertility Trap, a downward spiral in the level of fertility for those countries falling below a possible threshold level (Lutz and Skirbekk, 2005; Lutz, Skribekk and Testa, forthcoming). The three main mechanisms that could lead the trap are: negative demographic momentum, declines in ideal family size as a consequence of low actual fertility in the generation before, and declining relative income of young couples. The paper aims to provide further evidence supporting the existence of these self-reinforcing mechanisms by looking at the new data from the Eurobarometer Survey conducted in 2006 and from the Luxembourg Income Study. Preliminary results show that the ideal family size of young women and men in the Southern European countries has been slightly declining over the last five years, as predicted by the low fertility trap. This finding is carefully analyzed in the paper.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Fertility Decline in Brazil and México: Tempo, Quantum and Parity Composition Effects	Fertility studies in Brazil and Mexico are, in general, limited to the analysis of traditional measures, most because of the birth registration low quality and the absence of good birth histories. The investigation of alternative measures is becoming more important as fertility reaches lower levels. Miranda-Ribeiro & Rios-Neto present two birth history reconstruction methodologies and determine the one that produces better results to the Brazilian case. This methodology also produced good results when applied to the 2000 Mexican Census. The birth histories data allow the determination of period alternative measures, including those derived from fertility tables and the adjusted measure proposed by the Köhler & Ortega Method. The main purpose of this paper is to create and compare series of period fertility measures for Brazil and Mexico, focused on the study of tempo and parity composition effects.	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Adriana	 Miranda-Ribeiro
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Hindu-Muslim Differentials in Infant and Child Survival in India: Some Unexpected Findings	Several researchers have commented on the higher fertility of Muslims than Hindus in India, even after adding many socioeconomic controls. Given known fertility-mortality interactions, for this reason alone, one would expect infant and child mortality to also be higher among Muslims, an expectation buttressed by the fact that Muslim women also display so many other predictors of high child mortality - relatively low levels of education, greater social conservatism and larger levels of poverty. But infant and child mortality rates are significantly lower among Muslims, whether one is looking at different states, urban and rural areas separately, over time, and indeed even in populations of Hindu or Muslim origin in Europe. To understand this intriguing finding, we analyze data from the second round of the Indian NFHS. We also look for hints in the qualitative literature on religious differences in norms and practices related to childbearing and childrearing.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu	Lindy	 Williams	Deladem	 Kusi-Appouh
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Explaining the Russian Mortality Paradox	In the former Soviet republics of Central Asia, ethnic Russians have exhibited higher adult mortality than native ethnic groups (Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Uzbek, etc.) in spite of their higher socio-economic status. This ethnic mortality differential has even widened since the break-up of the Soviet Union. The most common explanation for this paradox, which we term the Russian mortality paradox, is that deaths are better reported among ethnic Russians. In this paper, we use detailed mortality data from Kyrgyzstan between 1959 and 1999 to evaluate the different explanations for the Russian mortality paradox: (1) data artifacts; (2) migration effects; (3) cultural effects. We find that the most plausible explanation is the cultural hypothesis, because the personal behaviors that generate the observed adult mortality differentials (alcohol consumption, in particular) seem to be closely tied to cultural practices. We examine the implications of this finding for understanding the health crisis in post-Soviet states.	Michel	 Guillot	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Tetyana	 Pudrovska
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	The Effects of Education and Nativity on Cause-Specific Older Age Mortality in Taiwan	Comparisons of migrants vs. native populations have become increasingly important as a means of gaining insight into the factors affecting health and mortality levels and the relationship between them. Taiwan underwent a unique migration in 1949-50, as more than a million people, mostly young males, arrived from Mainland China following the Communist civil war victory. The Mainlanders are distinct in several ways: they represented different provinces in China than the original settlers, were better educated, and had distinct occupational profiles. Since 1950, Taiwan has experienced a rapid demographic transition and notable economic development, resulting in mortality decline. In this paper, we generate age- and cause-specific death rates circa 1990 by education and nativity to evaluate the relative importance of each factor. We also use time series data on mortality and survey data to help interpret the differentials in terms of selection, risk factors, and other dynamics of health and mortality.	Albert	 Hermalin	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Cathy	 Sun	I-Wen	 Liu
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Mortality Experience of Tsimane Amerindians of Bolivia: Regional Variation, Temporal Trends and Epidemiological Transition	This paper examines mortality patterns among the Tsimane, small-scale forager-horticulturalists from lowland Bolivia. We compare age-specific mortality in remote versus acculturated regions and examine changes among all age groups and by sex over the past fifty years. Villages in remote regions show 2-4 times higher mortality from infancy until middle adulthood than in the acculturated region. Overall life expectancy at birth improved by 8 years from 45 to 53 after 1990. Over half of all deaths are due to respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. Accidents and violence account for a quarter of all deaths. Unlike typical patterns described by epidemiologic transition theory, we find a much larger period reduction of death rates during middle and late adulthood than during infancy or childhood. We hypothesize that that this pattern is due to differential access to medical interventions, a continued lack of public health infrastructure and cultural beliefs concerning sickness and dying.	Hillard	S. Kaplan	Michael	D. Gurven
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Epistemology and Epidemiology: Local Interpretations of AIDS Epidemiology in Rural Malawi	In this paper we use a rich set of ethnographic journals collected in rural Malawi to examine understandings of the epidemiology of STIs and HIV. The journals vividly show Malawians publicly and urgently grappling with epidemiology of the new and confusing disease. In their local social networks, people ask each other why some people known to be promiscuous have died, while others known to be equally promiscuous are still alive? How can it be that an innocent wife dies before her philandering husband? Is sex once with an infected person inevitably fatal? We find that between the first journals in 1999 and the present, some of these questions have been resolved; others remain puzzling. We also compare current interpretations of the epidemiology of HIV with what is accepted objectively, on the basis of medical research, to be its natural history.	Gigi	 Santow	Susan	 Watkins	Michael	D. Bracher
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Sexual Behavior and Vulnerability to HIV among Brazilian Heterosexual Population	This paper investigates sexual behavior among Brazilian heterosexual population and how it defines men's and women’s degree of vulnerability to HIV. Vulnerability is defined by the association of the pattern of exposure to risk of HIV infection and the ability to answer (which includes both the individual skills to prevent infection and the change of behavior). Methodologically, the study inter-relates quantitative and qualitative approaches. Grade of Membership (GoM) analysis was used to build a vulnerability typology for a sample of 3068 self-identified heterosexual individuals aged 16 to 65 years. Types of more interest were: “circumstantially not exposed individuals”, “highly exposed individuals with high ability to answer”, and “exposed individuals with low ability to answer”. The latest group exhibited the highest degree of vulnerability and was further investigated by using in-depth interviews. Findings are useful to comprehend how the interplay among gender patterns, sexual behavior, and vulnerability to HIV infection.	Junia	 Quiroga	Neuma	 Aguiar	Diana	 Sawyer
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Fatal Attraction: A Qualitative Study of Western Male Clients of Sex Workers in Thailand	Globally, young women are trafficked into sex-work to meet the demand of clients. The sex industry would not exist without the demand-side which has had limited research. Consequently, the characteristics of clients are almost unknown.     This paper explores the perceptions of Western male clients of female sex-workers in Thailand to gain an understanding of the demand-side of the sex industry. This qualitative study took place in entertainment venues in Thailand.     The study identified factors common to clients of sex-workers: fulfillment of masculine roles, social and sexual acceptance and supply of sex-work. Findings suggest clients’ need to assert masculine identity through power and control over the sex-worker and the need to feel accepted.     Clients seek extremely unequal relationships in order to fulfill masculine hierarchal roles. In most cases, these men cannot fulfill these roles in their own countries. The socio-cultural context plays a crucial role in the encouragement of this problem.	Rosanne	M. Rushing	Juan	Manuel  Contreras
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Redefining Vulnerabilities: A Study of Men Having Sex with Men in the Wake of HIV Epidemic in Mumbai, India	Evidence shows that the HIV has narrowed down the space between risky and safe practices. The paper captures the concepts of sexuality and sexual health among the males having sex with males (MSM) and the social externalities that determine their behaviour. This paper argues that to arrest this menace, a new paradigm is required that accords greater acceptance to sexual realities based on deconstruction of sexual identities. It also addresses both the structural and biological factors construct sexual identities and choices. The study was carried out among 160 MSMs selected from 10 different cruising points in Mumbai. It shows that the MSMs do not reveal their actual sexual identity to family members and society. Due to this hidden identity the MSM cannot take the real advantage of counselling, testing and treatment. At the end, the paper suggests developing an effective institutional mechanism to redress the problems faced by the MSM.	Ashish	 Kumar Mishra	Arun	 Kumar Sharma
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Graves and the Family in Japan	In this study, first historical trends of graves in Japan was analyzed– how the idea of a traditional family grave was socially constructed and was transformed reflecting changes in demography, society, culture, and families. Then considering modernization theories and their constructive criticisms, hypotheses were framed to test how three salient factors, generation, gender, and the place of residence, have affected people’s expectations about burial partners in contemporary Japan. The analysis of JGSS-2001 data supported these hypotheses. Although the majority of people chose graves with succession across generations, younger generations were more likely to support diversified graves than are older generations. This difference was greater for women than for men, and those who live in urban areas than rural areas.	Kimiko	 Tanaka
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Attitudes and Behaviours of Family Formation: The Consequences of Parental Divorce	There is a considerable literature on the effects parental divorce has on several child outcomes such as age at marriage, marriage stability, cohabitation and attitudes toward divorce.   Such literature is much less wide where prevalence of divorce has remained relatively low and therein lay the seeds of the lack of studies on children of separated couples. This happens in Italy, even though in the recent past, we observed a rapid increase of separations also in this country where the phenomenon is acquiring social relevance. Moreover, Italian context is largely different from U.S., and this can bring about some differences in the effect of parental divorce on children. For instance, Italy is well known for its late transition to adulthood, in such a context is still true that parental divorce makes children marry earlier? In this work we analyze these questions using data from a national survey conducted in 2003.	Fausta	 Ongaro	Stefano	 Mazzuco
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Cross-Cohort Changes in Attitudes about Intimate Relationships: Growing Liberalization or Polarization?	As once uncommon behaviors become more mainstream, their meaning and significance may change. This paper explores whether young adults' views of marital permanency, cohabitation, and adolescent sexuality have changed in the past few decades. Data are from waves 1 and 3 of the National Survey of Families and Households. We examine individuals who are single, cohabiting, and married at the time they were interviewed. Married couples are disaggregated into those who did and did not cohabit with their spouse. Preliminary results reveal growing liberalization towards living together, though young adults coming of age in the early years of the 21st century also express more conservative views regarding marital permanency and teen non-marital sexuality. Current cohabitors express the most liberal views at both time periods, while those who married without first cohabiting adhere to the most conservative attitudes. We find evidence of increasing polarization of family views.	Amanda	J. Miller
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	The Political Significance of the Second Demographic Transition(SDT) in the U.S. : A Spatial Analysis	To what degree can political outcomes at the level of counties be predicted on the basis of the new patterns of household formation, commonly referred to as the Second Demographic Transition dimension (SDT)?     Dependent variables are: Presidential election of 2004, same sex marriage amendments in 24 states (2004+), and the 2006 Missouri stem cell referendum. The SDT predictor is the principal component of several indices related to marriage and parenthood postponement, subreplacement fertility, and cohabitation.    Controls include socio-economic variables (income, education, urbanity), cultural variables (percentages Evangelical/Mormon and Catholic) and ethnicity (percentages Black, Hispanic).    The spatial correlations between the voting outcomes and the SDT-dimension are strikingly high and resistant for ALL controls. This suggests that the spatial differentiation according to household formation is a significant and non-redundant predictor of political outcomes particularly when related to the so called Culture War.    Color maps available on www.sdt.psc.isr.umich.edu/ Both convential maps and Gastner-Newman cartograms.	Ron	J. Lesthaeghe	Lisa	J. Neidert	Didier	 Willaert
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	A Tale of Two Cities: Residential Context and the Health-Risk Behaviors of Latino Adolescents in Los Angeles and Chicago	This analysis explores the possibility that residential location alters the adaptive trajectories of Latino youth in two different metropolitan areas. The data for the analysis come from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (LAFANS) and the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN). We estimate the effects of individual, family, and neighborhood-level influences on two scales of adolescent health risk-behaviors (substance use and delinquency). We find that in Los Angeles, residence in communities with high levels of Latino co-ethnics is associated with higher odds of substance use and delinquency, particularly for U.S.-born Latinos. In Chicago, a different pattern appears whereby residence in communities with a high concentration of non-Latino Black residents increases the odds of substance use and delinquency for U.S.-born Latinos. We conclude that both sets of results illustrate the negative effects of segregation and concentrated disadvantage for Latino children of immigrants.	Reanne	 Frank
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Adaptation and Immigrant-Native Disparities in Obesity among Older Americans	We explore how the immigrant-native gap in obesity changes over time and address limitations of previous health assimilation studies by utilizing panel data containing immigrants’ country of origin. We use growth curve modeling to analyze six waves of the Health and Retirement Survey, a nationally representative study of individuals aged 51-61 in 1992. Our multivariate results do not support a uniform pattern of negative adaptation to the U.S.  Immigrants from Asia, Europe, and Canada/Australia/New Zealand are significantly less likely to be obese than natives at baseline, while Mexican immigrants are more likely to be obese. With the exception of Asian immigrants, both natives and immigrants experience higher obesity by 2002. However, the rate of change is the same for all groups except Central American immigrants, who have a slightly faster rate of change than natives. Among immigrants, duration of time in the U.S. is not significant net of origin country.	Melonie	P. Heron	Katrina	M. Walsemann	Robert	 Schoeni
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	Acculturation and Diet among Mexican-American Women: Findings from the 2000 National Health Interview Survey	There is a growing literature that acculturation of Hispanic persons in the U.S. corresponds with health behaviors. Diet is a key health behavior whose directional association with acculturation is inconclusive. Understanding the true association is fundamental for developing a comprehensive picture of the behavioral changes that can accompany acculturation, and the health outcomes these may engender. We use data from the 2000 National Health Interview Survey to investigate the relationship between acculturation and diet among Mexican-American women. We incorporate two proxy measures of acculturation – nativity and a language composite – to predict dietary intake. Our results demonstrate that women born in Mexico and women with lower levels of language acculturation have healthier dietary intakes, and that the proxy measures are uniquely related to intake estimates. These findings should inform public health efforts concerning Mexican-American women. Furthermore, our findings underscore the importance of incorporating both acculturation measures in similar research.	Jennifer	Karas Montez	Karl	 Eschbach
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	Disentangling Mental Health, Immigrant Adaptation, and Selection: A Natural Experiment Approach	International migration is associated with a wide range of negative mental health outcomes among Southeast Asian immigrants to the U.S. The inherent stress of adapting to an especially foreign environment appears implicated; and it is widely held that successful adaptation (or acculturation) to the new setting will moderate these links between stress and poor mental health outcomes. A central problem with this paradigm is that the data employed to evaluate it often come from clinic populations; and nearly always consist of post-migration measures of outcomes and predictors, which beg the role of pre-migration attributes. Our approach to this dilemma is to employ a “natural experiment” research design, which involves comparisons of a wide range of mental health outcomes for three population-based samples of Vietnamese immigrants, never-leavers, and returnees. A central focus is the effect of social network, acculturation, and selection factors on several key dimensions of immigrant mental health.	Mark	 VanLandingham	Hongyun	 Fu
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Consequences of Unwanted Childbearing: A Study of Child Outcomes in Bangladesh	The assumption that unwanted childbearing has a wide array of detrimental consequences is an important justification for investment in family planning services. Existing empirical research suggests that such detrimental consequences are substantial. But this research, particularly studies in low-income non-Western settings, is suspect due to shortcomings in measurement (reliance on retrospective reports of the wantedness of births that are of questionable validity) and in statistical modeling (estimation of models that fail to account for effects of omitted family-level variables). The objective of this paper is to assess the consequences of unwanted childbearing using exceptional longitudinal data from two rural districts in Bangladesh. In these data, children are classified as wanted versus unwanted on the basis of prospective fertility preferences. Other advantages of this research include the large size of the sample of children and the measurement of sex-specific preferences.	Satvika	 Chalasani	Michael	 Koenig
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Is Birth Weight on the Causal Pathway to Infant Mortality: Maternal Age?	It is a common theoretical view that (low) birth weight is a correlate of adverse birth outcomes but not on the direct, causal pathway to infant mortality. On the other hand, U.S. national policy for reducing infant mortality is to reduce low birth weight. The development of covariate density defined mixtures of logistic regression, a non-linear structural equation like model, allows a formal test of this issue. This paper determines if maternal age influences birth outcomes directly, and/or indirectly through birth weight in four populations. The results indicate that a) maternal age has direct effects on infant mortality, b) maternal age influences the birth weight distribution, but c) the effects on birth weight have no effect on mortality, that is the birth weight specific mortality curve shifts to compensate for changes in the birth weight distribution. This is consistent with the theoretical view that birth weight may not be causal.	Timothy	B. Gage	Fu	 Fang	Erin	 O'Neill	Howard	 Stratton
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Maternity Timing, Wealth Accumulation, and Economic Well Being in Retirement	Given that the United States’ recent history is marked by the large scale entry of women into the workforce and large changes in employer pension plans, family planning impacts should be expected. During the past 30 years, large and simultaneous changes to both family and retirement planning have emerged. This paper which considers fertility and savings choices in the context of these changes. We consider how household structure, household wealth, labor force participation, and pension type relate to fertility and its timing empirically. We estimate the impact of fertility on life-cycle savings in a Defined Contribution environment using a simulation tuned to reflect the characteristics of initial empirical work. After considering the positive empirical evidence, we address the normative issue of optimal fertility within a life-cycle model which incorporates both fertility and savings for old age, and the possibility of fertility impacts for U.S. public pension finance.	Jason	S. Seligman	Yoko	 Mimura
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Timing of Childbearing and Disability in Older Age	Fertility is central to the life experiences of women. As such, it has consequences for all aspects of their lives and implications for their long-term well-being, yet how fertility matters in the later years is relatively unknown. Using data on a nationally representative cohort of women in the United States, I examine the relationship between the timing of childbearing and disability in later life as measured by functional limitations and ADL limitations with attention to the mediating effects of early life and adult social and economic circumstances and later life health. Preliminary results indicate that early and premarital initiation of childbearing is positively associated with disability, though these effects are accounted for by educational attainment and adult socioeconomic status, respectively. Late childbearing is also found to be associated with an increased likelihood of having ADL limitations, but again educational attainment and adult social and economic characteristics explain this relationship.	Naomi	J. Spence
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Going Most of the Way: Technical Virginity among Young Americans	Explanations for technical virginity have been based on weak empirical evidence and considerable conjecture. Using data from the National Survey of Family Growth, we examine technical virginity and its motivations among respondents aged 15–25. Despite perceptions to the contrary, the results suggest that religious adolescents are less likely than their counterparts to opt for non-vaginal sex over total abstinence. Abstinence pledgers who are virgins are neither more nor less likely than their counterparts to substitute non-vaginal sex for intercourse net of their (higher) religiosity. Moreover, religion and morality are the weakest motivators of sexual substitution among young people who have not had vaginal sex. Preserving technical virginity is instead more common among virgins who are driven by a desire to avoid potential life-altering consequences, like pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, and those who are simply waiting for the right person and time to come along before engaging in vaginal sex.	Jeremy	 Uecker	Nicole	 Angotti	Mark	 Regnerus
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Conceptualizing Healthy Sexual Relationships: The Role of Parent-Teen Relationships and Peer Relationships in Teens’ Choice of First Sexual Partners	The initiation of heterosexual romantic relationships represents a key developmental task of adolescence, and research suggests that two aspects of healthy sexual relationships are having a steady, romantic relationship and having a similar-age partner. This paper uses longitudinal data from Rounds 1–8 of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 cohort, to assess the role of positive family and peer environments in the development of healthy sexual relationships among males and females. Using person-round files, we will explore the role of parenting (including parent-teen relationships, parental monitoring and awareness, and family routines), family structure and stability, and peer environments (including the presence of positive peers or negative peers) in delaying sexual initiation, and – among sexually experienced teens – with more positive relationship characteristics, including having a first sexual relationship that is romantic (vs. casual) and with a similar-aged (vs. older or younger) partner.	Jennifer	 Manlove	Elizabeth	 Terry-Humen	Erum	N. Ikramullah
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Friendship Network Quality and Structure and Sexual Behavior in Adolescence	Moving from same-sex to opposite-sex relationships is a key aspect of development that occurs during adolescence (Dunphy, 1963). This period of life is where peer networks come to take the place of parents as the context within which behavior is learned and developed. The majority of papers that explore the influence of adolescent friendships do not examine a wide variety of network characteristics that have the potential for influencing them. This paper analyzes the influence of eight friendship characteristics (number of male and female friends, closeness to friends of each gender, sexual behavior of each friend by gender, centrality, and density) on two categories of respondents (respondents with same-sex friends only versus friends of both genders). Clustering analysis reveals five distinct friendship profiles that are linked to healthy and unhealthy ways in which sexual relationships are initiated and maintained.	Elisa	 Rustenbach	Alan	 Booth
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Adolescent Identities and Sexual Behavior: An Examination of Anderson’s Player Hypothesis	The current study relies on structured and qualitative data drawn from the first and third waves of the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study (TARS). We first investigate the social characteristics of male adolescents who self-identify as players in order to evaluate Anderson’s claim that this social role is inextricably linked with poverty and minority status. A second phase of the analysis examines the attitude and behavioral repertoires that connect to the player identity. An important goal of this analysis is to determine whether the player identity contributes significant variance in levels of such reported sexual risk-taking behaviors, after traditional predictors have been taken into account. Finally, we supplement these quantitative analyses with excerpts from in-depth qualitative interviews with youths who self-identify as players, those whose behaviors (large number of sexual behaviors relative to similar aged- peers) would appear to qualify them for this label, and others who position against such an orientation.	Peggy	C. Giordano	Miriam	J.  Northcutt	Monica	A. Longmore	Wendy	D. Manning
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	HIV Sero-Discordance among Heterosexual Couples in Sub-Saharan Africa	Although protection of uninfected partner is a best practice in HIV prevention, we know very little about the level, patterns and determinants of HIV sero-discordance among couples in Africa. Using nationally representative data from six sub-Saharan African countries, we analyze matched couple files to investigate the extent of the problem, its pattern, and the characteristics of sero-discordant couples. The results show that the proportion of HIV-positive sero-discordant couples is higher than the proportion that is sero-concordant in all study countries except Lesotho. In Tanzania, Kenya and Cameroon, the proportion of sero-discordant couples is at least twice the proportion sero-concordant. The man is more likely than the woman to be the infected partner in most countries. In rural settings, and among the less educated and the poor, men are more likely to be the infected partner. The implications of these findings are discussed in the context of HIV prevention in Africa.	Jacob	A. Adetunji
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	Estimating the Impact of U.S. International Family Planning Policies on HIV/AIDS Infection Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper examines whether the Mexico City Policy, which restricts organizations that receive U.S. family planning funds from discussing abortion, affected the AIDS crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa. Although abortion and HIV/AIDS are not directly associated, the Mexico City Policy resulted in large funding cuts for non-governmental organizations that received U.S. funding and provided family planning services in Africa. Using data from 44 countries from 1970 – 2001 and difference-in-differences estimation, we find that the Mexico City Policy significantly increased AIDS infection rates in countries that received U.S. family planning funds.	Elizabeth	 Asiedu	Donna	K. Ginther
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	HIV and Family Planning Service Integration and Voluntary HIV Counseling and Testing Client Composition in Ethiopia.	Using multi-level logistic regression models, we examined associations between family planning (FP) and HIV service integration modality and VCT client composition, self-initiated HIV testing and HIV status among 30,257 VCT clients from Ethiopian non-governmental health facilities. Specifically, associations between facility FP-HIV integration level and the likelihood of VCT clients being atypical FP client-types, versus older (25+ years) married women were assessed. Facilities offering FP and HIV services in the same rooms were 2-13 times more likely to serve atypical FP client-types than those co-locating services in the same compound. Facilities where counselors jointly offered FP-HIV services, and served many repeat FP clients, were less likely to serve atypical FP client-types relative to older, married women. Younger, single men and older, married women were most likely to self-initiate HIV testing (78.2% and 80.6%, respectively), while the highest HIV prevalence was seen among older, married men and women (20.5% and 34.2%, respectively).	Heather	M. Bradley	Amare	 Bedada	Amy	 Tsui	Heena	 Brahmbhatt	Duff	G. Gillespie	Aklilu	 Kidanu
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Socioeconomic Differences and Family Clustering of Child Mortality: A Multilevel Analysis of Rural Southern Sweden, 1766-1895	This paper studies the determinants of child mortality during the first stages of the demographic transition. Previous analyses have shown that while socioeconomic differences in child mortality during the nineteenth century were modest but growing, there was a large amount of clustering in certain families. This paper examines the issue using multilevel Cox regression with shared unobserved factors at the family level included. The problem of comparing the impact of unobserved factors at family level with the effects of observed factors is solved by employing a new method for converting the variation stemming from unobserved factors at family level into Median Hazard Ratios (MHR), directly comparable with relative risks. The data come from the Scanian Demographic Database. The principal findings are that while socioeconomic differences in child mortality were greater than sex differences, differences between families, whether due to observed or unobserved factors, were even larger.	Tommy	 Bengtsson
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	A Cohort Analysis of Mortality in New Zealand, 1876-2004	New Zealand is one of few countries with relatively complete demographic data sources from the late 19th century. This has enabled the compilation from 1876 of detailed birth, death and external migration data series by year of occurrence and birth cohort. This pioneering work laid the foundation for the construction of complete cohort life tables and a systematic cohort analysis covering the entire nation over 130 years and beyond. The analysis provides empirical evidence of changes in mortality and survivorship during New Zealand’s history. This includes quantifying the under estimation of life expectancy in period life tables, and quantifying the major population shock of two World Wars. This compilation and analysis of cohort mortality provides a new and valuable resource to research endeavours in the areas of mortality, human longevity, and various transition theories, which will contribute to the understanding of the drivers of mortality changes and future mortality trends.	Kim	 Dunstan	Jit	 Cheung
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Decomposing Changes in Life Expectancy at Birth by Age, Sex, and Residence from 1929 to 2000 in China	Life expectancy at birth (LEAB) in China has doubled in the twentieth century from below 35 years to over 70 years. To capture the contribution of mortality change to the increase in LEAB, we decomposed the changes in LEAB by age, sex, and residence in six periods between 1929 and 2000. Based on available life tables, we performed the decomposition using Arriaga’s discrete method. The results showed dramatic increases in LEAB in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Overall, mortality declines among young ages contributed more to the increase in LEAB, with an upward trend of contribution found among adulthood and elderhood since 1980. We discuss possible causalities between changes in LEAB and historical events and social disruptions such as wars, famine, regime change, women’s movement, the Cultural Revolution, economic reform and epidemiological transition in different periods.	Danan	 Gu	Danzhen	 You	Haiyan	 Zhu	Sarah	E. Tom	Yi	 Zeng
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	The Reversal of the Relation between Economic Growth and Health Progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th Centuries	It is often thought that health progress goes along with economic growth, at least in the long-run. Using the annual rate of growth of the national product as an index of the dynamic status of the economy, and (a) the annual decrease in longevity shortfall (= 90 minus life expectancy at birth), and (b) the decline of mortality rates as indicators of health progress, it is shown with different statistical models that, both in the short and in the long-run, economic growth is significantly associated with health progress in Sweden throughout the 19th century. However, the relation becomes weak as time passes and is completely reversed in the second half of the 20th century, in which it has periods of lower economic growth that associate with significantly greater improvements in health indicators. Evidence of lagged effects of economic growth on health progress is found only for small lags of very few years.	José	A. Tapia
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Gender, Environmental 'Stressors' and Mortality: Tracing Age- and Cause-Specific Mortality Differentials in a Century of Birth Cohorts from England and Wales, France, and the United States	Large-scale environmental ‘shocks’ or ‘stressors’, such as the two World Wars, are used examine the relationship between population demographics and gendered environmental conditions. Age- and cause-specific mortality differences between men and women are studied for cohorts born 1840-1980 in England and Wales, France and the U.S. (whites and non-whites). Key findings are: 1) dramatic peaks in male mortality disadvantage for cohorts reaching young adulthood (age 20-24) during WWI and WWII, and 2) a recent re-emergence of large sex-differentials in young adulthood that are consistent with increases in suicide among men (white and non-white) in the U.S. The study underscores the role of gendered environmental conditions in shaping young male exposure to mortal physical ‘stressors’ during war. In addition, it highlights the role of gender in shaping the exposures of more recent cohorts to mortal psychosocial ‘stressors’.	Margaret	M. Weden
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Shifting Geographies: Examining the Role of Suburbanization in Black’s Declining Segregation	This paper explores the relationship between black shifts to the suburbs and metropolitan segregation using the entropy index, which allows segregation to be decomposed into parts accounted for within suburb, within city, and between suburb and city components. I find that much of the decline in metropolitan segregation of blacks from others is due to declining central city segregation; suburban segregation has much lower average declines. Furthermore, a growing proportion of black/other segregation is explained by residential distributions within the suburbs. Uneven distributions of blacks across city lines account for nearly a third of black/other segregation in Midwest and Northeast in 2000. In the West, within suburban sorting is by far the most important component of metropolitan segregation of blacks from others, while in the South within city and within suburb sorting are relatively equal in importance.	Mary	J. Fischer
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	The Residential Segregation of Hispanics in Metropolitan America: The Significance of White, Black, and Other	This paper investigates the role that race plays in shaping the residential patterns of Hispanics. Our goal is to gauge the extent to which various groups of Hispanics in metropolitan America share similar generational spatial trajectories. Such an examination can provide insight into the power, and perhaps limitations, of spatial assimilation theory. Our study is guided by the following specific questions: To what extent do residential patterns of Hispanics vary by race? Does nativity play a similar role for all race groups? Among which groups are spatial differences attenuating across generations? Do these patterns remain after taking country of origin, socioeconomic status, and metropolitan-area characteristics into consideration? To answer these questions, we draw on restricted-use 2000 census data to calculate the levels of residential segregation of Hispanics by race and nativity, and then analyze multivariate models to examine the strength of these relationships.	John	 Iceland	Kyle	Anne  Nelson
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Neighborhood Characteristics: Objective versus Subjective Measurement	In this paper, we investigate the association between objective and subjective measures of neighborhood conditions in three domains: crime, physical disorder and social disorder. Specifically, we address the following:    (1) Do objective indicators of neighborhood conditions predict individual perceptions of neighborhood quality?   (2) Do individual-level characteristics predict perceptions of neighborhood quality and do they modify the association between objective indicators of neighborhood conditions and subjective assessment?  (3) Does the neighborhood racial and socioeconomic composition predict perceptions of neighborhood quality over and above objective indicators and individual characteristics?    The extent to which individuals’ perceptions of neighborhood conditions diverge from corresponding objective characteristics raises questions about the validity of using perceptions to study the effects of neighborhood context. Depending on the research question, objective or perceived measures may be more salient. Thus, using one measure as opposed to the other may cause researchers to overstate or understate neighborhood effects.	Laryssa	 Mykyta	Irma	T. Elo	Rachel	 Margolis
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Resident Satisfaction in Racially and Ethnically Diverse Neighborhoods	Utilizing data from a recent survey of Chicago, this study investigates residents’ evaluations of multiple aspects of quality of life in racially and ethnically diverse neighborhoods. Initial results suggest that whites and Latinos evaluate quality of life in diverse neighborhoods differently than they perceive quality of life in homogeneous neighborhoods, but that African Americans do not. Whites report that they are less satisfied with residence in diverse compared to predominantly white neighborhoods. They believe that property upkeep and public school quality are worse in diverse neighborhoods but report no differences in levels of crime across neighborhoods. They also perceive less of a sense of community in diverse neighborhoods. African Americans report no differences in any quality of life measure across neighborhoods. For Latinos, residence in diverse neighborhoods is related to improvements in quality of life with respect to satisfaction with local public schools and lower levels of crime.	Sapna	 Swaroop	Maria	 Krysan
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	The Association between Children’s Earnings and Fathers’ Lifetime Earnings: Estimates Using Administrative Data	Recent studies have found large estimates of the intergenerational elasticity (IGE) in earnings in the United States – as high as 0.6. Recent work (Haider and Solon 2006) suggests that these estimates likely are subject to biases resulting from life-cycle variation in the association between lifetime earnings and current-year earnings. Thus, the ages at which children’s and father’s earnings are measured affect estimates of the IGE in earnings. By using new administrative data of nearly career-long earnings histories of fathers' and children’s earnings around an age that likely is a good proxy for lifetime earnings, we provide an estimate of the IGE in earnings that corrects for both “life-cycle” and attenuation bias. We estimate that the IGE in earnings between fathers and sons is 0.3 to 0.4 and between fathers and daughters is 0.2 to 0.3. Our estimates imply that the United States is substantially more mobile than previously believed.	Molly	 Dahl	Thomas	 DeLeire
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Progresa, Early Childbearing, and the Intergenerational Transmission of Poverty in Rural Mexico	This paper employs panel data on effects of conditional cash transfers under the Progresa (later renamed Oportunidades) program in Mexico to assess the effect of transfers in mitigating the adverse effects of early childbearing on educational attainment of children of mothers who had first births before age 18 compared to children of mothers whose first births occurred at age 18 and older. Evaluations of the cash transfer program have shown that transfers helped reduce differences in children’s progression from primary to secondary school between poor and non-poor families. Analysis of baseline data for this study shows that children of early child-bearers have lower progression ratios than children of later child-bearers. Further analysis indicates that most of this differential affects girls. By 2000, most of the differences between daughters of early vs. late child-bearers have disappeared. The paper will report results of an analysis comparing the baseline and 2000 surveys.	Tom	 Merrick	Margaret	 Greene
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	The Initiation of Intergenerational Financial Transfers from Parents to Their Adult Children	Intergenerational transfers, including both inter vivos transfers and bequests, account for a large portion of the intergenerational transfer of social and economic status. In related work, the authors of this paper are pursuing an analysis of how transfer behavior changes as a result of changes in the marital status of older men and women. One of the surprising findings of that work is the strong persistence of transfers over time. The current study will examine the timing of the initiation of transfers between parents and adult children and the effects of respondent and child characteristics on this timing. Using data from respondents ages 51-60 in the initial wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we will follow these respondents through subsequent waves (1992–2004), using discrete time event history analysis to examine the effects of age, marital status, health status, wealth, income, etc. on the hazard of transferring.	Leah	K. VanWey	Shelley	 Nelson
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Children, Family Size Change, and Household Wealth Trajectories	Wealth inequality continues to play an increasingly important role in the overall American stratification picture. Previous research tends to examine early childhood and adolescent processes that influence adult wealth accumulation to the exclusion of influential adult life course effects. One important aspect of adulthood is having children and the transition to parenthood, which can affect numerous outcomes, including wealth trajectories. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort (NLSY79), and latent-growth curve modeling techniques, we look at the direct effect of family size on wealth and at potential family-size threshold effects in wealth accumulation. Furthermore, we assess racial and ethnic differences between Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics in the effect of family size on wealth. Finally, we disaggregate net worth into its two component parts, financial and non-fungible wealth in order to evaluate the effect of family size and family change on each resource pool.	Matthew	A Painter II	Kevin	M. Shafer
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Assessing the Effect of Wealth on Education without Wealth Data	We analyze the association between parental wealth and diverse measures of children's educational attainment in two Latin American countries. Given that wealth data are usually not available in developing countries, we use Filmer and Pritchett's (1999, 2001) approach in which wealth is proxied by a set of household assets. Different specifications of this measure are tested, and its potential multidimensionality is explored. Methodological and conceptual issues of this approach are discussed.	Florencia	 Torche	Seymour	 Spilerman
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Demographic Change, Social Security Systems, and Savings		David	 Canning	Rick	 Mansfield	Michael	 Moore
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Establishing Causal Relationships in Demographic and Economic Analysis: Approaches and Data for Sub-Saharan Africa		Peter	 Glick	Chad	 Meyerhoefer	David	E. Sahn	Stephen	 Younger
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Family Planning as an Investment in Development and Female Human Capital: Evaluating the Long-Term Consequences in Matlab, Bangladesh		T.	Paul  Schultz	Shareen	 Joshi
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	High Quality Nutrition in Childhood and Wages in Early Adulthood: A Two-Step Quantile Regression Approach from Guatemalan Workers	Establishing a causal relationship between health and productivity is not straightforward. On one hand, higher income individuals invest more in health: as their income grows, they invest in better diets and health care. On the other, if a worker is healthier and more energetic, then she will probably be more productive. This paper focuses on the second pathway and examines the effect of one dimension of health, height and body mass index (BMI), on wages. Data comes from a longitudinal study conducted in Guatemala, a low-income country, during 1969-1977 and followed-up in 2002-2004. The estimates suggest a very non-linear relationship between height, BMI and wages; however, the evidence is stronger for males than for females. While diminishing returns are operating at higher quantiles of the conditional wage distribution, increasing returns appear at lower quantiles, implying that height and BMI might have an increasing payoff for the poorer workers.	Maria	C. Calderon
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Parental, Gestational, and Birth-Related Risk Factors for Cognitive Development Problems at 9 Months of Age	Few studies have used population-based samples to examine the relationship of early childhood health to children’s cognitive development. This study uses a new nationally representative dataset, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) to analyze predictors of cognitive development problems at 9 months of age. A series of multiple logistic regression models are estimated predicting low scores on a modified version of the Bayley mental scale. Separate models are fit for singletons and non-singletons. Results indicate that a wide range of parental characteristics and gestational and birth-related risk factors are associated with cognitive development. Differences among singletons and non-singletons are also seen, and warrant further investigation.	Marianne	M. Hillemeier	George	 Farkas	Paul	 Morgan	Molly	A. Martin	Steven	 Maczuga
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Cumulative Index of Health Disorders and Longevity	We describe the accumulation of aging-associated health disorders by a cumulative measure known as a frailty index (FI) and evaluate the FIs ability to differentiate long- and short-life phenotypes as well as the FIs connection to aging-associated processes in the elderly analyzing the National Long Term Care Survey data. We show that males and females died before age 75 and those who lived long and died at age 85+ exhibit remarkably similar FI frequency patterns despite the ten-year age difference between age profiles in these samples. Long life is consistently characterized in longitudinal analyses by lower levels of the FIs. FI dynamics are found to be strongly sex-sensitive. The FI appears to be a sensitive age-independent indicator of sex-specific physiological decline in aging individuals and sex-specific discriminator of survival chances. The FI is a promising characteristic suitable for improving sex-sensitive forecasts of risks of adverse health outcomes in the elderly.	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Igor	 Akushevich	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Anatoliy	I. Yashin
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Obesity and Social Capital over the Life Course: Does Gaining Weight Mean Bowling Alone?	In this research, we seek to integrate two burgeoning literatures: social capital from the social sciences and the obesity epidemic in public health scholarship. Using the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, we explore whether changes in body mass between the ages of 17-18 and 53-54 influence the acquisition of social capital, and whether these effects differ for men and women. In addition to weight change, other potential sources of social capital accumulation are taken into account, including social background and social psychological influences. Results indicate that rather than having broad, predictive power, the influence of weight change is linked to participation in certain kinds of associational life, and, furthermore, differs in some respects for men and women.	Sandra	T. Marquart-Pyatt	Eric	N. Reither	Christy	M. Glass
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Sexual Risk Taking among Adult Dating Couples in the U.S.: The Influence of Respondent, Partner and Relationship Characteristics	We adopt a couple’s perspective to gain a more comprehensive understanding of factors affecting the risk of HIV and other STDs. Specifically, using reports from both partners in sexual dating relationships, we examine how female and male respondents’ reports of their personal and relationship characteristics are related to their reports of sexual risk taking within their relationship. We include measures of the respondent’s and partner’s perceptions of STD/HIV risk and examine how these perceptions mediate the impact of personal and relationship characteristics on sexual risk taking. We also take relationship power into account and examine how it weights the decision making process toward one partner or the other by reducing the importance of a person’s beliefs about levels of STD/HIV risk. Data come from a study of 335 dating couples (670 individuals) throughout the U.S., where the female partner is age 20-35 years and the male is age 18+.	John	O.G. Billy	William	R. Grady	Morgan	 Sill
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Power, Trust, and Pleasure: Relationship Components of Contraceptive Negotiations	Demographers have recently made the methodological decision to focus more on couples, rather than individuals, in research on fertility and contraceptive decision-making, but the theoretical foundations of this research remain underdeveloped. In this paper, I present a theoretical approach for analyzing contraceptive negotiations between partners, emphasizing the role of power, trust, and pleasure in determining whether those negotiations ever take place, and their outcome if they do. I explore the meaning of these factors and clarify their role in the contraceptive negotiation process, taking into account the multiple motivations people may have for contraceptive use. I contend that all three factors work in tandem, but I acknowledge that each factor assumes primacy in certain types of negotiations. This approach is grounded in the position that couple dynamics are important for fertility and contraceptive research because decisions about fertility and contraception occur in the context of sexual encounters and sexual relationships.	Julie	 Fennell
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	HIV/AIDS in Tanzania: Gender Based Structural Interventions	Current research on AIDS in Africa seeks to integrate both cultural and structural explanations as an alternative to research paradigms that focus on individual behavior (Parker 2001). Heavily influenced by developments within interactionist sociology, cultural anthropology, women’s studies, and gay and lesbian studies, AIDS research now considers the broader set of social representations and cultural meanings that shape sexual experiences in different contexts. It is unclear, however, if this shift in theory has translated to interventions. With a focus on gender, our project explores how and the degree to which AIDS prevention programs in Tanzania adopt structural strategies. Through document collection and interviews with program staff, we have created an inventory of AIDS prevention programs. Results indicate existing programs largely do not focus on changing gender norms but instead focus on changing individual behavior (e.g. condom use). These findings contribute to the discussion over the link between HIV/AIDS interventions and broader societal transformations.	Susan	 Mlangwa	Ann	 Meier
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Couples Reproductive Intentions in Two Culturally Contrasting States of North Eastern India	Until recently, fertility and family planning research in developing countries has primarily focused on women. Data on fertility intention, contraception, contraceptive attitude, sex preference, etc. are generally collected from a select group of women. However, husbands who are the main decision makers on these issues are not covered. The extent to which couples agree with each other on fertility desires and intention to use family planning in future has a major role, not only in determining family size but also in the process of fertility transition. The present paper attempts to investigate this question in two culturally contrasting states of North Eastern India. The two states under study are Meghalaya and Manipur. Meghalaya is a matriarchal society where as Manipur is patriarchal. We have sufficient evidence from the present analysis to support the hypothesis that culture has considerable influence on the reproductive intention of the couples.	Abhishek	 Singh	Faujdar	 Ram	Rajiv	 Ranjan
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	Young Women and Fertility in Africa: The New Skepticism	DHS data from a number of sub-Saharan African countries show a recent sharp increase in unwanted fertility, in particular unwanted first births. If true, this is a remarkable development: among young African women, misgivings about childbearing are emerging that constitute a historic break from the past. This paper examines desired and realized fertility in the most recent DHS surveys, with limited comparison to previous surveys. We first describe patterns, focusing on fertility desires (planning status of recent births, ideal number, desire for a(nother) birth), then consider contending explanations for the surprising emergence of unwanted first births: measurement issues; changes in age and marital status at conception; and macro social changes (economic distress, HIV/AIDS, religious revival, deteriorating family planning services). By looking beyond macro indicators and, in particular, focusing on young women, this research adds complexity and qualifies the accepted picture of slow and stagnating fertility decline in Africa.	John	B. Casterline	Satvika	 Chalasani
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	The Dynamics of Adolescent Childbearing and Schooling in Urban South Africa.	In this paper, we examine the intersections of childbearing and educational attainment in urban South Africa. We compare the pathways of adolescent fertility according to race and how they impact educational attainment. Although racial apartheid ended, our preliminary results show that today’s adolescents experience different pathways to adulthood associated with race. Different childbearing experiences may lead to very different educational careers. Insufficient panel data in developing countries has hindered studies examining childbearing and schooling. We use data from the Cape Area Panel Study, a panel of 4,800 young people in Cape Town, to answer: How do adolescents experience childbearing in post-Apartheid South Africa? How do these pathways drive adolescents’ educational attainment for different racial groups? For adolescents enrolled in school in Wave 1, we examine the factors leading to a birth between waves. We then look at the factors driving educational attainment after birth, including test scores implemented in Wave 1.	David	 Lam	Leticia	J. Marteleto	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	Traditional Gender Values and Adolescent Fertility Expectations in Ethiopia	We examine the influence of traditional gender values, education, family and peer relations, and community context on young people’s family size expectations in a sample of Ethiopian youth. In particular, we test whether the influence of traditional gender values on family size expectations varies by level of education and by the prevalence of traditional gender values among other youth in the community. We use survey data for 2,172 never married adolescents age 13-17 from the Jimma Longitudinal Family Survey of Youth (JLFSY). The JLFSY study area includes a regional city, three outlying towns, and surrounding rural communities in southwestern Ethiopia. Preliminary analyses indicate that the influence of traditional gender values on expected family size is highly conditioned by the level of schooling and the community context. Education reduces the influence of traditional values, whereas living in a community where traditional values are widespread magnifies the influence of individual values.	David	P. Lindstrom	Dennis	 Hogan	Craig	A. Hadley	Assefa	 Hailemariam
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	School Attendance and Adolescent Fertility in Central America	This paper examines interrelationships between school attendance and adolescent fertility, using recent survey datasets from Honduras (2001), Guatemala (2002) and El Salvador (2002/03). It presents an overview of trends in adolescent fertility, ages at first birth, first sexual intercourse and first union; highest grade level completed and age at school completion by considering successive cohorts of women. It then presents a series of multivariate models of school completion as a risk factor for starting fertility and of pregnancy as a risk factor for dropping out of school. The analysis is stratified by wealth quintiles of the population, as it is expected that these relationships vary by socioeconomic status.	Paul	 Stupp	Danielle	B. Jackson
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Toward a Fuller Understanding of Nonresident Father Involvement: A Joint Examination of Child Support and In-Kind Support Receipt	Less than half of all custodial parents receive child support payments but nearly 60 percent receive in-kind support of some form. In-kind (i.e., noncash) contributions from nonresident parents include such things as purchasing food or clothing for the child, or paying for the child’s extracurricular activities. Based on a sample of children with nonresident fathers from the CDS-II of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this study investigates the determinants of in-kind support receipt from nonresident fathers and addresses three research questions. First, is the receipt of cash child support and other economic contributions (in-kind support) positively (i.e., are complements) or negatively (i.e., are substitutes) related? Second, are frequent and high-quality visits with nonresident fathers positively associated with receipt of economic support (child support and in-kind)? Third, do the relationships between child support and in-kind support receipt and visitation vary by the income level of children’s families?	Steven	 Garasky	Susan	D. Stewart	Craig	G. Gundersen	Brenda	J. Lohman
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Phasing Out Fathers: Does Nonresidential Father Involvement Decline More when Mothers Have a New Partner?	Although research has focused on the role of father’s new relationships in the decline of paternal involvement over time, research has not yet investigated whether mother’s new relationships play a role. When children have social fathers, biological fathers may experience role confusion and withdraw or be excluded from their child’s life. Using the Fragile Families data, this research tracks father involvement among those who were not romantically involved with the mother at the first and second follow-up. Descriptive statistics suggest that the decline in paternal involvement is greatest when the mother formed a new relationship between follow-ups. Multivariate analyses of absolute levels of visitation and engagement suggest that paternal involvement is reduced when mothers (and fathers) have a new partner. When mothers formed a new relationship between follow-ups, fathers are more likely to have seen their child at the first follow-up but not at the second follow-up.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Interhousehold Contributions of Nonresidential Fathers to Children	Parents living in separate residences comprise a major source of interfamilial exchange. A positive relationship and exchanges with a nonresidential father are believed to be important to child development. However, little is known about the extent to which nonresidential fathers are involved in children’s daily lives beyond their provision of child support. In this study, a structural equation model was used to evaluate the association between maternal and paternal characteristics and relationship and three aspects of father involvement: paternal accessibility (father-child contact), father-child interaction (relationship quality), and father’s responsibility (financial support). The results show that previous circumstances and current context, including years spent together, geographical distance between the child and father, and parents’ age and marital status at birth are associated with father involvement. Additionally, amount of contact is linked to father-child relationship quality and to financial support but not to parent relationship quality.	Sandra	 Hofferth	Nicole	 Forry
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Shared Caretaking in Disadvantaged Families: When Are Fathers Involved and What Does This Mean to Parents?	This analysis draws on two waves of in-depth interviews with mothers and fathers when their child was age one and four to provide new information about fathers’ co-parenting in low-income families. Interviews with new parents living in California suggest that three types of co-parenting situations emerged early in their child’s life which were related to the status of their relationship as a couple and to the relative economic and personal stability of each parent. These co-parenting situations were often perceived differently by parents who framed stable co-parenting during this time as a commitment, early co-parenting as an exchange of resources, and later co-parenting as compensation for mothers’ reduced share in parenting. Particular preferences for child support, custody, and visitation also appeared within each situation, with implications for policies directed toward low-income families.	Maureen	 Waller
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	The Rise and Fall of Excess Male Infant Mortality	A nearly universal female advantage in mortality has been well-documented. We use data from fifteen countries to document a remarkably consistent pattern of sex differences in infant mortality over time. Data for Sweden show 10% higher infant mortality among males, which increases to 20% around 1900. Data for other European countries conform to the 19th century pattern. The male disadvantage in infant mortality increased during the 20th century as overall mortality declined rapidly. It reached a peak in the second half of the 20th century in the U.S. and many European countries, but has declined in recent decades. Although lifestyle factors such as smoking contributed to widening adult sex mortality differences, these factors are more questionable at the youngest ages. We test hypotheses that reduced exposure to infection, increased maternal nutrition, and changes in birth practices contributed to observed changes in sex differences in infant mortality.	Greg	L. Drevenstedt	Eileen	 Crimmins	Sarinnapha	 Vasunilashorn	Caleb	E. Finch
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Death of a Sibling in Early Life and Health of the Survivor Sibling in Later Adulthood	This study is to examine the long-term consequences of death of a sibling on the health of the survivor siblings in later adulthood using a modern data with rich information on family environment, SES, and life events. Using Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS), I found that experiencing the death of a sibling before age 36 had direct and robust harming effects on many measures of physical health of men and women at age 50 after controlling for childhood family environment (SES, family configuration, and others), socioeconomic attainment in adulthood, and other important life events. Next, I explore some possible explanations on the associations using information on all deceased siblings in WLS, including dissecting the effects of the death by the age and the cause of the death and looking into the associations between the sibling’s death, early parental death (before age 50), family medical history, and childhood health of the respondents.	Daphne	 Kuo
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Does Parenthood Affect Mortality? A Study of Norwegian Men and Women Aged 20-67 in the Years 1971-2002	The impact of children on mortality has received some attention, although largely in studies of all-cause mortality. Some studies find weak effects of children on mortality, while others conclude that such effects are strong for either parents or stronger for women than for men. To reach a better understanding of the importance of parenthood for mortality, in this paper I use logistic regression and Norwegian register data that includes cause of death. I analyze effects of children for both sexes controlling for relevant confounders. The specific research questions are:    1) How does the number of dependent children influence the parents’ mortality, given marital status, and does it explain the effects of marital status?   2) Do the sex of adult children and the proximity to these children have effects? Are effects of step-children different from those of own children? In particular, do the children serve as important “buffers” after bereavement?	Svenn-Erik	 Mamelund
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Paternal and Maternal Age and Their Effects on Adult Offspring Mortality	This paper assesses the role of paternal and maternal age at conception on the longevity of their offspring. The analysis relies on the Utah Population Database and includes approximately 77,000 offspring. Results indicate a strong adverse effect of parental age at conception on the longevity of offspring, with varying levels of significance based on offspring sex. Male longevity appears less sensitive to late paternal age and more sensitive to late maternal age than female longevity. Female longevity is independent of maternal age at which the mother conceived the target child, as well as the age at which the mother last conceived. These results are somewhat surprising since current theory holds that late, maternal-fertility may be a marker for longevity, a benefit that might be shared with their offspring.	Ken	R. Smith	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Cynthia	 Sahm
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Mortality Crossovers: The Effects of Socioeconomic Status and Race	Research has documented a Black-White mortality crossover at older ages; Blacks have higher mortality rates than Whites until approximately age 80, when survival curves cross and Blacks have lower mortality rates than Whites. We take a “fundamental cause” approach to this literature, predicting that a socioeconomic gradient drives this mortality crossover. Individuals at the lower end of the gradient suffer poor health at earlier ages, leading to high mortality; this phenomenon selects frail individuals out of the population, leaving a robust low-SES group that has relatively low mortality at older ages. First, we use data from the Duke EPESE to examine the possibility of a socioeconomic mortality crossover in later life. Second, we examine how socioeconomic status moderates the Black-White crossover by modeling main effects, interaction effects, and the mediating effects of health status, health risks, and health resources.	Jessica	M. Sautter	Patricia	 Thomas	Linda	K. George	Matthew	E. Dupre
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Changes in Active Life Expectancy by Race and Sex between 1984-2000	This paper investigates improvements in active life expectancy by sex and race for older persons in the U.S. Estimates of active life expectancy are based on two comparable longitudinal surveys, representative of the U.S. elderly population 70+, collected 10 years apart: the Longitudinal Study of Aging (LSOA I) and the Second Longitudinal Study of Aging (LSOA II). Total life expectancy at age 70 increased about .7 year for non-blacks over the 10-year period, with almost all the increase in active life expectancy. There was no improvement in total life expectancy at age 70 for the black population, but some increase in active life and decrease in non-active life (although not significant). At age 70, there was no increase in total life expectancy for women, but an increase of almost a year for men. Increases in active life were also greater for men during this time.	Aaron	 Hagedorn
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Racial Crossovers in Morbidity and Mortality of U.S. Birth Cohorts	Disability and mortality disparities by sex and race are a source of inequality among the elderly. Differential changes in disability life expectancy and total life expectancy over time are a public health concern. I address the previously unanswered question of whether some race/sex groups of actual birth cohorts live longer healthy lives as well as longer lives when compared with others. I study disparities in the expected remaining life in mild and severe disability by race and sex in cohorts born between 1904 and 1909. To estimate the quantities, I employ a refined definition of physical disability and apply a new extension of Sullivan's method to actual birth cohorts. Results suggest black women are the most disadvantaged group. The most striking finding is concordant compression of severe disability among all race/sex groups. Decreases in the expected remaining life in severe disability are associated with constant life expectancy over time.	Samir	 Soneji
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	When Do Health Insurance Mandates Matter? The Case of Infertility Treatment	The literature on mandated health insurance benefits has found little evidence of effects on the utilization of health care services. A number of explanations have been considered for these findings of no effects. In this paper, we examine whether mandated insurance coverage for infertility treatment affects utilization for a specific subgroup in the population: older, highly educated women. These women are both most likely to experience fertility problems and most likely to have insurance plans affected by the mandates. We find robust evidence that while an effect of the mandates on utilization can not be found for the full population of women, the mandates do have a large and significant effect on utilization for exactly this subgroup.	Marianne	 Bitler	Lucie	 Schmidt
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Men’s and Women’s Reports of Nonbiological Children within the Household: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth, we provide information on the presence and relationship type of minor, nonbiological children living with male and female respondents 18 years of age or older, detail the characteristics of men and women who are caring for nonbiological children, and produce national estimates of the prevalence and characteristics of all types of relationships with nonbiological children being cared for in U.S. homes today. We find that men are more likely than women to report currently caring for a nonbiological child and the majority of these children are step children. However, persons who are currently cohabiting report larger percentages of children of other relationships residing in the household than step children—these are most likely their partner’s children. Differences in propensity to be caring for a nonbiological child are evident by age, marital status and religious affiliation for both men and women.	Jo	 Jones	Brittany	 McGill	Penelope	 Maza
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Child Adoption: A Path to Parenthood?	In 1974, the World Population Plan of Action encouraged countries to facilitate child adoption so as to enable couples to achieve their desired family size. Thirty years later, there is the perception that an increasing number of persons are looking for alternative ways of experiencing parenthood, including via adoption. Is this really the case? The paper addresses this question by focusing on national data. Specifically, it examines data compiled by the United Nations Population Division on total, domestic, intercountry and step-parent adoptions for over 100 countries. The data are supplemented by information on national adoption legislation. The paper concludes that while in many cases couples and individuals may be resorting to adoption as a way to experience parenthood, not all countries conform to this pattern. In these countries, adoption cannot simply be viewed as a demographic response. Other factors, including societal norms and personal values may also be at play.	Clare	 Menozzi	Barry	 Mirkin
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Will Fertility among Danish Women Remain Stable Due to Assisted Reproduction? Assessing the Role of In Vitro Fertilization in Sustaining Cohort Fertility Rates	Broad availability and widespread use of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) could become one of the most prominent factors preventing a decline in completed fertility of Danish women, who have increasingly postponed childbearing to higher ages. We analyse and project cohort trends in total and ART-related fertility rates, using register data on births and ART treatments among native Danish women born in 1960-1978. Our projections show that women born in the 1970s are likely to retain fertility rates that are relatively close to the replacement-level threshold. The projections indicate that the continuation of relatively high and stable fertility will be partly sustained by a rapid rise in the use of assisted reproduction technologies. The projected proportion of children born after ART treatment shows a substantial increase from 2.5 percent among women born in 1965 to 5-6 percent among women born in 1978.	Tomas	 Sobotka	Martin	 Hansen	Tina	 Jensen	Niels	E. Skakkebæk
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Impact of Intermarriage on Ethnic and Racial Stratification	We investigate macro-level implications of ethnic/racial intermarriage on ethnic/racial inequality in subsequent generations. In our model, effects of ethnic intermarriage on stratification are thought to operate through the intergenerational transmissions of socioeconomic status and ethnicity. If ethnic intermarriage is selective on the basis of spousal SES, then intermarriage may increase socioeconomic gaps among primary ethnic groups. Thus, the model's predictions may contrast with those of assimilation and melting pot theories, which suggest that ethnic intermarriage reduces the social distance between ethnic groups.     We illustrate the model implications using data on young Jewish adults in Israel. We investigate educational gaps that might have arisen in a variety of counterfactual scenarios in which past ethnic intermarriage had not occurred. Analyses suggest that 10-15% of actual ethnic gaps in educational attainment is attributable to past ethnic intermarriage. Moreover, in the absence of intermarriage, intergenerational decreases in inequality would have been substantially more pronounced.	Barbara	S. Okun	Orna	 Khait-Marelly
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Distribution of Neighborhood Poverty and Racial Disparities in Neighborhood Context: The Unequal American Geography of Opportunity	Our objective is to broaden the conceptualization of neighborhood poverty beyond the average to illustrate the non-overlap of entire distributions of neighborhood poverty by race, and to highlight the differences in poverty/race distributions across U.S. Metropolitan Areas (MAs). We used Census 2000 tract data for 100 largest MAs. We analyzed proportions of total tract population in poverty. To examine race-specific neighborhood-poverty distributions, we applied weights based on tract-level counts for NH-Blacks, NH-Whites, and Hispanics. For each MA and racial/ethnic group, we calculated exposure measures of mean, median, and quartiles of the neighborhood-poverty distribution; we tested for non-distributional-overlap between groups; we calculated a relative measure of the distribution of poverty, calibrated within MAs. We found the entire distribution of neighborhood-poverty shifted in a worse direction for minorities; white-minority distributions barely overlap. The MA-neighborhood poverty variation is substantially larger for minorities. MAs with highest neighborhood poverty had the widest distributions (rho=.66, p	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Sandro	 Galea	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	Hispanic Population Growth and Rural Income Inequality	Recent Hispanic population growth may substantially alter income inequality in rural areas because rural Hispanics are often relatively young, less educated, lack U.S. experience, and work in low-skilled and low-paying jobs. We examine the impact of rural Hispanic population growth on income inequality in nonmetro counties from 1990 to 2000. We model income inequality as a function of economic and demographic variables using county-level decennial census data and OLS regression. Results document higher increases in inequality among rapid growth Hispanic counties relative to low growth counties. However, this growing inequality is explained mostly by typical educational and industrial changes. When compared across counties, rapidly growing Hispanic counties behave similar to other rapidly growing non-Hispanic counties. Rather than something unique to Hispanic groups, changes that these counties experienced appear part of broader processes of educational and industrial change that resemble those occurring in other rapidly growing rural counties without Hispanic in-migration.	Emilio	A. Parrado	William	A. Kandel
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	Race and Place Differentials of Poverty and Their Determinants: A Comparative Analysis of Poverty in the Texas Borderland and the Lower Mississippi Delta	This paper analyzes poverty among race/ethnic groups in the Texas Borderland and the Lower Mississippi Delta, the two poorest regions in the United States. Its objectives are (1) to develop a comparative model to determine how the patterns of poverty differ between the Borderland and the Delta; and (2) to investigate differences in the mechanisms that influence poverty rates across race and ethnicity in these regions. The paper presents a model that includes various indicators of economic structure, family structure, demographic structure, and human capital. Using 2000 census data, the paper models the correlates of poverty for non-Hispanic whites, Latinos, and blacks. Results show that the race/ethnic poverty differential is especially high in the core part of the two regions and related to the relative presence of minority populations. There also exist substantial differences across race/ethnic groups in the effects of structural factors.	Dudley	L. Poston, Jr.	Rogelio	 Saenz	Joachim	 Singelmann	Tim	 Slack
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Socioeconomic Attainments of Single-Racial and Multi-Racial Native Americans	Using data from the 2000 U.S. Census, this study investigates the schooling and wages of single-racial and multi-racial Native Americans. Our analysis distinguishes between single-race Native Americans, biracial White Native Americans, biracial Hispanic-White Native Americans, biracial Black Native Americans, and whites who report Native American ancestry. Our findings show significant variation in socioeconomic attainments across these different Native American groups. In general, however, most of these Native American groups have lower levels of schooling and/or wages relative to non-Hispanic whites for both men and women. Furthermore, most of these Native American groups have lower wages than comparable non-Hispanic whites after taking into account schooling, age, place of residence, and other demographic characteristics. Single-race Native Americans are the most disadvantaged, but socioeconomic differentials across the groups are not clearly consistent with traditional assimilation theory, and suggest the significance of the socioeconomic selectivity of whites who choose to report Native American ancestry.	Kimberly	R. Huyser	Isao	 Takei
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Comparison Analysis of the Official Population Estimates and the American Community Survey Results: 2001-2005	This paper attempts to assess the impact on American Community Survey (ACS) results of the official population estimates that were used by the ACS as controls for the years 2001-2005. We provide descriptive analyses of the differences between the ACS results and official population estimates before and after the ACS results were controlled to the official estimates. The differences are shown at the national, state, and county levels by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. The population universe in this study includes both the civilian and military population in households and excludes the group quarters’ population. Results from this analysis would be helpful for revisiting the ways the weights are developed to adjust the ACS results. Similarly, the geographic level and/or characteristics for which the ACS provides better estimates would help the Population Estimates Program revise its official estimates.	Antonio	 Bruce	Alfredo	 Navarro	Bashiruddin	 Ahmed
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Gross Migration Optimization Technique of Developing In- and Out-Migration Assumptions for Regional Population Projections	Gross migration approach may produce more adequate population projections than net migration approach for several reasons. But, gross migration approach is not popular among local demographers due to the limited availability of gross migration data and the difficulty in its application. This study proposes a gross migration optimization technique of developing reasonable in-migration and out-migration assumptions for local population projections. The gross migration optimization technique is designed to produce gross in-migration and out-migration assumptions by efficiently finding optimal adjustment factors for the plus-minus adjustment method. The major advantage of this gross migration optimization technique is to immediately develop the size of in-migration and out-migration, while maintaining acceptable age and sex specific in-migration and out-migration schedules. The gross migration optimization technique is applied to regional population projections of Southern California in an economic-demographic modeling framework. The gross migration optimization technique is useful and easily applicable in developing reasonable in-migration and out-migration assumptions.	S.	Simon  Choi
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Methodology for Projecting Sub-National Populations Allowing for the Impact of HIV/AIDS and Where Data Are Limited and Defective	Sub-national population projections are complex at the best of times. As the population being modelled represents a potentially small proportion of the national whole, the least understood of the three major demographic forces – migration (local and international) – plays an increasingly significant role, while, in addition, sub-population specific estimates of the other demographic variables may not be available or reliable. This paper describes an approach to projecting sub-national population dynamics in 28 districts of a country (Botswana) whose aggregate population is less than one-fifth that of New York City. Apart from having to ensure that the sum of the regional projections remains consistent with that of the national population, the projection needs to incorporate HIV epidemiological dynamics in each region and work with severely limited and defective census and survey data. In the process, interesting insights into the regional demographic dynamics of the country are developed.	Rob	 Dorrington	Tom	A. Moultrie
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Work Hour Differences in Child Care Time: Cross National Variation	Parental time investments in children are an important indicator of children’s present and future well-being. Employment depresses mothers’ and fathers’ time caring for children in the United States and other Western industrialized countries. Many researchers have called for reducing the number of hours American parents spend in paid employment, arguing that this would ease the time crunch for working parents (Jacobs and Gerson 2004; Williams 2000). Whether shorter hours in paid work necessarily translate into more time spent in caregiving, however, is an open empirical question, which we examine in this study. Our preliminary results indicate that the association of parents' level of work hours with child care time differs across country.	Liana	C. Sayer
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Working for Peanuts: Food Insecurity among Nonstandard Workers' Households	Nonstandard work affects household functioning in many ways, but the relationship between nonstandard work and food insecurity has not been explored. Utilizing the 2003 and 2004 Food Security Supplements to the Current Population Survey I investigate the effects of household head’s work form (by combining number of hours worked with multiple job holding) on household food security status. I find that households where the head is employed in multiple jobs, with varied hours or part-time work are more likely to be food insecure than households with a head in a regular full-time job even when controlling for income and other sociodemographic characteristics. Because the odds of food insecurity vary across household types, models will be estimated separately for married, cohabiting, female headed and male headed households. The lack of benefits, instability of income and unstable schedules associated with nonstandard employment may account for the greater odds of food insecurity.	Alisha	J. Coleman
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	The Impact of Non-Standard Work Times on Partnership Quality and Stability: Quantitative and Qualitative Findings from the Netherlands	The aim of this paper is to examine whether non-standard work times impact partnership quality and stability. Employment and partnership behaviour are understood via a multi-level theoretical framework that addresses preferences, networks and context. Data is drawn from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study (N=8,161) and in-depth individual interviews from 30 couples. Previous research shows a high correlation between non-standard work times and marital divorce. A quantitative and qualitative approach extends this research to allow a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms and causality in this relationship. Results indicate that the impact of non-standard work times on partnerships is highly related to preferences and the (in)voluntary nature of this work. There is a strong association between particular types of work times with lower partnership quality/stability and inequality within certain social groups. Results also demonstrate several key variations in quantitative and qualitative measures, complex strategies, and deviation from previous U.S. findings.	Melinda	 Mills	Taht	 Kadri
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	The Effect of Shift Work on Parental Interaction with Children, Marital Quality, and Depression.	We use the Early Child Longitudinal Survey-Birth Cohort to explore whether couples with one or both partners working  non-standard shifts differ from other couples in terms of three outcomes: parent-infant interaction, depression, and marital quality.   This paper promises to add to our understanding of shift work and family issues for several reasons. First, we consider both parents’ work schedules. Looking only at one parent’s shift does not provide complete information about the time dynamics within a family. Second, our analysis focuses on infants. Previous analyses focus on interaction with older children. Here, we focus on a crucial developmental stage.   Preliminary findings show that work schedules are related to depression. They are also related to parent-infant interaction, but the pattern is thus far complex. Finally, shift work is related to marital discord, but weakly. We consider the implication of these findings for past research on work schedules and family outcomes.	Chris	 Morett	Emily	 Rosenbaum
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Maternal Work Hours and Adolescents’ School Outcomes among Low-Income Families in Four Urban Counties	We examine how changes in maternal work hours affect adolescents' school participation and performance outcomes using data from interviews in 1998 and 2001 with 1,700 women who are single mothers of adolescents living in the most-disadvantaged neighborhoods in four urban counties. We find unfavorable effects of maternal work hours on several aspects of adolescents’ schooling: Full-time maternal employment increases the likelihood of skipping school, decreases adolescent school performance, and increases the likelihood of parent contact by a school about behavior problems. Sons seem to be particularly sensitive to changes in mothers’ average hours of work, with notable increases in incidences of being late for school and declines in school performance when mothers work more hours. These findings hold up controlling for a rich array of mothers’ characteristics, including their psychological and physical health and experiences with domestic and substance abuse, as well as unobserved time-invariant characteristics of the adolescent.	Leonard	M. Lopoo	Andrew	S. London
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	Linguistic Assimilation across the Generations: An Analysis of Home Language among Second- and Third-Generation Children from Contemporary Immigrant Groups	The U.S. is seen as a graveyard for languages other than English. However, given the high volume of immigration to the U.S. and the possibilities of transnational relationships, it might be argued that the viability of bilingualism among the U.S. born has been enhanced. To look for possible changes in patterns of linguistic assimilation, we replicate with 2000 Census data the analysis of children’s home language conducted by Alba et al. (2002) with the 1990 Census. Our descriptive results demonstrate that, while bilingualism appears more prevalent among the later generations descended from Latin American immigrants than it was among the descendants of Europeans, it remains a minority pattern; a three-generation assimilation to English monolingualism remains predominant for almost all groups. The multivariate analysis reveals that the determinants of home language have very similar effects to those found in 1990, suggesting that the dynamics of language assimilation have not shifted.	Richard	D. Alba	Jacob	 Stowell
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	The Pace and Flow of English Language Acquisition among the U.S. Latino Population	This paper examines the pace and flow of English language acquisition along a range of demographic variables that are critical to understanding the details of this social process. The study determines the effect, if any, of age at entry, time in country, educational attainment, and gender on both the rate and flow of language acquisition. The study is based on a sample of approximately 10,000 Latino adults produced through a series of Pew Hispanic Center surveys conducted between April 2002- July 2006. The richness of the information collected in the Pew Hispanic Center surveys on language proficiencies and usage will substantially extend our understanding of English language acquisition of Latinos.	Shirin	 Hakimzadeh
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	English Language Ability of Foreign Born in the United States: Assimilation and Cohort Effects, 2003	Past research on language acquisition of the foreign born population in the United States has identified age at entry and duration of stay as the two critical factors associated with the language acquisition. There have been attempts to examine the role of age after controlling for the length of stay and vice versa. However, none of these studies have explored the interaction between age, cohort and the assimilation effects besides the fact that they are all dated. This paper by using the 1980 through 2000 Census data and the American Community Survey between 2000 and 2003, attempts to fill that gap in the literature. Further, we examine these interactions by the major immigrant sub-groups. Preliminary results indicate that duration of stay is positively related with language acquisition and there is evidence of the existence of cohort effects with earlier cohorts doing better than recent cohorts.	Xiaohan	 Hu	Veena	 Kulkarni	John	P. Robinson
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	The Gradient of Immigrant Age at Arrival Effects on Socioeconomic Outcomes in the U.S.	A young age at arrival is believed to be one of the primary predictors of adult immigrant achievement. So important is this pre-adolescent arrival that a special classification is given these ‘1.5 generation’ immigrants. However, it is not agreed if the appropriate dividing line should be 5, 10, 15, or another age. The 2000 census provides opportunity to test a more specific gradient of age at arrival effects by using exact years of age. We test for nonlinearities and breakpoints in the gradient with respect to several outcomes, and we compare Latino and Asian immigrants. Results indicate that the effect of early arrival is much greater for English proficiency than other outcomes, and Latinos benefit more than Asians in most outcomes.	Dowell	 Myers	Xin	 Gao	Julie	 Park
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Including Covariates and Constructing Interval Estimates of Multistate Life Table Quantities Using Cross-Sectional Data: An Alternative to Sullivan's Method	Healthy life expectancy (HLE) is an important measure of population health. Sullivan's method is the most commonly used method for estimating HLE, because its data requirements are less stringent than those for multistate methods: Sullivan's method requires only cross-sectional mortality rates and cross-sectional health prevalence rates, whereas multistate methods require panel data. Sullivan’s method, however, is limited in its ability to produce HLE estimates for subpopulations due to limited disaggregation of cross-sectional mortality rates and small cell sizes in health surveys. We develop an alternative method that allows the inclusion of covariates in HLE estimation and the construction of interval estimates of HLE for any desired subpopulation. The method involves using Gibbs sampling to sample parameters from a hazard model, using an ecological inference model for producing transition probability matrices from the Gibbs samples, and using standard multistate equations to convert the transition probability matrices into HLE estimates.	Scott	M. Lynch	J.	Scott  Brown
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Respondent Cooperation and Requests for Contacts in Longitudinal Research	Researchers contemplating panel research designs regularly face the problem of panel attrition. A vital tool in reducing panel attrition is first wave information, which can be used to locate respondents who move. We analyze data from the 1988 National Survey of Families and Households (N = 13,007) to examine respondent cooperation to requests made during the initial interview for names and addresses of friends and relatives who might help researchers locate respondents who move. About 90 percent of respondents provided at least one contact. Compared to respondents who provide three contacts, respondents who provide one or no contacts have 26% or 60%, respectively, lower odds of being found the next year. Utilizing censored Poisson and sequential logistic regression we find that respondents with greater interest in the survey, and larger family and social networks, supply more contacts. Respondents from racial minority groups and respondents in the East provide fewer contacts.	Colter	 Mitchell	Vaughn	R.A. Call
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Disparities in Birthweight by Maternal Educational Attainment and Race/Ethnicity: An Illustrative Example of a New Modeling Approach	This paper takes an in-depth look at a new way of modeling the major underlying cause of infant mortality and childhood morbidity – low birth weight. The paper illustrates the quantile regression technique and its benefits over current methods (almost exclusively based on statistical models of the mean using OLS regression, or dichotomous measures of low birthweight using logit or probit regression) by focusing on the association between maternal education and subsequent birth weight using the 2001 U.S. Natality Data Set containing nearly 4 million observations. After establishing the complex relationship between maternal educational attainment and birth weight, we then further consider how maternal education is associated with birth weight outcomes within 14 race/ethnic groups. Preliminary results indicate that the common analytical techniques would have obscured the strong association between maternal education and birthweight at the most vulnerable portion of the birthweight distribution.	Michael	S. Pollard
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Growth Mixture Modeling for Sequential Growth Processes	We re-visit the issue of “compensatory growth hypothesis”. The main idea is that some infants who experience substandard growth due to nutrition deficiency may grow faster than other children at a later age, and eventually catch up. We test this hypothesis using the data from the Cebu longitudinal study that records two developmental phases for each individual: the first developmental phase includes 12 bi-monthly records from age zero to age two, and the second developmental phase includes three records measured around age 7, 10 and 14. To test the compensatory growth hypothesis is to identify a subgroup in the sample that grows slower than others from age 0-2, but catches up from age 7-14. Being able to simultaneously identify the optimal number of subgroups that has qualitatively different growth trajectories and the growth trajectory within each subgroup based on empirical data is the major strength of growth mixture modeling technique.	Shige	 Song	Bengt	 Muthen
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Modeling the Effect of Disease on Functional Change in the HRS	Previous research on functional decline has largely focused on the onset of disability or short-term changes in ADLs. The purpose of this paper was to model functional change longitudinally using mixed effects models and to estimate the effect of existing disease and disease onset on functional change. Participants came from five waves (1998-2004) of the combined Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and Assets and Healthy Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey, providing a nationally representative longitudinal study of Americans aged 50 and over living in the community (N=17,318). Functional change was nonlinear and varied by sex, race, education, and income. Existing chronic conditions and onset of disease were both related to functional decline; arthritis, heart disease, and lung disease caused the largest drops in function.	Dawn	 Alley	Beth	J. Soldo
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Trends in Disability-Free Life Expectancy in France: Consistent and Diverging Patterns According to the Underlying Disability Indicator	In this study we propose several estimates of disability-free life expectancy (DFLE), based on various indicators of disability. The aim is to point out specific patterns related to the underlying concept and indicator used: common functional problems, activity restrictions, dependency on someone.  We estimated 10 different DFLE based on 4 different household based surveys, three of them providing chronological series. The study confirms the usual patterns of age trajectory, gender gap, whatever the underlying concept, while these patterns are not evenly stressed. It shows the closeness of DFLE estimates based on similar disability indicators, even coming from different databases. Time trends differ according to the estimates; the more  severe the disability indicator, the steeper the increase in DFLE.  Despite data constraints and limitations, this study highlights the policy relevance of producing a whole set of DFLE indicators to better appraise disability patterns and trends in each country.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Aurore	 Clavel	Isabelle	 Romieu	Jean-Marie	 Robine
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Chronic Conditions and the Decline in Late-Life Disability, 1997-2004	Using the 1997-2004 National Health Interview Survey, we examine changes in chronic conditions as explanations for declines in late-life disability prevalence. We first decompose disability declines into changes in the prevalence of chronic conditions and in the risk of disability given a condition. In doing so, we extend traditional decomposition techniques to incorporate annual measures. We then repartition these traditional components into causal and co-morbid components based on respondents’ reports of conditions causing disability. We find increases in most conditions and declines in their association with disability. However, only 2 of the 7 condition groups that we examined—heart/circulatory conditions and sensory impairments (specifically, vision impairments)—were less likely to cause disability in 2004 than in 1997. Out of a total decline in disability prevalence of 1.45 percentage points, declines in heart/circulatory conditions causing disability account for .92 percentage points and declines in vision impairments causing disability account for .59 percentage points.	Vicki	A. Freedman	Robert	 Schoeni	Linda	G. Martin	Jennifer	C. Cornman
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Productive Social Activities and Well-Being in Mid-Old Age	The purpose of this study is to test whether paid jobs and unpaid volunteer work reduce the rate of health decline in middle and later life. Using four waves of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we estimated a series of individual growth curve models to assess the effects of productive activities on health trajectories. The central finding is that both paid work and volunteering have an independent promoting effect on self-rated health and psychological well-being. Specifically, both duration and diversity of engagement are associated with a slower rate of health deterioration across waves. However, in terms of intensity, only a modest amount of productive activities is sufficient for a health benefit. These findings suggest the optimal activity pattern for older adults based on activity and adaptation theory. The results are net effects after controlling for sociodemographic characteristics and predictors for poor health at baseline.	Yanni	 Hao	Linda	 Waite
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Pill Discontinuation and Its Aftermath in 18 Developing Countries	In most developing countries the pill is the most commonly used reversible method of contraception. Yet typically about 30% of women abandon the method within 12 months for reasons that imply dissatisfaction with the method. What happens thereafter this has considerable significance for the incidence of unwanted pregnancies, induced abortion and fertility. This paper uses DHS contraceptive calendar data from 18 countries to assess, in detail, method-specific switching probabilities following pill discontinuation and their correlates. Within 3 months, the percentage of women switching to another modern method ranged from 18% to 57% with a mean of 35%. Switching to a traditional method ranged from less than 5% in 4 countries to over 30% in 4 other countries, with a mean of 18%. Two individual correlates of switching (women’s education and fertility preference) are assessed and the paper ends with an examination of the link between program characteristics and switching.	Mohamed	M. Ali
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Preliminary Findings on Migrants-Nonmigrant Differentials in Contraceptive Discontinuation and Contraceptive Switching Behavior in Indonesia	Understanding the contraceptive use dynamics among women migrants is considered important, especially to a country like Indonesia that is undergoing demographic, social, economic and political changes and experiencing an increasing female-dominated migration during the last few decades. Using the 2000 wave of Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS3), this study seeks to examine the determinants of contraceptive discontinuation and switch among women migrants in Indonesia. The major conclusion from the competing event history analysis is that several demographic, socioeconomic, and community characteristics as well as the quality of the family planning program are significant predictors of contraceptive discontinuation and contraceptive switching among women migrants, although the magnitudes of such effects vary across different migrant types. Hopefully the results of this study will provide guidance to policymakers to employ effective means to incorporate migration and issues that are sensitive to women migrants in their family planning and reproductive health programs.	Hui-Peng	 Liew
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	The Effect of Access to Family Planning Services during Antenatal, Delivery and Postpartum Care on Contraceptive Use in the Postpartum Period	This study explores the importance of family planning services during antenatal, delivery and postpartum care on the use of a contraceptive method in the six-month postpartum period. We compare the access to family planning services during antenatal care, delivery and the postpartum period of women who are using a contraceptive method and women who would like to use a contraceptive method but are not using one. To assess the relative importance of family planning services in each of these phases, we fit a logistic regression model that controls for women’s socioeconomic and demographic characteristics and unobserved variables at the community level. Data come from a survey of 600 women who visited a health center in the six-month postpartum period in Nicaragua. Results show that family planning counseling and referral during antenatal care and offering a family planning method right after delivery increase the probability of contraceptive use.	Estela	 Rivero-Fuentes	Ricardo	 Vernon
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Discontinuation and Resumption of Contraceptive Use: Results from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Using data from Round 6 of the NSFG, we analyze the probability that a woman will discontinue using a contraceptive method, and having discontinued, she will resume use of that or another method.    We produce life table probabilities to analyze contraceptive failure and discontinuation for method-related reasons within 6 months, 12 months, 18 months and 24 months of initiating use of a method. After discontinuation, we calculate the probability of resuming use of specific methods within 12 months, controlling for the method used prior to discontinuation. Using data from the 2001 Abortion Patient Survey, we estimate probabilities adjusted for underreporting of abortions in the NSFG.    While contraceptive failure rates remain relatively unchanged since the prior round of the NSFG in 1995, discontinuation for all method-related reasons have increased substantially, as have total discontinuations. We use proportional hazards models to clarify the characteristics related to discontinuation and resumption of use.	Barbara	 Vaughan	James	 Trussell	Susheela	D. Singh	Kathryn	 Kost
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Designing Surveys of International Migrants: The Needle in the Haystack, or Finding the Right Haystack? A Case Study of Colombians in Ecuador	International migration is taking on increased importance in the world, leading to increased interest in how to collect data on international migrants, usually rare elements in destination countries. This is leading to the development and testing of methodologies for sampling and data collection. There have been few efforts to collect data on developing countries, on south-south migration. This paper will report on the design of a sample survey of Colombians, including refugees, who migrated to Ecuador since 2000. In the absence of a good up-to-date sampling frame, proportionate sampling of areas from a previous census, two-phase sampling, and snowball sampling were used to attempt to sample sufficient migrants. The paper will discuss rationales for the use of these methodologies and the actual experience in this case, concluding with recommendations for future surveys of similar populations in developing countries.	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Contextual Factors Influencing Sexual Activity within Adolescent Social Networks in a Micropolitan/Rural Area	This paper examines factors influencing sexual activity among 15-19 year-olds from a micropolitan/rural area, recruited by peers through Participant-Driven Recruitment, a methodology that combines participatory research with Respondent-Driven Sampling.  Using the social network derived from recruiting as the unit of analysis, findings indicate that adolescents who: engaged in alcohol, drug and tobacco use; who were older; and who communicated with adults about alcohol, drugs, pregnancy, sex, and STDs were more likely to engage in sexual activity. Social network characteristics generated using RDS analysis software show moderate to substantial homophily (tendency of similar persons to form social ties) among the adolescents. Graphics of the social network are also included, providing greater insight into the contextual and reciprocal nature of social ties. Social structures beyond dyadic relationships are explored, illuminating distinctive influences not likely to be captured by conventional statistical methods alone, offering complementary data seldom found in studies regarding non-metropolitan adolescents.	Deladem	 Kusi-Appouh
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Assessment and Validation of Respondent Driven Sampling	We assess the statistical validity of respondent-driven-sampling (RDS), an approach that is becoming increasingly popular for sampling hard to reach populations. RDS is based on certain assumptions about the social network connecting members of the population. It purports to allow valid inference from the sample to all potential members of the population of interest and to yield statistically unbiased estimates of behaviors of hidden populations. We evaluate the validity of a number of the key assumptions of RDS with a simulation model that is able to describe potential populations of FSWs and includes a realistic structure of their social networks. By modifying the model parameters, we evaluate what effects the possible violation(s) of the assumptions have on the inference that can be drawn. Variation in model parameters are empirically informed by exploratory research conducted among female sex workers in Shanghai, China. We also explore a wider range of input parameters to allow our results to be generalizable to a broader range of hard-to reach populations.	Jing	 Li	Giovanna	 Merli	Erik	 Nordheim	William	Whipple  Neely
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Surveying Migrant Households: A Comparison of Census-Based, Snowball, and Intercept Surveys	Few representative surveys of households of migrants exist, limiting our ability to study the effects of international migration on sending families. We report the results of an experiment designed to compare the performance of three alternative survey methods in collecting data from Japanese-Brazilian families of migrants to Japan. The three surveys conducted were 1) Households selected randomly from a door-to-door listing using the Brazilian Census to select census blocks; 2) A snowball survey using Nikkei community groups to select the seeds; and 3) An intercept survey collected at Nikkei community gatherings, ethnic grocery stores, sports clubs, and language schools where family members of migrants are likely to congregate. We analyze how closely well-designed snowball and intercept surveys can approach the much more expensive census-based method in terms of giving information on the characteristics of migrants, the level of remittances received, and the incidence of return migration.	David	 McKenzie	Johan	 Mistiaen
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Damned If You Do, Damned If You Don't: Religion and HIV-Risk Network Structure	While scholars have recently begun examining the link between religion and HIV-risk, their focus consistently conceptualizes both religion and risk as individual level factors. In this paper I show that this focus considerably limits our ability to understand the theorized relationships. The attention in existing research devoted to individual's “risk” behaviors, fails to recognize the important role of their partner(s)' characteristics in the riskiness of those behaviors. I draw on observed data for a number of sexual partnerships – constrained by gender and religious affiliation – to simulate networks from which I estimate how readily those differences subsequently correspond to changes in network-level factors of HIV-risk. By conceptualizing HIV-risk as a problem of network position, I demonstrate how reductions in risk behaviors resulting from religious participation (observed in previous work) can actually generate little-to-no effect on group level risk, and can even correspond to increases in group level risk.	Jimi	 Adams
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Social Interactions and Social Diseases	In this paper, we review what is known about the role of social and  sexual networks in the diffusion of sexually transmitted diseases and  clarify areas of demographic research that would benefit from new  theoretical approaches, new data and new methods. Our focus is on HIV  and other sexually transmitted diseases that are among the most  rapidly growing diseases through out the developing world,  particularly sub-Saharan Africa. Our general conclusion adds to the  evidence that sexual networks are the primary mechanism through which  HIV is spread and transformed in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) by taking  into account the influence of social networks on the structure and  composition of sexual networks. We also conclude that theoretical  perspectives from the network literature should lead to new data  collection and the use of methodologies that are not standard in this  area in order to understand better the social dynamics of social  diseases.	Susan	 Watkins	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Statistical Models for Sexual Networks on Likoma Island, Malawi: Implications for Sexual Behavior and HIV Control	Despite its importance, little research has addressed structural factors of sexual networks contributing to the generalized epidemic in Sub-Saharan Africa. We use sociocentric network data derived from a population-based survey of sexual partnerships conducted in Likoma Island (Malawi) and fit exponential random graph models (ERGMs) to a one-year sexual network, comprising 1463 individuals, from Likoma Island. The network is sparse, with a network density of 0.001. A simple structural ERGM incorporating edge effects and dyad-wise shared partnerships (DSPs) indicates that the log-odds of observing a new tie in the network are approximately -5.675, reflecting the sparseness of the observed network. Also significant is the coefficient on the DSP(1) term, with a log-odds of a new tie creating a DSP(1) of -0.519, indicating that a tie added to the sexual network is less likely to create a shared partnership than tie added to a random graph. This has important implications for the formation of sexual networks on Likoma.	James	H. Jones	Stephane	 Helleringer
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Concordance in Perceived Partner-Types between Sexual Partners among Adolescents	Contraceptive and condom practices vary by partner-type (main vs. casual). Couple-level STI interventions require both partners’ participations, and may also require that both partners perceive the other as main. Objectives of this study were to examine 1) the reciprocity of adolescents’ sexual relationships, 2) the concordance in partner-types reported by females and males among reciprocally nominated dyads, and 3) odds ratios of dyad-level condom use at last sex by relationship-types reflecting concordance in perceived partner-types (main-concordant, discordant, and casual-concordant) among reciprocally nominated dyads. The relationships reported by adolescents were often not reciprocal. Perceived partner-types were largely discordant between partners. Main concordance in partner-types significantly decreased the odds of dyad-level condom use at last sex. When female adolescents perceived their partners as main compared to casual, couples were significantly less likely to report using a condom at last sex; however, there was no association between couples’ condom use and males’ perceived partner-types.	Michiyo	 Yamazaki	Jonathan	 Ellen
2007	131	Children and Time Use	Extent and Type of Child Care during the Kindergarten Year and Child Well-Being: A Comparison of Regression and Propensity Score Methods	While much research has focused on formal after-school programs and child outcomes, little is known about the relationship between more typical school-age child care experiences and child well-being. In addition, the relationship between child care prior to school entry and child well-being is well documented, but the association between school-age child care and child outcomes is poorly understood. This paper provides one of the first systematic examinations of school-age child care experiences and children’s socioemotional and cognitive well-being using a nationally representative sample of kindergartners. Preliminary results show that almost half of kindergartners spend a portion of their day in child care, but the type of child care, rather than the amount of time in care, relates to child well-being. Extending this analysis, this paper compares estimates from propensity score matching methods to more traditional regression estimates, expanding existing knowledge of the relationship between school-age child care and child outcomes.	Amy	E. Claessens
2007	131	Children and Time Use	Parents’ Time with Children: Patterns in Diverse Family Contexts	Scholarship on patterns of parental time involvement with children in the U.S. has increased in recent years. Few studies, however, have as their chief aim an understanding of parental time involvement with children across diverse family forms. The key contribution of this paper is to elaborate extant knowledge by examining time spent with children in a diverse array of two-parent family structures. We limit our investigation to households with two coresidential “romantically” involved adults (e.g., first marriage, remarriage, and cohabitation) because a deepened understanding of the heterogeneity of two-parent households as environments for children is important empirically and conceptually. A second contribution of this paper is that we investigate patterns using data at two time points: 1997 and 2003. While this is a relatively short time-span, this comparison provides important leverage on the robustness of patterns that emerge.	Hiromi	 Ono	Pamela	J. Smock
2007	131	Children and Time Use	The Quantity and Quality of Child Care Provision in Australian Households	Using data from the 1992 and 1997 Australian Time Use Surveys, we explore the patterns of child care time spent by parents in Australia and estimate censored regression models of the quantity and quality of the time that parents spend in child care and the time parents spend in market work.  Our results show that mothers and fathers differ remarkably in the determinants and levels of the quality of time they spend with children.  We also find that how the quality of time spent caring for children is conceptualized affects the conclusions we draw about the determinants of parental child care time.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski	Gigi	 Foster
2007	132	Gender and Work	How Women's Employment and Related Gender Differentials Vary by Education: Common Patterns across Affluent Nations	Using LIS data on 13 affluent nations, we show a common pattern across nations that better educated women are more likely to be employed. Largely because of this pattern, gender inequality in median annual earnings (when the nonemployed enter as 0) is less extreme among the well educated than those with less education. Gender inequality in earnings among those employed full-time differs little by education, however. These patterns hold across nations. However, where women's employment differs the most across nations is at lower educational levels (college graduates have almost uniformly high levels in each nation), suggesting that policies may be most important at the bottom. Finally, we speculate about the theoretical implications of these findings in a context of marital homogamy.	Paula	S. England	Emily	F. Shafer
2007	132	Gender and Work	Gender Effects on Labor Market Outcomes in Russia, 1985-2001: Institutional Change, Family Structure, and Regional Variation	We analyze factors influencing the evolving effects of gender on labor market outcomes in contemporary Russia. Using 7,167 employment histories spanning 1985-2001 from the Survey of Stratification and Migration Dynamics in Russia, we estimate event history models for employment events (employment entries and exits, job changes) and logistic regression models for changes in career trajectories (upward and downward mobility conditional on a job change taking place). We empirically address several research questions regarding institutional change and gender inequality in the labor market: 1) How has Russia’s market transition affected gender differences in access to employment and career trajectories through jobs of different quality? 2) How do marital status and fertility shape the labor market transitions of Russian women and men during the late-Soviet and post-Soviet era? 3) Do the dynamics of gender differences in labor market outcomes vary by region and type of locality in a context of market transition?	Theodore	P. Gerber	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris
2007	132	Gender and Work	The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Gender and Caste Groups in India	This paper investigates whether there have been beneficial wage gains for women and minorities because of increased competition following liberalization of trade in India. Based on Becker’s model of taste-based employer discrimination, it is expected that as an economy becomes more competitive, employer discrimination should decline. The trade liberalization reforms that began in 1991 in India increased competition by lowering protection in certain manufacturing industries. Firms who could indulge a taste for discrimination when trade protection allowed supernormal profits, may not have been able to continue to do so as competition eliminated such profits. Using individual-level data and tariff data from pre- and post-reform periods, the paper finds that wage differences reduced for female workers relative to male workers in the more open manufacturing sector industries. However, there is no significant effect on the wage differential between low and high caste workers.	Marilyn	 Jacob
2007	132	Gender and Work	Does Economic Globalization Benefit Women? Export Production, Foreign Investment, and Gender Inequality in Mexico	In this paper we examine the effect of foreign investment and export production on gender inequality in Mexico, a country that epitomizes the global shift to an open-market economic strategy. Using data from nationally representative surveys of manufacturing firms between 1992 and 2001 we find that foreign and export-oriented firms employ significantly more women at every occupational level than nationally-owned firms producing goods for sale in the domestic market. The greater employment of women in foreign and export firms cannot be explained by their higher demand for workers of lower skill levels, their size, capital intensity, or industry among other factors. Using managers’ responses to survey questions regarding their gender preferences in hiring we find that managers in foreign-owned export firms have a preference for hiring women that cannot be explained by firm-level factors and which may partly account for the observed differences in female employment.	Andres	 Villarreal	Wei-hsin	 Yu
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Childhood Health, Nutrition, and Average Adult Height in Low-Income Countries	We create a database of adult heights for twenty-nine low-income countries for birth cohorts born between 1945 and 1985. We study the effect of average protein and calorie consumption, and the infant mortality rate, on cohort adult height. Most of the variation in height across countries is due to fixed effects, while sampling variation in measured cohort height produces a low signal to noise ratio in the data. Taking account of these factors, we find that variations in cohort height over time are sensitive to changing health and nutrition at birth and in adolescence. The presence of large fixed effects means that it may be unwise to use population height as a measure of health and nutrition in comparisons across different populations. Changes in cohort height over time can be used as a measure of changing childhood health and nutrition, provided health is understood as morbidity rather than mortality.	Yoko	 Akachi	David	 Canning
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Seeking Evidence for Finch and Crimmins’s Hypothesis of Inflammatory Exposure: The Effect of Canton of Birth on Costa Rican Elderly’s Health.	In order to explain the secular decline in mortality due to cardiovascular illnesses, Finch and Crimmins (2004) propose that exposure to infectious diseases early in life increases the risk of chronic inflammation through the life course. This paper seeks evidence for this hypothesis with data from a Costa Rican aging study, called CRELES. This country is ideal for studying the hypothesis because it has recently achieved very high life expectancy, but its current elderly population experienced a highly infectious environment early in life. The hypothesis is tested by studying the association of a highly infectious environment early in life with prevalence of chronic conditions, mortality, and biomarkers linked to inflammation. We find no conclusive evidence for Finch and Crimmins’ hypothesis, because the measure for early inflammatory exposure is only associated with diabetes biomarker and hypertension. Results seem to provide evidence for Barker’s hypothesis of early life programming of chronic diseases.	Gilbert	 Brenes
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Black-White Differences in the Relationship between Childhood Socioeconomic Status and Adult Health	A growing literature suggests that childhood socioeconomic disadvantage has long term, and perhaps cumulative, effects on health. However, little if any previous research examines race/ethnic differences in the association between childhood socioeconomic status and health. In the U.S., racial minorities are more likely to experience socioeconomic adversity than whites at all ages. In addition, the health effects of childhood economic adversity may be dissimilar for racial minorities than for majority whites. Thus differences in both exposure to childhood economic adversity and in the effects of this adversity may be very important to understanding race/ethnic differences in adult health. In this paper, I address these issues using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. I examine black-white differences in the impact of childhood socioeconomic status on the presence and age of onset of any of six chronic conditions; I also examine the prevalence and age of onset of cardiovascular disease.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	The Timing of Early-Life Health and Socioeconomic Disadvantage	This paper addresses the importance of the timing of a health or socioeconomic disadvantage during childhood. Specifically, it has two goals. First, I ask whether some periods of exposure to disadvantage during childhood are more important than others. Are there key points during childhood in which simultaneously experiencing an important educational transition with a health or socioeconomic disadvantage is particularly detrimental for later-life well-being? Secondly, does such a disadvantage affect all later points in an individual’s life equally, or do the effects cumulate or attenuate over time? I will examine these questions using data from the British National Child Development Study (NCDS), unique life course data from the U.K., a context with many similarities but also a few important differences to the U.S.	Margot	I. Jackson
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Inter-Neighborhood Migration, Race, and Environmental Hazards: Modeling Micro-Level Processes of Environmental Inequality	This study combines individual-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics with neighborhood-level environmental hazard data derived from the Environmental Protection Agency and sociodemographic characteristics drawn from the U.S. census to provide a first examination of racial and ethnic differences in migration between neighborhoods with varying levels of environmental pollution. Results indicate that profound racial and ethnic differences in exposure to industrial pollution are maintained more by differences in mobility destinations than by differential effects of pollution on the decision to move. Conditional upon moving, black and Latino householders enter neighborhoods that are significantly more polluted than those accessed by whites, while other-race householders enter neighborhoods with less pollution. These differences cannot be explained by group differences in socioeconomic resources or other micro-level characteristics but are shaped, to a certain degree, by group differences in the reaction to non-white populations that tend to be concentrated in highly polluted areas.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Liam	 Downey
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Home Leaving and Migration of Young Adults in Indonesia: The Role of Education and Household Assets	The departure from the parental home, whether to migrate or to establish an independent household nearby, is one of the salient events experienced by young adults during their life course. This paper investigates the factors determining home leaving among young adults in Indonesia, using data from three waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, IFLS1(1993), IFLS2(1997) and IFLS3(2000). The paper exploits the longitudinal nature of the survey to answer the following questions: what role do parental/household assets and human capital play in influencing whether the  individual: i) co-reside with their parents, ii) establish new households near his/her parents' households (move locally), iii) migrate. Preliminary findings suggest that age, potential wages, and household assets influence home leaving and migration decisions of sons. For daughters, wages of potential spouses influence decision to migrate but not to move locally. Different types of assets influence local move and migration differently.	Firman	 Witoelar
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Rural Out-Migration to Alternative Destinations in the Southern Ecuadorian Andes: The Roles of Livelihood Diversification and Environmental Assets	Out-migration from rural areas is a key driver of change in the developing world, but connections between this process and rural livelihoods have not been fully explored. Motivated by the literatures on environmental refugees and livelihood diversification, this paper addresses the influence of environmental assets and livelihood strategies on rural out-migration from the southern Ecuadorian Andes. The data originate from a multilevel longitudinal survey implemented in a key region of out-migration and environmental risk. I use a multinomial event history model to compare the effects of demographic factors and livelihood activities and assets on out-migration to local, rural, urban and international destinations. The results indicate that (1) drivers of out-migration differ substantially across migration streams, (2) origin-area livelihood diversification primarily increases internal migration but mostly decreases international migration, and (3) environmental assets have important influences on out-migration, but effects are not unidirectional as predicted by the literature on environmental refugees.	Clark	L. Gray
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	People, Land, and Context: Multilevel Determinants of Off-Farm Employment in the Ecuadorian Amazon	This paper investigates factors affecting decisions of settler colonists to engage in off-farm employment (OFE) in rural or urban areas in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon (NEA). While OFE decisions are ultimately a matter of individual choice, factors associated with the farm household and the local community also play key roles in this decision-making. Little empirical research, however, has been done on the simultaneous identification of such factors and their effects on labor mobility, and consequently on deforestation and urbanization in frontier areas. This research develops a multilevel conceptual framework and uses a multinomial, multilevel statistical model to study OFE in the NEA in 1999 as a result of factors at the individual, farm household, and community levels. The results show differences between movers and nonmovers in personal characteristics, human capital, farm household life cycle, land use, land management, farm environmental conditions, transportation accessibility, community size, and structure of local labor markets.	Alisson	F. Barbieri
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Marital Disruption and Economic Well-Being: A Comparative Analysis	Though there is a considerable literature concerned with the economic consequences of marital breakdown, there is still substantial disagreement in terms of its magnitude. One of the major problems underlying this debate is how economic well-being is defined. In this work we implement several measures of well-being of monetary and multidimensional nature using data from European Community Household Panel. Another issue in this literature concerns selection bias of divorcing couples. We tackle this issue using a propensity score matching technique combined with a Difference-in-Differences estimator. Results confirm the importance of well-being definition. We find a high gender bias when using monetary measures but a considerably lower one or even non-existent when using non-monetary indices.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Gianni	 Betti
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Does Community Context Have Important Bearings on the Divorce Rate?	Decisions to divorce could be affected by a number of characteristics of the local community. Community characteristics may be barriers to divorce (e.g. strong social control) or increase the attractiveness of divorcing (e.g. through access to a good remarriage market), but our knowledge of such influences is sparse. This study examines the impact of several community-level factors that may influence a couple’s risk of divorce: Socioeconomic conditions, the local marriage market, and the normative climate. Discrete-time hazard models with community-level fixed effects are estimated using a register-based data set of all Norwegian first marriages contracted 1980-2000 that includes longitudinal information on both the community and the couple level. Results show that higher average education, an unbalanced marriage market, and population density drive divorce rates down but that economic conditions do not matter for divorce risk. Estimates obtained from regular models are markedly different than those obtained with the fixed-effects approach.	Torkild	 Lyngstad
2007	135	Union Dissolution	The Effects of Divorce Risk on the Labour Supply of Married Couples	This paper presents a model of lifetime utility maximization in which expectations of future marital transitions play a role in the determination of work hours. Married people with spouses who earn more are predicted to devote additional time to the labour market when they are confronted with a high likelihood of divorce and vice versa. Similarly, work hours should be positively associated with marriage probability for single people who expect to marry a higher earning spouse. These predictions are tested using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Marriage and divorce probabilities are calculated from proportional hazard models and are included in regressions of annual hours. Married women are found to work more when they face a high divorce probability. This relationship holds both over an individual's life-cycle and across people with different inherent risks of divorce and is robust to the use of alternative marital transition measures.	Kerry	L. Papps
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Sexual Frequency and the Stability of Marital and Cohabiting Unions	Prior research on marriage shows that lower sexual frequency or lower sexual satisfaction is associated with higher rates of divorce. Scant research, however, has addressed the role of sexual activity in the dissolution of cohabiting unions. We draw upon social exchange theory to develop our hypotheses and propose why sexual frequency is more important in cohabitation: lower costs to ending the union for cohabitors, cohabitors' lack of union-specific emotional and non-emotional capital, and cohabitors' higher demands for sexual activity. In short, sexuality occupies a more prominent role in cohabitation than marriage, and poor sexuality within cohabitation is more likely to lead to dissolution. Using the National Survey of Families and Households, we employ discrete-time event history models to examine the relationships between sexual frequency and union dissolution. Results indicate that low sexual frequency is associated with significantly higher rates of union dissolution in cohabitation than in marriage.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Constance	T. Gager
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	Higher Education Policy as Secondary School Reform: Texas Public High Schools after Hopwood	This article assesses three policies enacted in Texas after the elimination of affirmative action as high school reform initiatives. The Texas top 10% law, the Longhorn and Century Scholarships, and the TEXAS Grants Program were designed to improve diversity at Texas universities. Nonetheless, this paper's analysis of panel data describing Texas high schools between 1993 and 2002 demonstrates that each of these policies redistributed college-related activity at the state’s high schools and boosted high school students’ academic engagement. These findings lend support to comprehensive K-16 school reform proposals, which seek use of college opportunities as incentives to improve the educational outcomes of high school students.	Thurston	 Domina
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	Do Small Classes Lead to Larger Variability in Student Achievement? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment	Previous research from randomized experiments on class size indicates positive immediate and long-term effects of small classes on average achievement for all students. However, the effects of small classes on the variability on student achievement have not been examined. Differences in achievement variability between smaller and larger classes are of great importance, since they indicate differential effects of small classes across different types of students (e.g., lower or higher achieving students). Since previous findings on the social distribution of the small class effects are unclear, the present study uses data from a four-year large-scale randomized experiment to examine the effects of small classes on the achievement gap. The results indicate that higher achieving students benefit even more from being in small classes in early grades than other students. However, there is no indication that small class reduction is a mechanism that can reduce the achievement gap.	Spyros	 Konstantopoulos	Amelie	 Constant
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	College Going and the Texas Top 10% Law: A Regression Discontinuity Approach	The Texas legislature changed the college admission regime in 1997 when it passed H.B.588, popularly known as the top 10% law, which guarantees automatic admission to any public university in the state to all high school seniors who graduate in the top decile of their high school class. Using a representative survey of Texas high school seniors as of 2002, we use regression discontinuity methods to discern the impact of the top 10% law on four nested college enrollment decisions: college enrollment; enrollment at a 4-year institution; enrollment in Texas institutions; and enrollment at the Texas public flagships. We find that eligible seniors are more likely to attend college and to enroll in four-year institutions than seniors who do not qualify for the admission guarantee, but also that the law boosts overall minority students' college enrollment, their enrollment in 4-year colleges, and also at the two public flagships.	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu	Marta	 Tienda
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	State High School Exit Examinations and Retention in Grades 9 and 10	In a recent paper the senior author demonstrated that state high school exit examinations (HSEEs) have the effect of reducing state-level high school completion rates. The state-level analysis in that paper made clear that state HSEEs reduce public high school graduation rates, but they did not explore the mechanisms that might give rise to that effect. As a result, the policy implications of that important empirical finding are limited.    One of the best predictors of whether a student drops out of high school is whether they were ever made to repeat a grade in school. At the same time, there is speculation that schools frequently retain students in the grade prior to when state HSEEs are administered. In the present paper we test the hypothesis that state HSEEs affect graduation rates by affecting the rate at which students are retained in school.	John	R. Warren	Amelia	 Corl
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Understanding Contraception Use among Muslims of India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh	Within social demography, religion is frequently cited as an important factor forming the basis of one's identity. Values and practices placed on a list of demographic parameters could have intended and unintended effects on demographic performances of a particular religious community. However, Muslims across the globe are not behaving in a similar fashion. Keeping this view in mind, the present paper examines the attitude of Muslim women towards adoption of contraceptives in three neighboring countries namely India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. NFHS-1998-99 for India and DHS data for Pakistan-1992-93 and Bangladesh-1993-94 are used to carry out the study. It is clear from our analyses that the religious component of prohibition against contraceptives is not that high in Bangladesh as it is in Pakistan and also to some extent in India. Hence the goodwill of authorities in framing the policies may work in achieving the desired demographic goals, defying the conservative religious dictation.	Laxmi	Kant  Dwivedi	Usha	 Ram	Baishali	 Goswami
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Racial Differences and Similarities in Childlessness, 1988 - 2002	In this paper we seek to understand the socioeconomic similarities and differences between white and black women who are childless. Past research has either neglected racial differences among childless women, or attributed childlessness to unique causes for black and white women. While white women’s childlessness has been attributed to increased educational and employment opportunities that conflict with family responsibilities, black women’s childlessness has been viewed as the result of inadequate health care, disease, and coercive sterilization. We re-evaluate these arguments with data from the three most recent waves of the National Survey of Family Growth (cycles 4, 5, and 6).	Jennifer	H. Lundquist
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	The Importance of Ethnicity: Fertility Behavior and Ethnicity in West Africa	Africa is often the neglected stepchild of Eurocentric demographic transition theory. The weak nation-state, extended kinship networks and lasting socio-cultural supports for elevated fertility have often challenged demographers. This paper addresses this central debate and examines the importance of ethnicity in determining current fertility and its proximate determinants in West Africa. Utilizing recent DHS surveys I look at the fertility behavior of ethnic groups spanning more than one country in the region, with current fertility and various proximate determinants as the dependent variable. I fit models for each country separately in the first analysis, followed by pooled fixed effects models for all countries in the second analysis. The results are expected to show the importance of ethno-linguistic groupings, as well as the mitigating effects of structural circumstances in different countries.	Petra	 Nahmias
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Do Sub-Cultural Norms Survive Immigrant Transition? Fertility of Cantonese and Mandarin Chinese Immigrants	This paper examines whether subcultural norms survive immigrant transitions to affect fertility of the two biggest Chinese immigrant subgroups, Cantonese and Mandarins, by analyzing the Census 2000 PUMS. The research finds that Cantonese, who are believed to be more pronatalistic and have higher fertility than Mandarins in China, continue to exhibit these tendencies in the United States. Part of the fertility disparities between Cantonese and Mandarins can be explained by their differences in migration experiences, demographic characteristics and socioeconomic status. Higher Cantonese fertility, however, persists even when all these factors are controlled for, suggesting the effect of pronatal subcultural norms. Furthermore, levels of education and degree of assimilation, which play very important roles in depressing fertility, can also be associated with their regional culture by cause and effect. Some possible causes of the Cantonese pronatal norms and their persistence and changes are explored as well.	Ping	 Ren
2007	138	Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Force	Immigrants' U.S. Labor Market Adjustment: Disaggregating the Occupational Transitions	Using data from the New Immigrant Survey 2003 cohort, changes in occupational prestige between the last job abroad and the first U.S. job and from the first U.S. job to the current U.S. job are examined. Incorporating the first job in the U.S. overcomes an important limitation faced by many previous studies, which were generally restricted to a comparison of the last job abroad and the U.S. job as measured at the time of the survey. Distinctions are made between class of admission groups as the trajectories toward labor market success vary systematically along this dimension. Consistent with a model of immigrant occupational assimilation, all class of admission groups show a U-shaped adjustment pattern with, on average, initial downgrading followed by subsequent ascension. However, although all groups exhibit a similar pattern, the trough of the U is deepest for refugees, who also experience the steepest subsequent upward climb.	Ilana	Redstone  Akresh
2007	138	Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Force	Effects of Foreign Education on Immigrant Earnings	The research reported here explores the effects of foreign education on earnings. Previously, most studies were based on indirect estimated information about foreign education, and documented the lower earnings of immigrants who had foreign education as compared to those who had domestic education. Using direct information obtained from respondents, this research goes beyond the existing studies by suggesting the discount effects of foreign education, consisting of endowment and sheepskin discounts. Our results, as expected, show that the endowment discount on earnings is significant among immigrants who received their highest education in foreign countries. In addition, our results confirm our expectation that the place-specific sheepskin discount is found among those who completed universities in Asia.	Eric	 Fong	Xingshan	 Cao
2007	138	Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Force	The Wages of Skilled Temporary Migrants: Effects of Job Portability and Student Status	More highly skilled temporary migrants are admitted yearly to the U.S.A. than skilled permanent immigrants. This phenomenon is relatively new and there is little empirical research with credible data that establishes the relative earnings or impact of skilled temporary workers. We use the NSF's National Survey of College Graduates which asks visa questions and follows up the college-educated population enumerated in the 2000 Census. We frame the competing expectations on temporary worker earnings: prevailing wage equality, lower reservation wages, segmented markets, visa-job portability, and visa pathways. The findings indicate that visa-job portability and visa pathways (student to worker) significantly reduce the earnings of temporary foreign workers relative to U.S. college-educated natives. Further, tests of the impacts of temporary workers appear to indicate that they adversely impact wages and unemployment. While large scale temporary programs may have certain benefits, they have not been well managed to date.	Lindsay	 Lowell	Johanna	 Schneider
2007	138	Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Force	Has the Mainstream Been Remade? Mexican Origin Workers in the New Economy	This paper examines the labor market integration of Mexican origin workers by exploring inter-ethnic differences in standard versus non-standard jobs, including wage and salaried work on a temporary or part-time basis or on the payroll of an intermediary, as well as self-employment. We compare first, second, and third-generation-plus Mexican Americans to whites and African-Americans of the third generation or beyond, and find that non-standard work is actually more common among third generation whites than among minorities. However, while whites engaged in non-standard work are disproportionately likely to be self-employed, an activity associated with higher levels of education and experience, other groups are likely to be wage and salaried workers employed in non-standard jobs into which less-skilled, less experienced workers get sorted. While non-standard jobs compare unfavorably with standard jobs across all types of compensation examined, the net effect of greater minority reliance on non-standard work on inter-ethnic differences in compensation is slight.	Renee	 Reichl	Roger	 Waldinger
2007	139	Cohabitation and Marriage	Family Boundary Ambiguity and the Measurement of Family Structure: The Significance of Cohabitation	Using data from the first wave of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we examine family boundary ambiguity in adolescent and mother reports of family structure. The greater the family complexity, the more likely adolescent and mother reports of family structure were discrepant. This discrepancy was most pronounced for cohabiting stepfamilies. Among mothers who reported living with a cohabiting partner, only one-third of their teenage children also reported residing in a cohabiting stepfamily. For adolescents who reported their family structure as a cohabiting stepfamily, two-thirds of their mothers agreed. The distribution of adolescents across family structures varies according to whether adolescent, mother, or combined reports are used. Moreover, the relationship between family structure and family processes tied to adolescent well-being differed depending on whose reports of family structure are used. This large discrepancy presents an important measurement problem for family scholars.	Susan	L. Brown	Wendy	D. Manning
2007	139	Cohabitation and Marriage	Marital Expectations among Cohabiting Men and Women	The goal of this paper is to examine the influence of prior relationship history and fertility history on expectations of marriage; hence investigating whether a race and ethnicity differential does exist in marital expectations and whether introducing prior relationship or fertility history into the model explains the existence of such a differential. The analysis will be limited to the 369 cohabiting men and 741 cohabiting women. I plan to use logistic regression to analyze the effects of the independent variables on marital expectations and test whether ordered logistic modeling is a better technique for analysis by retaining the ordinal nature of the dependent variable. Men and women will be analyzed using separate models. This study will help us determine whether there are two types of cohabitors: those that are on the pathway toward marriage and those who are using cohabitation as an alterative to dating.	Jessica	A. Cohen
2007	139	Cohabitation and Marriage	Social Distance and Relationship Progression	For the majority of contemporary young adults, sexual intimacy is no longer reserved for marriage. Much research has confirmed class and race differences in age at entrance into sexual unions and the timing of marriage and parenting. Yet little is known about determinants associated with initial formation and progression of relationships. This paper examines relationship progression, asking whether relationship tempos differ for racially homogamous and heterogamous couples. Data are from 18- to 25-year-olds from the Add Health and the National Survey of Family Growth with recent opposite-sex partners. Results from Cox proportional hazards models reveal that white men’s and women’s progression into sex is significantly more rapid when partners are racial minorities than when they are white; gender differences emerge once controls for individual and family characteristics are included. Progression into cohabiting unions differ for mixed-race and homogamous couples, but the tempo slows and gender differences persist.	Sharon	 Sassler	Kara	 Joyner
2007	139	Cohabitation and Marriage	Mine is Yours: Expense Sharing in Married and Cohabiting Households	Relatively little is known about sharing economic resources within cohabiting relationships in the United States. Access to financial resources may affect individual outcomes and poverty definitions. Using the 2001 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), this study compares the extent of household expense sharing among married and cohabiting couples and considers the role of relative resources and gender specialization. Multinomial logistic analyses suggest that relative resources do much to explain who pays the majority of household expenses, but also find support for differences in gender specialization in married and cohabiting households. The presence of children is positively related to specialization, but couples in which the male partner pays the majority of expenses are less likely to have a child not biologically related to a partner present. Couples in which the female partner pays the majority of expenses are more likely to be cohabiting than married.	Catharine	H. Warner
2007	140	Socioeconomic Status and Health: International Perspectives	Spatial Homogeneity in Uganda’s SES-Child Health Gradient	This paper asks whether the SES-health gradient had uniform intensity in a nationally representative survey in Uganda (UNHS-2000). Answering this question illuminates whether the various parts of the country are achieving similar or disparate success in social protection. The study used random coefficients regression and an interaction between SES and community dummies to study the relationship between stunting, wasting, vaccine coverage versus log income across communities. Analysis showed the expected SES-gradients, but more importantly showed that the community or (primary sampling unit) in which the child lived had no statistically significant effect on the intensity of the SES-health gradient for stunting or receipt of DPT vaccine. A program of pro-poor policies enacted by the central government in the 1990s may have been responsible for equalizing the gradients. We believe this simple method of checking spatial homogeneity can be used in other countries to assess the degree of social protection.	David	 Bishai	Annamarie	 Kisalu	Elizabeth	 Kirapa	George	 Pariyo
2007	140	Socioeconomic Status and Health: International Perspectives	Origin of Socio-Economic Differentials in Health in Uzbekistan: An International Perspective	The study investigates the magnitude of mortality differentials by wealth in Uzbekistan, and compares it with sub-Saharan Africa. Data were derived from DHS surveys. Wealth was distributed evenly in Uzbekistan, whereas the distribution was highly skewed in Africa. Despite major differences in mortality levels, the relationship between mortality indicators and wealth bore much similarity in the two situations: mortality differentials were of the same order of magnitude, with gradients ranging from 2.5 to 1 for child mortality and 1.5 to 1 for adult mortality. However, mortality levels remained lower in Uzbekistan than in Africa at the same level of wealth. On the contrary, there were no differences by wealth in use of health services and level of education in Uzbekistan, whereas wealth gradients were steep in Africa for the same variables. The study suggests that mortality differentials were primarily due to nutritional status, and not to use of health services.	Michel	 Garenne	Sophie	 Hohmann
2007	140	Socioeconomic Status and Health: International Perspectives	The Puzzling SES Gradients in Adult Health and Mortality of a Latin American Population	Vast evidence has shown that poorer health and higher mortality in children are clearly associated with lower socioeconomic status of parents everywhere. In contrast, the evidence of a SES gradient in developing country adult health is scarce and conflicting. Particularly puzzling is the fact that subjective general health status measures have been found in some studies to have much larger SES gradients than more objectively measured health indicators. This paper further investigates this paradox using data from an ongoing longitudinal study of health and survival among elderly Costa Ricans (the CRELES study). We document varying SES gradients across a rich array of health indicators including subjective health, functional status, disease conditions, objective risk factors from blood and urine samples, and mortality data. In addition, we estimate SES gradients in key mediating environmental and behavior variables in order to elucidate what hypotheses may be most promising for further research.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	William	H. Dow
2007	140	Socioeconomic Status and Health: International Perspectives	Length of Life and Wealth of Retired German Men in 2003	Data on mortality by socioeconomic group is not available in Germany due to data protection regulations. Existing estimates originate from sample surveys. The present study aims at closing this gap by estimating mortality of the German male population aged 65+ from an unusual data source. The data come from the German Union of Pension Systems (VDR) and cover over 95% of Germans aged 65+. The 2003 data were provided in the frequency format and classified by age, type of medical insurance, broad professional group, place of residence, and number of the pension credit points. The latter reflects income accumulated over working lives. Estimates of life expectancy and regression-based and empirical mortality rate ratios outline contours of variation across socioeconomic categories. The range of multivariate variation between the extreme groups is 2.5 to 3 fold in terms of relative mortality and is close to 6 years in terms of life expectancy 65.	Vladimir	 Shkolnikov	Rembrandt	 Scholz	Dmitri	A. Jdanov	Michael	 Stegmann	Hans-Martin	 von Gaudecker
2007	141	Parental Influences on Child and Adult Health	Intra-Household Bargaining and Investment in Child Health	In this paper I investigate the intra-household bargaining process and investment in children’s health using Nigerian Demographic and Health Survey data for 2003. I introduce new and direct measures of empowerment which reflect a wife’s relative say in different decision making contexts. To correct the potential bias from the endogeneity of the empowerment measure, an instrumental variables approach is used. Religion and prevalence of polygyny in the neighborhood are used as instruments for the empowerment variables. A mother’s empowerment has a positive and significant impact on the long run health of her child. The decision making process in the household does not appear to be unitary, the husbands and wives have varying preferences and abilities in enforcing their tastes. This study also sheds light on the fact that empowerment is multidimensional and control of economic resources may not be the sole determinant of women’s empowerment in the developing world.	Meherun	 Ahmed
2007	141	Parental Influences on Child and Adult Health	Are Returns to Mothers’ Human Capital Realized in the Next Generation? The Impact of Mother’s Schooling and Long-Run Nutritional Status on Child Human Capital in Guatemala	This paper explores how estimates of the impact of both maternal schooling attainment and long-run nutritional status on child human capital are affected if both are treated as behaviorally determined, using an unusually rich longitudinal data set collected over 35 years in Guatemala. We find that OLS estimates for maternal schooling are likely to understate slightly the impact on grades of schooling relative to the age-cohort mean, but overstate substantially the magnitude and significance of the effect on being ever-schooled. OLS estimates for maternal height understate the causal impact of maternal long-run nutritional status on both anthropometric and schooling child outcomes. Thus, standard estimates may not only be misleading due to endogeneity of maternal human capital; they are also likely to understate the importance of long-run maternal nutritional status relative to maternal schooling attainment in determining child human capital.	Jere	 Behrman	Alexis	 Murphy	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Usha	 Ramakrishnan
2007	141	Parental Influences on Child and Adult Health	Estimating the Causal Effect of Parental Smoking on Youth Uptake	Smoking is the leading preventable cause of death in the U.S., contributing to more than 400,000 deaths annually. A recent public health initiative, Healthy People 2010, aims to cut the prevalence of smoking among adults in half, from the current rate of about 24 percent to 12 percent. Recent policy debates have tended to focus on how to prevent youth from starting to smoke. Embedded in all of the debates about youth smoking is a stylized fact that has yet to be established in a systematic way - whether the strong correlation between parental smoking and youth smoking prevalence is causal or not. The answer to this question seems, on its face, to be obvious. In this paper I use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to estimate whether parental smoking causes children to be more likely to take up smoking later in life.	Dean	R. Lillard
2007	142	Emerging Knowledge about Sexual Behavior in Diverse Settings	Community Influences on Young People’s Sexual Behavior in 3 African Countries	This research investigates the influence of community-level characteristics on the sexual behaviors of young people (15-24) using DHS data from Burkina Faso, Ghana and Zambia. The analysis examines a binary variable coded one if the respondent reports that they had sex with more than one person in the 12 months prior to the survey and they did not use a condom at their last episode of sex. The analysis considers several dimensions of the community: economy, gender norms and inequalities, prevailing demographic behaviors, and the sexual behaviors and attitudes of older generations in the community. Separate models are fitted for males and females in each country. Significant community-level factors included, prevailing gender norms, demographic behaviors, and economic development, although there was variation is the significant factors across genders. The results stress the hierarchy of influences that exist on young people’s sexual behavior, highlighting the need to focus beyond the individual-level when addressing  such behavior.	Rob	 Stephenson	Susan	 Allen
2007	142	Emerging Knowledge about Sexual Behavior in Diverse Settings	Educational Attainment in Emerging Adulthood: Links with Sexual Debut Timing	Educational attainment is an important determinant of population well-being. While some adolescent risk behaviors are negatively associated with educational outcomes, how sexual debut timing relates is unclear. Data from Waves I, II and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (n=4,351) were analyzed to assess: (1) the association between post-adolescent educational attainment and sexual debut timing, and (2) association moderation by race/ethnicity and gender. Although in bivariate analyses persons reporting early (age       	Aubrey	 Spriggs	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern
2007	142	Emerging Knowledge about Sexual Behavior in Diverse Settings	Effective Polygyny in the United States: Adolescent Precursors	This paper examines the extent and correlates of effective polygyny in contemporary American society. The level of effective polygyny (usually defined as the ratio of variance in male reproductive success to variance of female reproductive success) is a potentially important determinant of the level of resources that a society devotes to its children.    Measuring effective polygyny in American society is novel. The concept is usually applied to other species. When applied to human beings, they are typically ethnic subgroups in developing countries.    We treat adolescents’ relationships and sexual behaviors as precursors of reproductive success. Data are drawn from the Add Health Survey. We decompose the adolescent population into a variety of subgroups, in an effort to identify some of the correlates of our measure of effective polygyny. We are particularly interested in correlates considered to be predictive of paternal investment in children.	Siobhan	 Reilly	Eirik	 Evenhouse
2007	142	Emerging Knowledge about Sexual Behavior in Diverse Settings	A National, Population-Based Study of Sexuality at Older Ages in the United States		Stacy	Tessler Lindau	Edward	O. Laumann	Wendy	 Levinson	Colm	 O'Muircheartaigh	Phil	 Schumm	Linda	 Waite
2007	143	Child Labor and Education in Africa	Child Labor and Schooling in Burkina Faso and Mali: A Multilevel Event History Analysis	There are numerous studies on the topic of child labor and schooling in developing countries. Much of the research has been based on data derived from standard cross-sectional household surveys. Despite the findings from these studies and the lessons learnt, there is a need for examining supplementary data sources to assess the full scope of interaction between child labor and schooling. Particularly, the main objective of the research is to analyze the determinants of child labor and schooling in a longitudinal framework. Using two nationally representative and retrospective surveys conducted in the year 2000 in Burkina Faso and Mali, we have adopted a multilevel event history analysis model to analyze child’s labor and schooling. The expected results of these analyses are promising in term of lessons and policy implications.	Jean-François	 Kobiané	Richard	 Marcoux
2007	143	Child Labor and Education in Africa	Progress through School in Urban South Africa: Evidence from Panel Data	This paper uses the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), a longitudinal survey of 4,800 youth in Cape Town, South Africa, to analyze the impact of individual, household, and school characteristics on progress through school. CAPS provides data on 1,500 students who were enrolled in grades 8-10 in 2002. Following these students over the next three years, we document large differences in the probability of grade advancement between white, coloured, and African youth. Probit regressions indicate that grade advancement between 2002 and 2005 is strongly associated with the respondents’ performance on the literacy and numeracy evaluation administered in 2002. Controlling for these test scores eliminates the white and coloured advantage over Africans in progress through school. We also estimate large effects of household income, and find a negative impact of household shocks such as the loss of employment or death of an adult household member.	David	 Lam	Cally	C. Ardington	Murray	 Leibbrandt
2007	143	Child Labor and Education in Africa	Child Labor, Poverty and Schooling in Ghana and Kenya: A Comparative Analysis	This study explored the relationship between child labor, poverty, and schooling. Specifically, it examined how the household characteristics and government policy impact child labor and school attendance in Ghana and Kenya. Using household-level data from the Statistical Information and Monitoring Programme on Child Labor (SIMPOC) of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), this study compared the nature and determinants of child labor and/or school attendance between Ghana and Kenya. The study found that differences exist between Ghana and Kenya in the relationship between child labor and poverty and schooling. The findings also demonstrate that children can attend school despite facing poverty. Overall, the results of this study highlight the importance of government commitment to the provision of education to all children in these two countries.	Peter	 Moyi
2007	143	Child Labor and Education in Africa	School Attendance, Marriage and Child Labour in Sahel Areas of Burkina Faso	School attendance in Sahelian region of Burkina Faso is still very low around 39%. Girls are more affected by this situation due to early marriages, and heavy involvement in household chores. Boys also are affected with agricultural, pastoral and commercial activities. The phenomenon of child labor outside the family circle is somewhat encouraged by school’s counter production. Economic factors and the rise in the cost of schooling in a context of large poverty, contributes to non-school attendance, early drop out and increased resort to child labor.  The paper is an analysis of some key points between the  Education – Marriage – Child labor triptych. The presentation will use data collected through a national survey financed by UNICEF on the acceleration of girls’ education by setting up an essential learning package. The study was carried out in six of the country’s regions including Sahelian Region .	Yacouba	 Yaro	Erinna	C. Dia
2007	144	Socioeconomic Status and Health: Causation and Selection	The Healthy Bird Gets the Worm: Childhood Health and Inequality in Labor Market Outcomes over the Work Career	This analysis sheds light on the relationship between health and socioeconomic status over the life course by illustrating how labor market outcomes over the work career are patterned by early life health status. The analysis takes advantage of unique data from the Health and Retirement Study linked to administrative records from the Social Security Administration to model trajectories of labor earnings between the ages 25 and 50. We find that those who experience poor childhood health have substantially diminished labor market earnings and experience increased variability in earnings over the work career. Though earning differentials start out small in early adulthood they grow larger over the life course. Part of the child health earning differential is accounted for by health-related selection into diminished educational attainment. The results have important implications both for understanding health disparities over the life course but also the early life determinants of labor market inequality.	Steven	A. Haas	M.	Maria  Glymour
2007	144	Socioeconomic Status and Health: Causation and Selection	Schooling and the Production of Health Inequality	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I examine the mechanisms that link educational attainment and health. The transition from adolescence to adulthood offers a unique opportunity to see health behaviors and educational trajectories as they evolve, and before other complicating factors intervene in adult health. Recent research documents that many health behaviors such as smoking and drinking that are related to the major causes of death and to disparities by sex and race emerge in young adulthood. I examine how specific components of the schooling process such as coursework, school atmosphere, school transitions, and social networks as well as factors theorized to be associated with schooling, such as, future orientation and soft skills relate to health behaviors in early adulthood. I also control for confounding factors such as family background, early health status, and cognitive skills, which predict both school progress and health choices.	Vida	 Maralani
2007	144	Socioeconomic Status and Health: Causation and Selection	Socioeconomic Status and Psychopathology among Men: A Test of the Causation-Selection Issue	While the need for gender-sensitive research focused on women’s mental health has been recognized, studies specifically tailored to disability burdens among men are evolving more slowly. Moreover, a lack of data, especially with respect to poor men and men of colour, presents a challenge. This paper uses a policy relevant, racially diverse sample of fathers from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to assess the predictive value of social selection and social causation hypotheses concerning the association of low socioeconomic status with the increased prevalence of psychiatric disorders. The use of a quasi-experimental strategy designed for making causal inferences concerning socioeconomic status and psychopathology produces compelling results in favour of the dominance of social selection over social causation. However, the results of structural statistical models show the two processes are complementary and result in a downward spiral in the intergenerational transmission of low socioeconomic status and increased psychopathology.	Marilyn	 Sinkewicz
2007	144	Socioeconomic Status and Health: Causation and Selection	The Causal Pathway from Socioeconomic Status to Disability Trajectories in Later Life: The Importance of Mediating Mechanisms for Onset and Accumulation	Demographers have studied the connection of socioeconomic status and disability among older adults for some time. However, the effects of the components of SES (education, income) over time have not been fully explored, nor have their mediating mechanisms. Using the Duke EPESE sample and a novel approach to trajectory analysis, I examine the independent effects of education and income on disability and explore the mechanisms hypothesized as shared and independent mediators in health stratification literature. I find education’s effect is preventive, where income also serves a muting effect on accumulation. Obesity, smoking, and mastery partially mediate the effect of education, where assets and access to care mediate income effects. The roles of mastery and assets were particularly pervasive in decreasing the slope of disability over time. These findings speak to the examination of life course components of SES in later life and to the timing and effectiveness of interventions.	Miles	G. Taylor
2007	145	Economic and Social Impact of 9/11 on NYC	9/11 and the Economy of Downtown and Midtown New York: The Lens of Real Estate Prices		Andy	 Haughwout
2007	145	Economic and Social Impact of 9/11 on NYC	Effects of 9/11 on NY Workers in the Airline Industry		William	 Kornblum
2007	145	Economic and Social Impact of 9/11 on NYC	Effects of 9/11 on High, Middle, and Low Wage Workers in NYC		James	 Parrott
2007	146	Technological Change and the Labor Force	Reemployment Rates over the Life Course: Any Hope after Late Career Job Loss?	The labor market situation for elderly job searchers is more difficult  than for their younger counterparts. To identify patterns in the reemployment of the elderly, we analyze the employment histories of about  113,000 male job searchers in West-Germany. The analysis is based on a hazard rate model with piecewise constant intensities. We focus on age-specific reemployment rates. Individual characteristics, labor market indicators as well as the influence of the previous employment history on reemployment are accounted for. As expected, reemployment rates decline with age. Between 1975 and 1995, the negative impact of age on reemployment chances increases significantly. The obsolescence of human capital seems to play a decisive role for reemployment, especially for engineering occupations: From age 50 on, the negative age effect is significantly stronger than for other occupations.	Katharina	H. Frosch
2007	146	Technological Change and the Labor Force	Technological Change, On-Site Outsourcing, and Its Consequences for Stratification	Technological innovation has not only changed the distribution of jobs in the economy, eliminating work that can be automated; it has also changed the organizational structure of employment. Technical advances have made it both desirable and possible to hire on-site service workers through contractors. This paper uses both an agent based model and empirical evidence from the Current Population Survey to examine how this structural change has diffused, and suggests the possible  implications of this change for labor market stratification.	Debra	 Hevenstone
2007	146	Technological Change and the Labor Force	Declining Inter-Industry Wage Dispersion in the United States	Previous research indicates that wage differentials across industries were increasing through the mid 1980’s. Using more recent data, however, we find that the level of inter-industry wage dispersion thereafter declined by 36% from 1986 to 2002 despite the continuation of the general trend towards increasing inequality in the labor force as a whole. Using multi-level growth curve models, our multivariate results indicate that the decline is only weakly related to industrial changes in education, occupational mix, or even productivity in terms of value added per worker despite the fact that the latter variable had been a critical factor in the prior period of rising inter-industry dispersion. By contrast, for the more recent period, our analysis reveals that the most important factors associated with the decline in inter-industry wage dispersion are changing organizational power relations measured by unionization rates and the proportion of part-time workers.	Changhwan	 Kim	Arthur	 Sakamoto
2007	146	Technological Change and the Labor Force	Lifetime Employment in Japan: Concepts and Measurements	This paper poses three fundamental questions about lifetime employment in Japan: How big is it? How unique is it? And, how is it changing? I examine different concepts and methods for estimating lifetime employment and conclude that it covers roughly 20 percent of the Japanese labor force. Job mobility remains considerably lower in Japan than in other economies (particularly the U.S.). Evidence regarding changes in lifetime employment is mixed. The share of workers in the core, an ex-ante measure of lifetime employment, is declining. But the probability of job separations has remained stable for those who are already in the system. I also find evidence that the incentives among workers, managers and executives are aligned to preserve the lifetime employment system.	Hiroshi	 Ono
2007	147	Policy and Child Health	‘Chasing Children’: The Impact of Rural Community-Based Health Services on Childhood Immunization in Nkwanta District, Ghana	This paper presents an evaluation of a rural community-based strategy for health service delivery and its impact on the Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI) coverage in Nkwanta District, Ghana. The EPI program in Ghana is implemented at static health facilities, which requires mothers to keep track of her child’s immunization schedule and travel to the provider’s facility at the specified time. Starting in 1998, Community-based Health Planning and Services (CHPS) introduced a new model of health service delivery by posting resident nurses in remote rural communities. In the CHPS model, nurses and volunteers travel to villages to provide integrated health care including child immunization by canvassing households door-to-door. Using data collected from a 2004 District Evaluation Survey, this analysis finds significant associations between living in a CHPS zone and improved odds for the complete immunization of children aged 12 to 59 months [OR=1.66, p=.017].	J.	Koku  Awoonor-Williams	Maya	N. Vaughan-Smith
2007	147	Policy and Child Health	Development-Induced Displacement and Children's Human Capital	Development projects and policies forcibly displace an estimated ten million people each year worldwide. The consequences of forced resettlement can be dire. Cernea’s risk and reconstruction model for displaced populations identifies eight “impoverishment risks,” including food insecurity, increased morbidity, and community disarticulation. In this study we examine how forced resettlement and attendant impoverishment negatively impact children’s human capital. Using a new dataset from the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), we ask whether children in resettled households achieve lower stature and lower educational attainment than children in non-resettled households. We also evaluate the probable mechanisms linking resettlement to compromised human capital investments in children, including household food security, children’s diet diversity, and time spent on activities other than schooling. We use village fixed-effects models and propensity-score matching techniques to address unobserved heterogeneity in the probability of being displaced. Preliminary results suggest that resettlement does permanently compromise child height.	Alison	M. Buttenheim	Harold	 Alderman	Jed	 Friedman
2007	147	Policy and Child Health	Policy Interventions for Improving Child Health Outcomes in Pakistan	High child mortality in Pakistan results from poor service delivery, and constraints on women accessing services. This is because of cultural restraints on women’s mobility and on their autonomy to make and implement health care decisions for themselves and their children. Both these problems have been widespread in South Asia, but some countries such as Bangladesh have successfully mitigated them by expanding the density of fixed facilities, and also through home health visitor programs. These two approaches have also been tried in Pakistan, and here we analyze their impact. We find that both approaches increase the likelihood of immunization, but that health visitors have the larger impact. However, we find that health visitors do not significantly increase the uptake of other maternal and child health services, indicating lack of synergy between the health visitor program and the health facilities. Policies to improve these synergies would further improve child health outcomes.	Monica	 Das Gupta	Ghazala	 Mansuri	Nistha	 Sinha	Tara	 Vishwanath
2007	147	Policy and Child Health	The Dynamic Relationship between the Health Sector, Health Knowledge and Health Outcomes	We examine both the short and long run effectiveness of a specific early childhood intervention on various developmental outcomes. This intervention was provided in schools and was designed to inform parents about the availability of medical and dental services in their community. Since these services are publicly provided at no fee, this intervention provides additional information on both the availability and benefits of health sector services. We use fifteen years of detailed administrative data from the health sector merged with a unique survey data set that tracks a cohort of 800 French-Canadian boys from birth through adolescence. Since the schools were randomly selected to offer this intervention we use the quasi-experimental in the availability of the program to address two questions. First does this additional information leads to increased use of health services. Second, we examine whether visits to the health sector affect several physical and mental health outcomes.	Steven	F. Lehrer	Richard	 Tremblay
2007	147	Policy and Child Health	The Village Midwife Program and the Reduction in Infant Mortality in Indonesia	Indonesia introduced over 50,000 midwives in villages across the country in the 1990s to provide primary care to women without easy access to health facilities. Using the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS), this paper estimates the impact of this program on infant mortality. Since women choose the type of assistance during delivery and where they give birth, regressing mortality outcomes against the choice of services will lead to biased estimates due to the correlation between the choice of services and unobserved characteristics of the women. Furthermore, the non-random placement of the program also needs to be considered when estimating the program effect. In order to overcome the problem of endogeneity, mortality outcomes and program prevalence are aggregated at the district level and the program effect is estimated taking district fixed effects. The results suggest that the program is associated with a reduction in neonatal mortality, but not with post-neonatal mortality.	Ranjan	 Shrestha
2007	148	Paradox of Better Health and Lower Mortality among Immigrants	The Latino Health Paradox: A Cross-Generational Comparison	Demographers have found that on average immigrants exhibit health advantages over non-immigrants in the United States. This has led some to speculate that immigrants may possess inherent cultural/behavioral dispositions that propagate health advantages. Still, others have found that U.S. tenure tends to lower immigrants' health status towards that of native populations. In order to test whether or not U.S. tenure across generations effects these health advantages, my paper examines infant weight-at-birth differences between first-generation and second-generation Latinos using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth:1979. I use OLS regression techniques to model the impact of generational status, my main covariate of interest, on the weight of immigrants' first child - controlling for various background characteristics. I expect to find that birth-weight of infants decreases due to U.S. tenure (i.e., move toward that of native populations) across generations.	Steven	 Alvarado
2007	148	Paradox of Better Health and Lower Mortality among Immigrants	Race and Hispanic Origin Reporting on Death Certificates in the United States: Status and Effects	We evaluate race and Hispanic origin reporting on death certificates in the United States for deaths occurring between 1979 and 1998, using the latest version of the National Longitudinal Mortality Study. Study findings indicate that reporting has improved considerably over time for most race and Hispanic origin groups. They also indicate that the quality of reporting on the death certificate varies significantly by selected characteristics of the decedent, such as area of residence and nativity. Finally, study findings also show that the quality of reporting on the death certificate has very serious effects on mortality indicators.	Elizabeth	 Arias	William	S. Schauman	Paul	 Sorlie
2007	148	Paradox of Better Health and Lower Mortality among Immigrants	Infant Mortality and the Hispanic Paradox: A Meta-Analysis	This paper reports on a meta-analysis of infant mortality to shed light   on the Hispanic Paradox. We identified 33 relevant papers on infant mortality published between 1975 and 2005. Each study analyzed infant mortality by U.S. race/ethnic groups. Meta-analysis resulted in a risk ratio of 1.07 (1.03- 1.12, 95% CI) for Hispanics to Whites; 2.07 (1.96- 2.19) for Blacks to Hispanics; 2.26 (2.18 – 2.35) for Blacks to Whites. Overall, these findings suggest that Blacks are approximately twice as likely as Hispanics and Whites to experience infant mortality, and that among Hispanics the risk of infant death is lower than expected given their greater socioeconomic disadvantage over Whites. This appears to be the first meta-analysis study to address the Hispanic Paradox and infant mortality.	Jamie	 Chatman	Katharine	M. Donato	Rudy	 Guerra
2007	148	Paradox of Better Health and Lower Mortality among Immigrants	Migration and the Risk Transition: The Influence of Time on Health of Migrant Communities in Belgium	Immigrant health is often considered the result of selection mechanisms and acculturation. A central issue is the influence of time.  Several studies tried to evaluate immigrant health by duration of stay in the host country, but the time dimension is very difficult to assess. We are not only confronted with the classical problems of age and birth cohort with their dual significance, but also with the concept of migration cohorts. Immigration itself is much more than an event occurring in space with migrants moving between countries. Immigrants can in many cases be considered as time travellers, not only coming from another country, but also from another stage in the epidemiological transition of humanity. Health questions of the Belgian 2001 population census linked to register data on date of arrival and mortality are used to explore the change in health in migration cohorts and to formulate some hypotheses.	Patrick	 Deboosere	Sylvie	 Gadeyne
2007	149	Segregation  	Ecological Succession and the Historical Emergence of High-Poverty Neighborhoods: 1970-2000	The social ecology of urban poverty has changed dramatically over the last thirty years. In the 1970s and 1980s, poverty became much more concentrated in a growing number of socially-isolated and intensely-disadvantaged inner-city neighborhoods. In the 1990s, concentrated poverty unexpectedly and dramatically declined. This study investigates the effect that racial and ethnic succession had on the growth of high-poverty neighborhoods in the 1970s and 1980s and the decline of high-poverty neighborhoods in the 1990s. Drawing on the human ecology literature, we develop arguments for why racial invasion and succession may have contributed to the dramatic increase in the number of high-poverty neighborhoods in the 1970s and 1980s. We test these hypotheses using longitudinal data drawn from the Neighborhood Change Database on urban neighborhoods from 1970 to 2000. Preliminary results indicate that much, if not all, of the growth in concentrated poverty is attributable to processes of ecological succession.	Robert	L. Wagmiller	Elizabeth	A. Gage
2007	149	Segregation  	Ethnic Preferences and Residential Segregation: A Simulation Study	Individual preferences for neighborhood ethnic composition have been identified as playing a major role in determining the spatial distribution of ethnic groups within modern cities. In this paper, we use a statistical framework based on discrete exponential family models to simulate the way in which xenophobia (i.e., a preference not to reside in the same neighborhood as dissimilar alters) and homophily (i.e., a preference to reside in the same neighborhood as similar alters) combine with other factors to influence the spatial distribution of households to neighborhoods. We conclude that the presence of xenophobia almost always leads to segregation, whereas the effect of homophily depends on its interaction with other factors. These results show that making a distinction between these two types of preferences can provide important insights into the process of residential segregation.	Miruna	 Petrescu-Prahova
2007	149	Segregation  	Global Neighborhoods: Pathways to Diversity and Separation	This study analyzes how traditional processes of racial invasion and succession are affected by the growth of immigrant populations from Latin America and Asia. Metropolitan regions with new global neighborhoods display a predominant trend during 1980-2000 toward greater racial and ethnic diversity at the neighborhood level. The study uses census data at the tract level for the nation's most multiethnic metropolitan areas, and traces their composition over time in terms of presence of whites, blacks, Hispanics, and/or Asians. Stable integration is most likely to occur when blacks enter neighborhoods that whites already share with Hispanics and Asians. The analysis reveals limitations of diversity, especially the existence of many all-minority neighborhoods that are unlikely to develop any white presence and the persistence of white flight from some integrated settings.	John	R. Logan	Wenquan	(Charles)  Zhang
2007	150	Fertility Declines: Patterns and Causes	Trends in Reproductive Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Micro-Macro Distinction	Previous research on reproductive inequality in developing countries has focused on micro-level inequality. We complement this work with a macro-level analysis using DHS data from sub-Saharan Africa and find that cross-country comparisons and historical analyses of reproductive inequality yield different conclusions, depending on whether one focuses on micro or macro-inequality. For instance, while micro-level inequalities do not change during the early stages of African fertility transitions, aggregate inequality have increased in most countries. In some countries, these increases in macro inequality were predominantly driven by differentiation in fertility behavior, while in others, the main driver was a change in the educational composition of the population.  These findings underscore the potential importance of on-going educational (and social) transitions in Africa as an additional driver of reproductive inequality. Moreover, they reveal a growing reproductive inequality that would be missed by micro-level analyses.	Sarah	 Giroux	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue
2007	150	Fertility Declines: Patterns and Causes	Towards below Replacement Fertility in Southern Africa	The paper compares fertility trends, mortality trends and net reproduction rates between two case studies conducted in Agincourt and Hlabisa in rural South Africa. Data come from the demographic surveillance systems (DSS) put in place in Limpopo since 1992 and in Kwazulu-Natal since 2000. Data combine retrospective information from the baseline census and prospective information from the DSS. Both studies show that period fertility tends towards below replacement levels in the recent years, partly because of fast fertility decline, and partly because of increasing mortality due to HIV/AIDS. Cohort fertility in the case of Agincourt is also discussed. Projection of the current trends over the next 10 years lead to a level much below replacement. The data indicate that population size might decline in the near future unless proper measures are taken to control the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Results are compared to other data from South Africa.	Michel	 Garenne	Stephen	 Tollman	Kathleen	 Kahn
2007	150	Fertility Declines: Patterns and Causes	Understanding Fertility Decline in Egypt	One of the main goals of the Government of Egypt is to achieve the replacement level (TFR of 2.1 births per woman). Data from EDHS surveys indicated that TFR declined by 0.8 births between 1992 and 2005, while the decline in the total marital fertility rate (TMFR) was 0.9 from a level of 5.5 births per married woman in 1992 to 4.6 in 2005.   TMFR declined in rural areas from a level of 6.1 births per married woman on 1992 to 4.7 births in 2005, compared with almost no decline in urban area over the same period. The paper will attempt to understand in more depth how the overall TFR and TMFR are shaped by household’s wealth, education of women, and residence. The paper assesses the change and investigates the determinants of TMFR.	Fatma	 El- Zanaty
2007	150	Fertility Declines: Patterns and Causes	The Transition to Lower Fertility in the West Bank and Gaza Strip: Evidence from Recent Surveys	Using recent data from three national-level surveys conducted in 1995, 2000, and 2004, we provide evidence that the Palestinian fertility rate in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, historically among the highest in the world, began to slow especially in the West Bank, but stalled in Gaza during the recent Intifada. The TFR in early 2000s was 4.56 per women, down from 6.23 a decade earlier. However, most of the decline in Gaza’s fertility appears to have taken place during the early 1990s, before the onset of the second Intifada. In Gaza, TFR decreased from 7.4 to 5.72 during the 1990s, but changed only slightly to 5.63 during the second Intifada period. Surprisingly, contraceptive prevalence has not changed during these years, and the transition to lower fertility was mainly due to nuptiality. The continuing conflict and worsening economic situation provides clues to address the persistence of high fertility among Palestinians.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Shireen	 Assaf
2007	151	Gender and Reproduction	Planning the Nation: National Identity and the Family Planning Program in Uzbekistan	Since the early 1990’s there has been a push to lower fertility rates through the use of modern contraceptives in Uzbekistan. The family planning program in Uzbekistan is considered largely successful, having increased current use among married women from 55.6% (DHS 1996) to 67.7% (DHS 2002). Central to the notion of citizenship is an individual’s relationship to the state and its resources (Yuval-Davis 1997). It has been well documented that women hold different forms of citizenship than men (e.g. Pateman, McKinnon, Yuval-Davis, Kandioyoti). My research will attempted to interrogate the role of the family planning program of Uzbekistan in national identity building and as part of this process, the defining of who is and who isn’t a citizen of the modern state. This task will be accomplished through the analyzing of statistical data from Demographic and Health Surveys, and a review of the relevant literature from international academics, the Uzbek state, and international donor agencies.	Scottie	 Buehler
2007	151	Gender and Reproduction	Gender Scripts and Age at Marriage in India	While it has been long recognized in the feminist discourse that marriage is one of the key institutional sites for production and reproduction of hierarchical gender relations, demographic literature on marriage patterns in developing countries has rarely explored this insight. This deficiency can be attributed to conceptual shortcomings as well as difficulties in obtaining appropriate data. This paper uses data from the India Human Development Survey, collected in 2005 for over 40,000 households around the country, to explore ways in which gender scripts regarding valuation of women's modesty and separation of male and female sphere shapes the decisions regarding age at marriage across different regions and different social classes.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Lester	 Andrist
2007	151	Gender and Reproduction	Reproduction, Women and the ‘Body Politic’ of Demographic Knowledge	Bodies as socially created through societal dynamics, tell stories, life stories. They are more than passive bits of ectoplasm overlaid with social meanings. Recognizing women’s bodies as sites for knowledge where social and political scripts are enacted is vital for understanding both the demographic processes of reproduction and the politics of demographic knowledge.    This paper relies on three methodological approaches: 1) a systematic examination of how demography sees women’s bodies in reproduction; 2) a qualitative study of older women looking back on their reproductive lives and reflecting on reproductive experiences in relation to their bodies; and 3) an examination of some key policies in Canada and the United States with respect to reproductive access and constraint, to see how policies differently create and control reproductive bodies. Findings from the parallel analyses are then brought together to shed new light on the processes of demographic knowledge construction.	Susan	 McDaniel
2007	151	Gender and Reproduction	Hegemonic Motherhood: Reconceptualizing Femininity and Family through the Lens of Voluntary Childlessness	Discourse on motherhood has evolved into an understanding of what is ‘natural’ and constitutive of healthy femininity. Transformations in economic potential, advances in contraception, and a shift in gender roles became an impetus for social change in the home. Challengers of the voluntarily childless lifestyle proclaim that individuals who remain childless are selfish and subversive. Research findings suggest that this decision is fraught with personal, economic, and social ramifications for childless couples. Research fails to highlight this population and adequately explain this complex decision. This study provides a synopsis of literature on voluntary childlessness focusing on how a belief in hegemonic mothering has hampered intellectual development. I demonstrate how a mother-centered conception of femininity has inhibited our ability to understand the impetus for and ramifications of voluntary childlessness. As political initiatives advocate marriage while constraining the definition of family, it is intriguing to consider the fate of voluntarily childless couples.	Deanna	 Trella
2007	152	Immigration and Adolescent Development	Immigrant Parents’ Participation in the Affairs of Middle and High Schools: What We Learn and Its Implications	The dramatic change in the nativity status of American schoolchildren is generating debate about what changes should schools make to ensure scholastic achievement and assimilation among children from immigrant families. Notwithstanding the importance of studying the school performance of children in immigrant families, a related concern surrounding the education of immigrant children is their parents’ involvement with the schools. This study investigates school involvement among immigrant parents. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, the study uncovers patterns of school involvement among the immigrant parents of early adolescents, compares their involvement patterns with those of native-born parents and distinguishes the effects of immigrant status per se from other factors raising parental involvement in school affairs. Findings suggest that immigrant parents participate less in school matters than non-immigrant parents after accounting for other socio-economic and demographic factors.	Peter	D. Brandon
2007	152	Immigration and Adolescent Development	A Longitudinal Study of Educational Adaptation among Immigrant Youth: The Role of Immigrant Generation, Ethnicity, and Friendship Network	Due to data limitations, previous studies often lack a national picture and took a cross-sectional approach to examine educational adaptation of immigrant children. This is limited in viewing educational experience as a changing process. To address these limitations, I use new longitudinal national data from the Adolescent Health and Academic Achievement Study (AHAA) (part of Add Health data) to conduct a longitudinal study of academic achievement among immigrant youth through three goals: (1) exploring immigrant generational differences in academic growth-curves in terms of initial status and rate of change among high-school immigrant youth; (2) assessing racial/ethnic differences in their academic trajectories; (3) examining the mediating effects of friendship networks (measured by composition of immigrant generations and ethnicities) on patterns of academic trajectories over time.	Ping	 Chen
2007	152	Immigration and Adolescent Development	Cohabitation and Children’s Developmental Well-Being in Latino Families	Cohabitation, an increasingly common type of union formation, is often accompanied by the birth of a child among low-income populations. However, studies have only recently considered the well-being of children born into cohabiting unions. Furthermore, fewer studies have considered the situation for Latino families. We propose to evaluate the effect of residing in a cohabiting family on Latino children’s developmental well-being. We focus on children of Latino foreign-born mothers compared to children of Latino U.S.-born mothers to assess whether assimilation over generations to the norms of cohabitation in the U.S. affects children’s developmental trajectories. We compare families of Dominican, Mexican, and Puerto Rican origin, three migrant-sending areas that represent high, moderate, and low levels of cohabitation prevalence. Our analysis draws on three waves of a longitudinal study of low-income families that includes a substantial number of immigrant-headed families and sufficient sample size to consider Latinos by place of origin.	Paula	 Fomby	Angela	 Estacion
2007	152	Immigration and Adolescent Development	Low-Income Immigrant Parents and Their Children in Four Large Urban Cities	Recent waves of immigrants may be particularly disadvantaged in the U.S. labor market, lacking the formal education or training, as well as necessary legal status to secure higher quality, full-time work. We use data from the Project on Devolution and Urban Change, a longitudinal study of welfare-receiving mothers in 1995 who lived in highly disadvantaged neighborhoods of Cuyahoga, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and Miami-Dade counties to examine whether immigration status moderates the effect of maternal work hours on the educational, health, and behavioral outcomes of preschoolers (aged 2 to 6 at Wave I) and adolescents (aged 12 to 18 at Wave I). Approximately 19 percent of the 8,600 children in the data are born to immigrants. Most of these immigrants are of Hispanic origin, with a fifth from Puerto Rico, one third from Mexico, and notable minorities from Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and El Salvador.	Lisa	A. Gennetian	Andrew	S. London
2007	153	Union Formation among Disadvantaged Populations	Is There an Economic Bar for Marriage? Socioeconomic Status Differentials and Implications for Marriage Promotion Policies	Economic stability and prospects have always been important for family formation, especially for marriage. Recent research among low-income U.S. couples suggests that couples delay marriage until they reach the perceived economic 'bar' for marriage. This study uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 to more extensively investigate the existence and level of the hypothesized marriage bar. I consider differences by socioeconomic status in levels of earnings associated with increases in marriage among cohabiting couples. I find that combined couple earnings are most important for those with a high school degree or less. Marriage odds increase significantly for these couples between $26,000 and $34,000 of combined earnings. The earnings bar for marriage is above the poverty threshold for a family of three ($13,861 in 2000) and above the phase-out for many government transfer programs. It is unlikely that income supplements would push disadvantaged couples above the marriage bar.	Jennifer	 Holland
2007	153	Union Formation among Disadvantaged Populations	The Association between the Underground Economy and Fathers' Marital Behavior	This study analyzes how male participation in the underground economy affects union formation and dissolution. Data come from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Survey, a longitudinal birth cohort study that collected information on fathers’ informal and formal labor market patterns. I hypothesize that participation in the underground economy may equalize the earning differences between married and unmarried men, and influence union formation or dissolution depending on the perceived fungibility of the informal and formal labor market. Results suggest that earning differences between married and unmarried fathers are only exacerbated by the underground economy, as married fathers earn more money from their underground activities. Furthermore, while participation in the informal economy does not hasten the transition to marriage, it may encourage couples to dissolve their relationship. This implies that couples take a negative view of under-the-table jobs, and do not believe that they can be substituted for regular sector employment.	Christina	M. Gibson-Davis
2007	153	Union Formation among Disadvantaged Populations	Incarceration, Marital Uncertainty, and the Transition to Marriage among New Parents	The mark of a criminal record has profound effects on a person's employment opportunities and is believed to adversely impact one's position in the marriage market. In this paper I examine the effect of incarceration on the transition to marriage over the life-course using panel data from the Fragile Families and Well-Being Study. I present a causal model of incarceration and marriage that focuses on latent criminal propensities and marital uncertainty prior to incarceration. By comparing never-incarcerated criminals to ever-incarcerated criminals, I am able to net out the effect of incarceration on marital probabilities through the identification of criminal behaviors. Additionally, I am able to examine the effect of criminal dispositions on transitioning to marriage for never incarcerated populations. My model allows researchers to minimize measurement error, and my findings have significant implications for marriage market research that controls for incarceration rates without identifying latent criminal propensities and martial uncertainty.	Bryan	L. Sykes
2007	153	Union Formation among Disadvantaged Populations	Assortative Mating among Unmarried Parents with a Newborn: Differences by Marital Transition after Childbirth	Assortative mating, the tendency for individuals to choose partners with similar characteristics, is a prominent feature of the marriage market. Existing evidence on assortative matching is based primarily on married couples/parents, and studies on unmarried parents do not distinguish between unmarried parents who marry after childbirth, and those who remained persistently unmarried. Using data from the FFCWS, this study examines assortative mating patterns among unmarried parents, between parents who marry after childbirth and parents who remained unmarried. In addition, we examine whether the differences in assortative mating patterns can be explained by differences in marriage market conditions suggested by economic theories. We find that unmarried parents who marry after childbirth are less assortatively matched by age, education, and race; but more assortatively matched by earnings, compared to parents who remained unmarried. Significant differences in assortative mating patterns by race are found, with the largest difference found between whites and Hispanics.	Shirley	H. Liu
2007	154	Child Labor and School Outcomes	The Abuelita Effect: The Impact of Grandparents on Children’s Schooling and Work in Latin America	Recent U.S. evidence suggests that children living with single mothers and at least one grandparent attain as much schooling as children living with two parents. We examine whether this positive effect of living with grandparents is also found in Latin America, specifically looking at school attendance, child labor, and school attainment for adolescents aged 14 to 16. This work builds on our earlier work (Arends-Kuenning and Duryea 2006), which showed that living in a single-mother household significantly reduced the probability that a child attended school in four Latin American countries. We will use the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Surveys (LSMS) for Brazil, Ecuador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Panama. These data sets are unique for their inclusion of detailed information about household relationships. We are able to identify maternal and paternal grandparents and to distinguish between households headed by grandparents and households headed by parents who live with their parents.	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning	Suzanne	 Duryea
2007	154	Child Labor and School Outcomes	Conditional Cash Transfer and Educational Gender Gaps: Insights from Bangladeshi Households	This paper documents a reverse gender gap in secondary schooling outcomes in Bangladesh, drawing upon nationally representative household survey data. In terms of enrollment status and years of schooling completed, boys are found to lag behind girls in the rural as well as urban areas. This finding is robust to extensive control for demand and supply-side determinants of schooling and common family unobservables. We test to what extent the reversal of the gender gap in secondary school outcomes in urban area is driven by a conditional cash transfer program – female secondary school stipend program. Whilst boys residing in the program area have more education compared to those in the non-program area, they fare poorly when compared to girls. Boys are also more likely to be in child-labour in the program area. Consequently urban gender-gap is widest in the treatment area. We consider a number of hypotheses to reconcile these findings.	Nazmul	 Chaudhury	Mohammad	N. Asadullah
2007	154	Child Labor and School Outcomes	Staying in School: Assessing the Role of Access, Availability and Opportunity Cost	This paper investigates the role of contextual factors outside the household in determining whether or not a child attends basic education in Tajikistan. By combining data from the Tajikistan Living Standard Survey with data from a parallel community survey, aggregated census data at the jamoat (village) level, and spatial data, a series of variables are constructed which characterize the environment where the child lives. These variables serve as proxies for the accessibility and availability of school services, quality of education, opportunity cost of education in terms of the opportunities for income generating activities forgone, and level of economic development in the communities. Applying multilevel modelling techniques, the results show that contextual factors have a strong effect on school attendance. Accessibility of service and higher quality of school have a positive effect, however a high opportunity cost to education in a community exerts a negative effect on school attendance.	Angela	 Baschieri	Jane	C. Falkingham
2007	154	Child Labor and School Outcomes	The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs on Household Work Decisions in Brazil	Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs have become widespread in developing and underdeveloped countries as a way to alleviate current poverty and provide investments in human capital that could lead families to better life conditions in the long-term. The first goal is accomplished when poor families receive money from governments on a monthly basis, as a complementary income source. The second goal is reached by conditioning the cash transfers on certain behaviors, such as enrolling children in school. However, these programs may also have impact on time use decisions within beneficiaries, particularly with respect to time spent working. We aim to measure the impact of Brazilian conditional cash transfer programs on children and parents’ labor status. The usual econometric models show that CCTs reduce the probability of work for children but not their time spent on labor market. Nevertheless, parent’s labor participation is not affected but their working hours change.	Andrea	R. Ferro	Alexandre	 Nicollela
2007	154	Child Labor and School Outcomes	Child Labour and Schooling Outcomes among Children in India: An Analysis of Levels, Trends and Differentials	The present paper examines the levels, trends and differentials in schooling outcomes among children in India, using data from the census for the years 1991 and 2001 and two rounds of NFHS conducted during 1992 to 1993 and 1998 to 2000. Two aspects, such as, 'ever been to school' and 'completed grade 5' among children are studied using logistic regression and mean logarithmic deviation (MLD) method. The results of logistic regression indicate that the effects of majority of the variables used are highly significant. The adjusted values estimated indicates higher differentials according to sex and working status of the child, standard of living index, education attained by an usual female or male adult member and religion. However, the results of decomposition method using the MLD suggests a relative high variation according to work status of child, household’s standard of living, educational level attained by an usual adult female or male member in the household	Rajaram	S. Potty	Jayachandran	 Vasudevan
2007	155	Historical Analysis of Families and Households	Canadian Family Alternatives, Past and Present: A Comparison of Non-Family Living Arrangements in 1901 and 2001 Canada	The evolving residential choices of Canadians away from the traditional nuclear family toward unmarried cohabiting couples and parents, single-parent families and blended families, as well as the tendency of persons to reside by themselves or with roommates because of the postponement or avoidance of marriage, has captured considerable attention among sociologists, demographers and economists. At the beginning of the 20th century, we observe the onset of such living arrangements. How have the socio-economic characteristics of such persons changed or not changed during 100 years? The primary sources  used in this study are the individual public-use microdata file (PUMF) of the 2001 Canadian census and a 5% sample of the 1901 Canadian census (Canadian Families Project, University of Victoria). The resulting analysis promises a more nuanced perspective on contemporary household constellations and a more sophisticated understanding of the socio-economic exchanges and trade-offs among family and household members.	Lisa	 Dillon	Maryse	 Dion-Tremblay
2007	155	Historical Analysis of Families and Households	Emptying the Nest: The United States, 1880 to 2000	Long-term declines in elderly co-residence with children have been accompanied by increases in the use of the empty nest. Three models attempt to explain the shift: 1) cultural, normative change; 2) demographic factors; and 3) economic affluence, including Social Security. IPUMS data for men and women, 50 and over, reveal three distinct periods: slow trends toward the empty nest from at least 1880 to 1940, sharp upward ticks between 1940 and 1970, and slow upward trends from 1970 to 2000. The parallel behavior of diverse ethnic groups undermines cultural explanations; social security cannot account for trends for persons not covered. Multinomial logistic analyses for men of individual census points (and pooled estimates for 1880 to 1930 and 1940 to 2000 indicate consistency in some variables (e.g. age); but inconsistency in others (e.g. SES). Demographic factors, including level of immigration, may be one explanation for temporal shifts.	Brian	 Gratton
2007	155	Historical Analysis of Families and Households	The Impact of the American Civil War on Post-War Marriage	Over 600,000 men died in the American Civil War--roughly equal to the number of deaths suffered in all other American wars through the Korean War combined. In this paper, we investigate the impact of wartime mortality on subsequent nuptiality through a microsimulation coupled with an empirical investigation of age at marriage and proportions   ever marrying in the 1850-1880 IPUMS samples. We construct microsimulations, indices of the intensity of the postwar marriage squeeze (including the marital sex ratio and Schoen's index), and nuptiality estimates for each census region. We focus our discussion, however, on the postwar South, which lost an estimated 1-in-4 white men of military age in the conflict--three times the rate of death in the North. Diaries, letters, and memoirs of nurses, soldiers, and people on the home front supplement the analysis and confirm the presence of a developing marriage squeeze on southern white women.	Libra	R. Hilde	J.	David  Hacker	James	H. Jones
2007	155	Historical Analysis of Families and Households	Care of the Elderly during a Time of Demographic Transition: The U.S. North, 1850 to 1880	As in the developed world today, the native born population of the Northern U.S. was aging and there was a reduced pool of family care givers. Census samples show the proportion of persons over 65 living with their children declined. This paper explores the effect of fertility decline and urbanization on family forms and adult lives of the children using a longitudinal database derived from genealogies, that contain information on the availability of adult children and how far they were from their parents. In 1850, over 90% of elderly with living sons over 15 lived in the same town as at least one of them (usually the youngest). In 1880, fewer elderly lived with children and more were living with daughters. The paper will assess the role of non-farm work in producing this result, as well as the affect of staying at home on the children’s futures.	Alice	B. Kasakoff
2007	155	Historical Analysis of Families and Households	Black-White Differences in the Coresidential Experience of Mothers of Young Children, 1880 to 2000	Research on changes in women’s parenting has focused primarily on mother’s increased likelihood of employment. A more complete understanding of the changing landscape of parenting, however, depends on the broader family context, including changes in the coresidential experiences of mothers of young children. Between 1880 and 2000, there were substantial declines in the presence and availability of other females, ten and older, in the households of mothers of young children (Short, Goldscheider, and Torr forthcoming 2006). Although all mothers experienced this decline, the patterns of change in coresidence differ substantially for black and white mothers, as well as for married and unmarried mothers. This paper examines these differential patterns of change in coresidence for mothers of young children.	Berna	M. Torr	Fran	 Goldscheider	Susan	E. Short
2007	156	Studies in Applied Demography	Age Dynamics and Optimal Recruitment Policies of Learned Societies: An Application to the Austrian Academy of Sciences	In a hierarchical, constant sized organization the annual intake is strictly determined by the number of deaths and a statutory retirement age. Faced with a rising life expectancy there is a fundamental dilemma of two conflicting  goals of such populations, (i.e. an Academy of Sciences): to keep a young age structure while guaranteeing a high recruitment rate. In this paper we reconstruct the population of the Austrian Academy of Sciences from 1847  to 2005. Based on alternative scenarios of the age distribution of incoming members we then project the population of the Austrian Academy forward in time. We introduce an age-structured optimal control model to determine the optimal trade-off between the above mentioned conflicting goals. Our results indicate that it is optimal to elect either young or old aged new members. Moreover, we discuss some interesting policy implications of the obtained  optimal recruitment policy (scientific excellence and life-long achievements).	Gustav	 Feichtinger	Inga	 Freund	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Vladimir	 Veliov	Maria	E. Winkler-Dworak
2007	156	Studies in Applied Demography	The American Community Survey's Interstate Migration Data: Strategies for Smoothing Irregular Age Patterns	Because migrations are relatively rare events, age- and origin-destination-specific flows obtained from population samples often contain irregularities. Bias in analyses of migration flows can arise if these irregularities are not corrected for. In this paper, we present some typical examples of age-specific migration flows with irregular patterns, using the recently released American Community Survey (ACS) data. Strategies for smoothing these patterns based on the multiexponential model migration schedule and the categorical log-linear model are presented and compared. Before smoothing the irregularities found in the ACS data, our ideas are first tested on age-specific interstate migration in the U.S. West Region during 1995-2000 using the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). The corresponding full sample Census data are used to assess the smoothed patterns. Our results demonstrate that more accurate migration data can be provided by smoothing the irregularities caused by relatively small samples.	James	 Raymer	Andrei	 Rogers
2007	156	Studies in Applied Demography	Projections of Elderly Disability and Care Needs for the States of California, Florida, Minnesota, and North Carolina	Based on available demographic data and data on disability and care needs derived from the 2000 and 1990 censuses micro datasets and using the ProFamy method/software for households and consumption forecasting, we present projections of numbers of self-care disabled elderly and care needs by age, race and living arrangement from 2000 to 2050 for California, Florida, North Carolina, and Minnesota. These four states are chosen since they represent four typical types of regions with different race compositions, degree in population aging and economic development levels. Three scenarios (high, medium and low) of disability trends have been conducted based on the medium scenario of household projection. While there are many similarities in the future trend of care needs across the states, the cross-state differentials are notable. Discussion for such cross-state similarities and differentials are presented. We also discuss the policy implications on socioeconomic planning of future elderly care needs.	Zhenglian	 Wang	Danan	 Gu	Yi	 Zeng
2007	156	Studies in Applied Demography	Financial Demography: Mastering the Financial Consequences of Life Contingencies.	In 1982, Nathan Keyfitz and Andrei Rogers published contingency calculations that bridged the historical divide between demography and actuarial sciences and paved the way to a better management of financial risks at the level of cohorts and individuals. This paper extends the work by Keyfitz and Rogers and presents a biographic actuarial model that combines life history models with a large variety of insurance schemes. The life course is approached as a sequence of state occupancies and state transitions (events), and is modelled by a discrete-state continuous-time Markov process. Premiums and insurance benefits are linked to transitions and state occupancies. The equivalence principle is used to determine premiums that cover insurance benefits in complex life histories. An example from disability insurance illustrates the model. Financial demography is a new field that responds to the challenges that contemporary and envisaged demographic changes cause to public and personal finance.	Frans	 Willekens
2007	157	Intentions and Behavior Related to Contraceptive Use and Childbearing	Effects of Son Preference on Contraception, Abortion, and Fertility in Central Asia: The Case of Uzbekistan	Research on sex preference for children has largely focused on Southern and Eastern Asian countries and overlooked the region of formerly Soviet Central Asia. Using the 2002 Uzbekistan Health Examination Survey and qualitative data collected in 2005 and 2006, I explore the preference for male births as it affects contraception, abortion, and fertility in a country well into its fertility transition. Findings indicate that, while son preference has a small influence on current contraceptive use, the overall sex ratio at birth (1.05) may mask substantial parity-specific differences. For first births, the calculated sex ratio does not fall in the normal range and may indicate the presence of an artificial intervention. I use focus group and individual and expert interview data to explain this phenomenon in economic and cultural terms. The paper discusses the policy implications and the relevance of these findings for theoretical perspectives on son preference.	Jennifer	 Barrett
2007	157	Intentions and Behavior Related to Contraceptive Use and Childbearing	Economic Reforms, Age at Marriage and the Length of the First Birth Interval in Vietnam	Research on marriage and childbearing in Southeast Asian countries since the 1980s documented the shortening of the time between first marriage and first birth. Social and economic changes in these countries are believed to have led to the increase in premarital and marital sexual intercourse, which in turn resulted in shortened first birth intervals. This study examines the impact of the economic reforms started in 1986 on early marital fertility in Vietnam. Using the 2002 Demographic and Health Survey data on 4732 ever-married women, the study finds that women married after the onset of the reforms tended to have shorter first birth intervals than those married before them, controlling for other characteristics. Residence, ethnicity, and occupation also played significant roles. Furthermore, we detect a catch-up effect of delayed marriage, which is independent on the marriage period. The study relates these findings to attitudinal changes regarding premarital and marital sexuality.	Lan	 Nguyen
2007	157	Intentions and Behavior Related to Contraceptive Use and Childbearing	What Kinds of Power Predict Couples' Concordance and Perceptions of Concordance on Birth Desires and Method Preferences?	How do partners in committed relationships reach their individual and joint reproductive goals? One key step is either a couple’s achieving concordance or partners’ perceiving differences. The present study uses an area probability sample of married and cohabiting couples to: (1) examine partner concordance in birth desires and method preferences; (2) contrast concordance on these factors with partner’s perceptions on them; and (3) test hypotheses regarding the extent to which relative power predicts these outcomes. Important contributions of this study are the use of multi-dimensional measures of power in couples' relationships and our access to parallel partner data in order to evaluate partner’s relative power. The study uses data from the NIH-funded National Couples Survey, which finalized data collection in Fall 2006. We project to have 674 married and cohabiting couple interviews collected separately and contemporaneously from both partners using a Computer Assisted Self Interview (CASI) in the home.	Virginia	E. Rutter	Koray	 Tanfer
2007	157	Intentions and Behavior Related to Contraceptive Use and Childbearing	Promoting Optimal Inter-Pregnancy Interval in India through Integrated Public Delivery Systems	Early marriage and closely spaced births are important causes of high maternal mortality and neonatal mortality in Uttar Pradesh, India. This paper attempts to understand compulsions of young couples for early first pregnancy and reasons, despite desiring a second child three years later, do not practice postpartum contraception. 20 FGDs and 30 in-depth interviews of married couples aged 15-25,  providers, and elderly women/community leaders were conducted to address these questions.     Findings show that young couples experience pressure from elders to demonstrate their fertility early and to see their grandchildren. Strong belief prevails that contraceptive use before first child causes infertility. Despite the desire to enjoy married life they do not succeed as they succumb to family pressure, lack knowledge of contraceptives and their accessibility and opposition from husbands to contraception. Failure of postpartum contraception is also due to misconceptions about timing of next conception—when a  woman becomes biologically capable for pregnancy.	Mary	 Sebastian	M.	E. Khan
2007	158	Spatial Determinants of Health	Changing Neighbourhood and Infant Mortality in Rural India	Childhood mortality rates in India are concentrated along geographic and family lines. Five of twenty-six states account for more than half of the under-5 deaths in the country. Within states, a small fraction of villages account for most deaths. Within villages, some families experience multiple child deaths, while others experience none. There is clustering of childhood death by region and by family. We use two waves of an all-India health survey to examine two questions that these facts suggest. First, what is the effect of fertility norms and contraceptive availability on mortality rates by region? Second, would the family-level state-dependence in mortality risk identified in earlier research disappear if governments were to make contraception more widely available? Our results suggest that contraceptive availability at the district-level has a significant mortality-reducing effect, but only in the second wave of the data.	Wiji	 Arulampalam	Sonia	 Bhalotra
2007	158	Spatial Determinants of Health	Factors Influencing the Spatial Distribution of Lung Cancer Mortality in the United States, 2000 - 2002	Smoking is the single most important cause of preventable mortality, contributing to between one-fifth and one-quarter of all deaths in the U.S. (Rogers et al. 2005; Peto and Lopez 2005). Given the contribution of smoking to mortality patterns, the prevalence of smoking and the structure of mortality across states may have important repercussions in terms of health expenditures across states. This paper examines the factors influencing the distribution of mortality across states. Specifically, it examines interstate differences in lung cancer mortality in the United States among persons aged 45 and over. The results presented here suggest the importance of behavioral and selected demographic factors in explaining state variations in lung cancer mortality for both men and women. Further, my results support the strong causal link between smoking prevalence and all-cause mortality across states, especially for men.	Laryssa	 Mykyta
2007	158	Spatial Determinants of Health	Does the Food Environment Predict Obesity in New York City?	Researchers in demography, public health, and other social sciences have identified the quality of the local food environment as one factor in the rising rates of obesity in the United States. A number of studies have documented racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic disparities in access to supermarkets and other types of food outlets, yet few empirical studies have provided direct evidence on the relationship of the food environment to body weight or obesity. In this study, we examine the effects of the food environment on body mass index (BMI) using data from a large health study conducted in the New York City; our analysis is conducted on a racially- and ethnically-diverse sample of more than 13,000 adult residents, and employs unusually detailed measures of the food environment using data on business locations from Dun & Bradstreet.	Andrew	 Rundle	Ana	 Diez Roux	Samuel	 Field	Lance	 Freeman	Shang-min	 Liu	Kathryn	 Neckerman	Marnie	 Purciel	James	W. Quinn	Christopher	C. Weiss
2007	158	Spatial Determinants of Health	Distance and Mammogram Utilization among Unmarried Middle-Aged and Older Women	This study assessed the relationship between distance to mammography facilities and mammography utilization among unmarried women age 40-75 in Rhode Island, using data from the Cancer Screening Project for Women (N=568). ARC/GIS was used to calculate distance between women's exact home addresses and nearest mammography facility. Distance was split into tertiles, and three logistic regression models of recent mammography (past 2 years) were computed: (1) distance variables only;  (2) model 1 plus individual-level variables; and (3) model 2 plus neighborhood-level variables. Greater distance was significantly positively associated with recent mammography, but only in model 1 (tertile 2 OR=1.76, CI=1.00-3.09; tertile 3 OR=2.37, CI=1.29-4.33).  Results suggest that in small, densely populated areas, greater distance does not, in and of itself, affect mammography utilization. In these areas, GIS may best be used as a tool to assess the compositional differences accounting for underserved areas, so that tailored interventions may be designed.	Melanie	R. Wasserman	Steven	 Meersman	William	 Rakowski	Melissa	A. Clark
2007	159	Health Consequences of Domestic Violence	Intimate Partner Violence and HIV Risk in Kenya	In Kenya, the majority of adults infected with HIV are women. In other settings, women who have been abused by their sexual partners are more likely to report infection with HIV or another STI, report more sexual partners, and are less likely to use condoms. Intimate partner violence, therefore, may represent a significant barrier to behavior change and HIV prevention in Kenya. I utilize data from 1,717 women aged 15-49 from the 2003 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey to show that past experience of emotional violence is significantly associated with an increased likelihood that a woman is infected with HIV (OR=1.62, p=.024). Experiences of physical and sexual violence, however, are not significantly associated with HIV risk. While these results add to the evidence that intimate partner violence is positively associated with HIV, they also indicate that all types of abuse may not have the same effect on disease risk.	Annie	 Dude
2007	159	Health Consequences of Domestic Violence	Domestic Violence, Couple Interaction and Children’s Health in Latin America	This paper examines the relationships between several measures of couple interaction and children’s health. We hypothesize that more maternal input in decision-making, joint discussion of health issues, and the absence of violence and male control are conducive to better child health. Mortality and nutritional status are used as measures of child health. Analyses are based on Demographic and Health Surveys in five Latin American countries (Bolivia, Peru, Colombia, Haiti and Nicaragua). Violence is the best interaction predictor of poor nutrition and lack of female autonomy is the best predictor of higher mortality. Joint discussion of family planning and joint decision-making about household issues are also predictive of child health. Male controlling behavior did not have a strong relationship with health outcomes in most countries. Overall, findings indicate that positive couple interaction is associated with improved health outcomes for children.	Tim	B. Heaton	Renata	 Forste
2007	159	Health Consequences of Domestic Violence	The Costs and Impacts of Gender-Based Violence in Developing Countries: Methodological Considerations and New Evidence	GBV has devastating consequences not only for victims but also for society as a whole. A growing body of research has focused on dimensioning these consequences either by estimating the impacts of GBV on a set of outcomes or by measuring the monetary costs of GBV. This paper has three goals. First, it synthesizes the research on estimating the costs and impacts of GBV, presenting and evaluating the methodologies used to produce cost and impact estimates. The focus is on methodologies which are potentially most relevant to developing countries. A second goal of this paper is to use a relatively new methodology—propensity score matching—to generate comparable, cross-country estimates of some of the impacts of GBV in Haiti, Peru and Zambia. This methodology has not previously been used on a cross-country basis to estimate the impacts of GBV. Finally, the paper identifies priority areas for future research.	Andrew	 Morrison	Maria	Beatriz  Orlando
2007	159	Health Consequences of Domestic Violence	Gender Inequality and HIV-1 Infection among Women in Moshi, Tanzania	This study examined the relationship between gender inequality and women’s HIV risk using a population-based survey of 1418 women aged 20 to 44 in Moshi, Tanzania. Gender inequality was measured by coerced first intercourse, intimate partner violence, couple’s age difference and partner’s financial contribution to children. After adjustment for sexual risk behaviors and background characteristics, women had significantly increased risk of HIV infection if they had coerced first intercourse before age 18 years (OR 2.11, 95% CI 1.12-3.95), their partners were at least 10 years older (2.47, 1.45-4.19), or their partners made low financial contributions to children (1.79, 1.11-2.90). Intimate partner violence was not associated with women’s HIV infection. This study provided further evidence that sexual coercion towards young women and women’s subordinate status increase their HIV risks. Thus, addressing gender inequality and promoting behavioral changes of men should be given higher priority in HIV interventions.	Zhihong	 Sa	Ulla	M. Larsen
2007	160	Cohabitation and Union Dissolution	Does Cohabitation Prior to Marriage Raise the Risk of Marital Dissolution and Does This Effect Vary Geographically?	A number of studies show that premarital cohabitation increases the risk of subsequent marital dissolution. Some argue that this is a consequence of selection effects and that once these are controlled for, premarital cohabitation has no effect on dissolution. We extend this research by examining whether the effects of premarital cohabitation on marital dissolution vary across settlements within a country. Using retrospective event-history data from Austria, we model equations for union formation and dissolution jointly to control for unobserved selectivity of cohabiters or non-cohabiters. Our results show that those who cohabit prior to marriage have a higher risk of marital dissolution. However, once selection effects are controlled for, the risks of marital dissolution for those who cohabit prior to marriage are significantly lower than for those who marry directly. We show that strong selection effects relate to both cohabitation and direct marriage and these effects are consistent across all settlements.	Paul	J. Boyle	Hill	 Kulu
2007	160	Cohabitation and Union Dissolution	Premarital Cohabitation and Marital Disruption across Time: New Results from the NSFH 3	Using data from Waves 1 and 3 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH), I examine how the relationship between premarital cohabitation and marital disruption has changed over time. As cohabitation has become a common experience among many young adults, I wish to investigate if the association between cohabitation and marital instability has weakened across time. Recently, the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) completed data collection on a third wave of data (2001-2002), and conducted extensive interviews of the focal child of the main respondent (Sweet & Bumpass 2002). I compare between the two cohorts how cohabitation experiences prior to marriage affect marital disruption. I find that the association between cohabitation and marital disruption has weakened across time among those that cohabited only with their partner. However, time has not reduced the likelihood of divorce among those that have experienced multiple cohabitations prior to first marriage.	Anna	 Cunningham
2007	160	Cohabitation and Union Dissolution	Do Premarital Cohabitation and Civil Marriage Have a Negative Impact on Marital Stability? Empirical Evidences for the Italian Case	Civil marriages and marriages preceded by a cohabitation show higher rates of divorce. Many studies confirm that selectivity plays an important role in the relation between premarital cohabitation and union dissolution but we know little to date regarding the effect of civil marriage. We can easily imagine that civil marriages and premarital cohabitations are strictly linked and that both behaviours can be considered as endogenous in the hazard of divorce. The Italian case appears particularly interesting given the recent diffusion of the behaviours considered. Using micro-level data from ISTAT Multipurpose Survey 2003, we developed a multi-process model allowing the unobserved heterogeneity components to be correlated across the three decisions (premarital cohabitation, civil marriage, divorce). Our results show that selectivity is the main factor able to explain the higher divorce rates among those who lived a pre-marital cohabitation and a civil marriage. Net of selectivity, any form of causal effect from these two behaviours on union dissolution disappears.	Roberto	 Impicciatore
2007	160	Cohabitation and Union Dissolution	The Economic Impact of Cohabitation Dissolution versus Marital Dissolution in Fragile Families	The large literature on the consequences of divorce for families and children has largely found negative effects of divorce. Yet, there has been little research on the economic consequences of cohabitation dissolution as compared with marital dissolution, particularly in low-income populations. We use the Fragile Families and Child Well-being study to compare the consequences of cohabitation dissolution and marital dissolution. By year 3 of the Fragile Families and Child Well-being study, 41% of mothers who ever cohabited with their child’s father and 9% of mothers who were ever married to their child’s father have dissolved their union. This study compares changes in employment and earnings across the transition to cohabitation dissolution as compared with marital dissolution. We also examine whether there are differences by type of union dissolution in a variety of child support outcomes.	Claire	M. Kamp Dush	Elizabeth	 Peters
2007	161	Population Consequences of Global Warming	Preference and Risks of Coastal Population Distribution: A Systematic Assessment of Population and Land Area in Urban and Rural Areas of Coastal Zones	Human settlement has long been drawn to resource-rich coastal areas. But coastal regions also experience seaward hazards, including sea level rise and extreme weather events that are expected to increase as a result of climate change. We have shown elsewhere that coastal zones exhibit higher population densities, in both urban and rural areas than any other major ecologically defined zone. In this study, we show that about one person in ten globally lives in the most vulnerable low elevation portions of coastal zones—i.e., below ten meters. We integrate several new spatially-explicit databases and analyze them to assess population distribution and change over the past decade in low elevation coastal zones, with particular attention to urban settlements. The paper explains the methodology for data integration and analysis, presents new findings by different types of coastal vulnerabilities (poverty, delta regions vs. island, and city sizes), and discusses implications for policy.	Deborah	L. Balk	Gordon	 McGranahan	Bridget	 Anderson
2007	161	Population Consequences of Global Warming	Demographic Consequences of Sudden Global Cooling in the “Year without a Summer” as Documented by 19th-Century Administrative Records of an Italian Town	The 1815 eruption of Tambora volcano is the largest known historic eruption and responsible for the last major one-year temperature drop in 1816, the year without a summer. The demographic consequences of this sudden global cooling have not been well recognized, particularly on rural 19th-century communities. In this paper I will examine the administrative records of the commune of Pettorano-sul-Gizio in the Abruzzi region to examine the extent of the demographic consequences of sudden global cooling on a rural agricultural community.	Katherine	M. Condon
2007	161	Population Consequences of Global Warming	Fleeing the Storm(s): Evacuations during Florida's 2004 Hurricane Season	The 2004 hurricane season was the worst in Florida’s history, with four hurricanes causing at least 47 deaths and some $45 billion in damages. In order to collect information on the demographic impact of those hurricanes, we surveyed approximately 2,000 households at the state level and 12,000 households in the local areas sustaining the greatest damage. Using these data, we estimated that one-quarter of Florida’s population evacuated prior to at least one of the hurricanes; in several counties, more than half of the residents evacuated at least once. In this study, we summarize the results regarding the number of evacuees, types of lodging, and number of days spent away from home. Using logistic regression analysis, we analyze the factors affecting evacuation decisions. With the apparent increase in hurricane intensity (and perhaps frequency) caused by global warming, we believe the findings reported in this study will be very useful in preparing for the impact of future hurricanes.	Stanley	K. Smith	Chris	 McCarty
2007	161	Population Consequences of Global Warming	Recent and Historic Population Trends in the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands: Hubs and Spokes, Booms and Busts	Human populations on the coastline and islands of the Bering Sea have been increasing since the 1920s, a trend which could accelerate or reverse under different global climate change scenarios. In larger hub communities, a net in-migration has been generated by foreign-born immigrants drawn as labor to the seafood processing industry. In many small villages, net out-migration for education and economic opportunity is countered by a high birth rate among Native Alaskan populations. Most communities that have experienced negative population growth in the last 15 years are those closely linked to the salmon fishery which has suffered economically with the growth of globalized trade in farmed fish. Understanding of these patterns can help us to construct models that predict potential impacts of ecosystem changes stemming from global climate change, which are expected to be more dramatic in the arctic and subarctic than in other parts of the planet.	Jennifer	 Sepez	Amanda	 Poole
2007	162	Neighborhood Effects on Health  	Investigating the Influence of Neighborhood Context on Levels of Violence in Medellín and Chicago	Limited information exists about ways communities impact violence in developing countries. We tested the association between neighborhood characteristics and violence by using a household survey of 2495 respondents in 166 neighborhoods in Medellín, Colombia, and 3094 respondents in 342 neighborhoods in Chicago, USA. In Chicago, poverty and lower collective efficacy were predictive of higher perceptions of violence and rates of homicide. In Medellín, collective efficacy was more pronounced in contexts of high disadvantage and was associated with higher levels of perceived violence and homicide. We also found significant interactions between neighborhood collective efficacy and poverty in both cities. Higher levels of collective efficacy were associated with higher homicide in high-poverty neighborhoods in both sites. In Chicago, collective efficacy was only protective against higher levels of perceived violence in low-poverty neighborhoods. The study questions the notion of social organization as a homogeneously beneficial process across cultural and socioeconomic contexts.	Magdalena	 Cerda	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff
2007	162	Neighborhood Effects on Health  	Dynamics of Income and Neighborhood Context on Health and Racial Health Disparities	Cross-sectional neighborhood-health models that relied on single-point-in-time measures of neighborhood context fail to account for possible heterogeneous histories within groups who may share similar characteristics at a given point in time. Ignoring the dynamic nature of these factors may lead to the underestimation of their importance in explaining health and racial health disparities. In this study, I use longitudinal data to investigate the relationship between neighborhood poverty and respondent-rated health, focusing on whether the addition of a temporal dimension reveals: 1) a stronger relationship between neighborhood poverty and health, and 2) a greater explanatory power for the health gap between Blacks and Whites. Results indicate that long-term neighborhood measures are stronger predictors of health outcomes and explain a greater amount of the Black/White health gap than single-point measures.	D.	Phuong  Do
2007	162	Neighborhood Effects on Health  	Race/Ethnic Differences in Birth Outcomes in Philadelphia: The Role of Residential Segregation, Crime, and Neighborhood-Level Socioeconomic Disparities	This paper contributes to the literature on neighborhood context and race/ethnic disparities in birth outcomes. We integrate individual and community-level determinants in a multilevel analysis of preterm and small-for-gestational age births, with a specific focus on the role of residential segregation, crime, and neighborhood deprivation. To date, individual-level socio-demographic variables, health behaviors, health service use, and biomedical conditions have not fully explained race/ethnic differentials in birth outcomes. We base our analysis on 2000 Philadelphia resident live birth records of which approximately 95% were successfully geocoded based on the mothers’ address reported on the birth record. The birth records were merged with block group level measures of residential segregation, (index of dissimilarity, exposure, and isolation), crime rates (measured as property crimes and crimes against persons), and a composite measure of neighborhood deprivation. Individual-level characteristics available from birth certificates are also included. The analyses focuses on non-Hispanics blacks, non-Hispanic whites, and Hispanics.	Irma	T. Elo	Jennifer	 Culhane
2007	162	Neighborhood Effects on Health  	Neighborhood Environments and Obesity: Exploring Links to Body Mass and Physical Activity	We assess potential mechanisms through which the social and built environments may be linked to obesity, both directly and indirectly through their affects on physical activity, using data from Chicago neighborhoods. Preliminary findings reveal that neighborhood factors appear to play important roles in predicting both exercise and walking, net of a wide array of individual-level characteristics. People exercise less in neighborhoods in which residents perceive higher levels of crime and disorder, but walk more in such neighborhoods. People walk less in neighborhoods where there is more collective fear of crime. The presence of recreational facilities and/or waterfront in a neighborhood appears to encourage exercise. People who live in more “yuppie” neighborhoods (places with people who have higher levels of education and people in professional managerial jobs, and marked by the absence of children) tend to exercise more, and they tend to walk more in areas with higher population density.	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	James	S. House
2007	163	Transition into Fatherhood	Relationship Context and Men’s Transition to a Subsequent or Higher Order Birth: Preliminary Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study	This project examines the association between relationship quality and relationship status and the experience of a subsequent or higher order birth among males. This study extends a small but growing research literature on male fertility by addressing two primary research questions: 1) Is relationship quality associated with fathering a subsequent or higher-order birth (either with the same partner or another partner)?; and 2) Do these associations differ by men’s union status? (i.e., for fathers who are married, cohabiting, romantically involved and report not being in a relationship) The project uses data from the baseline, 12-month follow-up and 3-year follow-up father surveys from the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study (Fragile Families). Fragile Families is a longitudinal study that provides information on the characteristics of fathers and mothers and their relationships with one another at the time of their child’s birth, and on the factors that support or strain their relationships.	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Cassandra	A. Logan	Elena	K. Kennedy
2007	163	Transition into Fatherhood	Pathways to Young Fatherhood in the United Kingdom	In recent years research has begun to examine the experiences of young fathers and this has provided good evidence that early fatherhood is selective of men of disadvantaged backgrounds. Young fathers are more likely to come from poorer families, to have had low educational achievements during childhood, and to have experienced family disruption. However, the experience, timing, and duration of these adverse childhood experiences are all likely to be important. Using data from a 1970 cohort of British men, this paper considers the timing of events explicitly - in early childhood, pre-adolescence and adolescence. Our preliminary findings suggest that parental resources have a significant effect on the onset of early fatherhood. This study also shows that, regardless of when they are measured, educational test scores are linked to early childbearing. In contrast, behavioural attributes have a greater effect on young fatherhood at older ages, particularly during adolescence.	Maria	C. Huerta
2007	163	Transition into Fatherhood	Which Men Remain Childless?: The Effects of Early Lifecourse, Family Formation, Working Life and Attitudinal Variables	This paper examines later life childlessness among males in Australia. The data are from 1,610 males aged 45-59 interviewed for Wave 1 of the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey, a large-scale, nationwide, longitudinal survey of the household population of Australia conducted in 2001. Staged logistic regression models were used to identify the early lifecourse antecedents and later lifecourse correlates of a man being childless in later life. The results show that the father’s and mother’s occupations, the type of schooling and birthplace are important early lifecourse variables predictors of whether a man is childless in later life. Nuptiality and occupational variables are strong later life predictors of whether a man is childless. The importance of attitudinal variables, particularly attitudes towards family, work, money, leisure, health, and community, as predictors of his childlessness is highlighted. The implications of the findings for Australia’s public debate are discussed.	Nick	 Parr
2007	163	Transition into Fatherhood	Becoming Step-Fathers: Union Formation with Single Mothers	While much of the current attention to promoting marriage focuses on barriers to marriage among single mothers, relatively little is known about the attributes of men willing to partner with single mothers. I use data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth to examine what characterizes men who become step-fathers, the type of union into which they enter, and the tempo of progression into coresidence. No previous studies have examined whether the pace of progression differs for men entering into step-fathering relationships relative to those forming relationships with women who do not have coresidential children. Preliminary results indicate men are more likely to enter into unions with childless women. Those who partner with single mothers are more likely to cohabit than marry. Furthermore, progression into coresidential unions is considerably more rapid for men becoming step-fathers than for those entering unions with women with no children.	Sharon	 Sassler
2007	164	Measurement Issues in Health and Mortality	The Empirical Relationship between Lifetime Earnings and Mortality	Researchers have aimed to estimate the extent of differential mortality across socioeconomic groups by classifying individuals using income in the previous year. The first problem with this strategy is reverse causation: the same health shocks that lead to increase morbidity also cause income to decline. Second, annual income is a noisy measure of permanent income. This paper aims to tackle these drawbacks by classifying individuals using measures of lifetime earnings. A unique data set constructed matching the Survey of Income and Program Participation to Social Security records on earnings and mortality is used. Results indicate that the gradient between mortality and lifetime earnings is strong, smaller for women, decreases with age and varies when own versus household earnings is used. Adjusting for race, marital status and education only slightly decreases the estimated differentials. Finally, there is evidence that differential mortality by lifetime earnings has increased in the last twenty years.	Julian	P. Cristia
2007	164	Measurement Issues in Health and Mortality	Reassessing the Shape of the Relationship between Education and Health	Many studies have documented a strong correlation between education and adult health, but the nature of the basic shape of this relationship remains unclear. Drawing on data from a large, nationally-representative survey of the non-institutionalized U.S. population, this paper shows that the relationship between education and several common measures of adult health is usually nonlinear, with the strength of the relationship weakening at progressively higher education levels. An exception is the relationship between education and self-reported health, which is linear across all levels of schooling. The results are important in part to show researchers how to best measure the effects of education in statistical analyses, but also to further knowledge of the pathways or mechanisms through which education might lead to better health.	Brian	 Goesling
2007	164	Measurement Issues in Health and Mortality	Life Course Earnings in Health and Middle Age	Research on income and health frequently relies on self-reported income at a single time point. We assessed how these data limitations modified observed associations between earnings and health in 5,951 Health and Retirement Study participants with Social Security Administration recorded earnings (SSE) available for 1951-1991. Self-reported 1992 health outcomes assessed disability, depressive symptoms, and diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and stroke diagnoses. We compared: 1991 self-reported income; 1961-1991 SSE; multiple-year average SSE; and year-to-year SSE declines (adjusting for average earnings). For most outcomes, findings indicate similar results using administratively reported (SSE) data and self-reported earnings. Earnings averaged across 30 years predicts after controlling for most recent year of earnings. Declines in earnings ages 25-50 predict health independently of average earnings level. Comparing results including and excluding zero earnings years suggests that coding zero earnings years as “low earnings” introduces substantial bias, possibly due to sick individuals leaving the labor force.	David	 Rehkopf	M.	Maria  Glymour
2007	164	Measurement Issues in Health and Mortality	Military Service and Mortality: A Reappraisal Based on Frailty Models	Several investigators have examined the influence of military service on men’s life course trajectories, including health outcomes. Studies of late-life outcomes using samples of survivors, such as the HRS, must contend with a potentially serious initial-conditions problem: if military service changes mortality risks during the pre-HRS years, then the chances of surviving from the completion of military service until the HRS baseline will differ between veterans and non-veterans. We address this problem in two ways: we use estimates of pre-HRS survivorship based upon decennial Census data to adjust mortality models estimated using HRS data; and, we develop cohort mortality models that explicitly represent unmeasured heterogeneity, using the analytic machinery of fixed-frailty mortality dynamics. The HRS data fail to produce evidence of differential mortality by veteran status; in contrast, 1960 and 1990 Census data produce clear evidence that black veterans have lower death rates than black non-veterans.	Douglas	A. Wolf	Janet	 Wilmoth
2007	165	Work and Family	Family Provisions at the Workplace and Their Relationship to Absenteeism, Retention, and Productivity of Workers	Using data from the Australian Workplace Industrial Relations Survey, this study provides timely evidence on the effects of on-site child care at the workplace and employer-provided family leave on worker absenteeism, turnover, and productivity. The study found that workplaces with on-site child care compared with workplaces with no on-site child care had lower rates of absenteeism and higher ratings for worker productivity. Workplaces that had a family leave policy also had lower rates of absenteeism than workplaces that had no such policy in place. Analyses also suggest that workplace characteristics, such as presence of a human-resources manager or union representative, are associated with higher worker productivity. Firm size, mission, and shift work were other predictors of worker performance. The findings argue strongly for an extensive, new workplace survey that can elucidate how parents today manage to abide by new workplace agreements while still handling the demands of family life.	Peter	D. Brandon	Jeromey	 Temple
2007	165	Work and Family	Workplace Flexibility Policies and Wage Growth: Do Organizational Characteristics Matter?	This paper explores the wage trajectories of workers using flexible work practices to see how employers evaluate such workers under a variety of organizational settings. Earlier research has shown markedly lower wage growth for professional and managerial mothers who use flexible work arrangements when their children are small (Glass, 2004).   Fathers and non-parents who use the same workplace policies have not been carefully evaluated. This study estimates fixed effects models of respondents in the 1989-2002 panels of the National Longitudinal Study of Youth to assess the comparative impact of having a flexible schedule, working from home, and working reduced hours on the wage growth of mothers, fathers, and non-parents. We further explore differences in the size of wage penalties based on occupational sector, firm size, and occupational characteristics such as customer or client contact and supervisory authority.	Jennifer	L. Glass	Mary	C. Noonan
2007	165	Work and Family	Trouble at the Border?  Gender, Work, and the Work-Home Interface	We address three questions: 1) Are schedule control and job autonomy associated differently with the work-home interface? 2) Do schedule control and autonomy interact with different forms of work-home role blurring to influence levels of work-to-home conflict? 3) Do any of these observed associations differ for women and men? We apply a gender view of border theory and propositions about resourceful versus demanding work conditions in the work-home interface. Analyses of the 2002 National Survey of the Changing Workforce reveal that schedule control and autonomy are associated positively with work-home role blurring, although the effects are stronger among men. The association between role blurring and work-to-home conflict is greater at higher levels of schedule control. The findings challenge the view that schedule control and autonomy function uniformly as resources that help people manage the work-home border. Implications for research on gender, the work-home interface, and border theory are discussed.	Scott	 Schieman	Paul	 Glavin
2007	165	Work and Family	Dual-Earner Couples with Children: Exploring the Relationship between the Parents’ Working Hours in the Context of Norwegian Work-Family Policy	A more equal sharing of paid and unpaid labor between mothers and fathers has been an important objective in Norwegian work-family policy for decades. Mothers' participation in the labor force has increased substantially and more fathers share the parental leave and childcare with the mother. In this paper we wish to examine the relationship between the parents' working hours by following couples with children over time. Using a nationally representative panel survey conducted by Statistics Norway 1997-2002 our findings indicate that the mother adjusts her working hours to the age of the youngest child, while the father slightly adjusts his working hours to the mother's. Despite numerous government incentives and reforms to facilitate gender equality, it seems that the more equal sharing of labor observed at an aggregate level masks a more traditional division still present among couples with children.	Silje	Vatne  Pettersen
2007	165	Work and Family	Paternity Leave and Fathers' Involvement with Their Young Children	Unlike many European countries, the United States has no national paternity leave policy giving fathers the right to take paid time off work following the birth (or adoption) of a child. Despite this, prior research suggests that many fathers do take some time off work after a child is born. However, little is known about the determinants, circumstances, or consequences of paternal leave-taking. In this paper, we use the first two waves of data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), a new nationally representative panel study of over 10,000 children born in 2001, to examine these questions. In preliminary work, we find that the overwhelming majority of fathers take some leave at the birth of their child, but that the length of leave varies a good deal. Our results also indicate that fathers who take longer leaves are more involved in child care-taking activities nine months later.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy	Jane	 Waldfogel
2007	166	Race and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective	Unraveling the Eurasian Nuptiality Conundrum: Ethnicity and Entry into First Union in Kyrgyzstan	Demographers have long been intrigued by ethnic and regional variations in family formation in Eurasia. We use data from a recent survey of young adults in northern Kyrgyzstan to examine ethnic differences in the dynamics of entry into first union — marriage or cohabitation. We move beyond the traditional contrast between the European-origin minority and the Kyrgyz majority by subdividing the latter into two subgroups based on the degree of European cultural influence (Russification). The results of the multinomial discrete-time logit model show that Europeans are least likely to marry and most likely to cohabit, while the opposite is true of non-Russified Kyrgyz. Russified Kyrgyz stand between the two extremes. The analysis also reveals variations in ethnic patterns of union formation by gender and area of residence. We interpret these results in light of enduring cultural and demographic distinctions as well as more recent politically-driven differences between main ethnic groups.	Victor	 Agadjanian	Lesia	 Nedoluzhko	PremChand	 Dommaraju
2007	166	Race and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective	State-Sponsored Racial Segregation: Paradoxical Outcomes in South Africa	This paper examines how the territorial segregation of Blacks in homelands impacted the economic standing of Black and White South Africans shortly after the end of apartheid. We investigate how the employment, occupational status and income of Blacks and Whites differ according to their residence in former homeland areas and their individual assets. Segregation in homelands was detrimental for many Blacks but beneficial for others. Employed Blacks enjoy higher occupational prestige and incomes in former homelands than Blacks in other areas. But far more Blacks are unemployed in former homelands. These outcomes are attributable to the structure of labor markets in homelands. The segregation of Blacks in homelands created a large class divide between employed and unemployed Blacks. In contrast to prior research which finds either wholly beneficial or detrimental effects of segregation for subordinate groups, the results underscore the multiple impacts of segregation on disadvantaged groups in multiracial societies.	Claudia	 Buchmann	Troy	A. Powell
2007	166	Race and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective	Foreign Nationality and Age - A Double Drawback for Reemployment in Germany?	We analyze reemployment prospects for Germans and non-Germans over the life course. Older foreigners may  experience a double drawback due to health issues, discrimination or differences in occupational structure.  This effect might be alleviated by accumulation of country-specific skills over time and selectivity effects. We  apply a piecewise-constant hazard rate model on more than 270,000 unemployment episodes drawn from the  social insurance register for male employees aged 25 to 65 between 1975 to 2001. Foreign nationality  lowers reemployment prospects by 7 percentage points. On average, the effect of aging on reemployment is  stronger for non-Germans. The effect of nationality differs strongly between nationalities and ranges from  minus 17 percentage points for Greeks up to plus 5 percentage points for people from Ex-Yugoslavia. Aging is  particularly a problem for foreigners from Greece and Turkey: until age 60, their prospects for reemployment  are, on average, about 27 percent below that of natives.	Katharina	H. Frosch	Jana	 Bruder
2007	166	Race and Ethnicity in Comparative Perspective	Schooling and Disadvantage in Laos	Over the last 40 years, Laos made steady progress in educational outcomes, as evidenced by higher enrollment rates, literacy, and schooling years completed. This progress has been partly a result of government education policy because economic growth alone, as measured by the trend in per-capita consumption, would have predicted less progress than what was achieved. However, educational progress has not been equal across population groups, revealing significant disparities by residence, gender, ethno-linguistic affiliation and income, and how these attributes interact. Laos, one of the poorest countries in Asia, is very ethnically diverse; ethnic groups speak distinct languages, presenting the education system with a difficult challenge. The paper examines educational progress and inequalities, and the factors that explain enrollment and attainment. The analysis draws primarily on data from the Lao Expenditure Consumption Survey for 2002/3, a nationally representative household survey that covered 8,100 households, as well as a linked school survey.	Elizabeth	M. King	Dominique	 van de Walle
2007	167	Immigrant Adaptation	Racial and Ethnic Differentials across the Generations in Home Ownership and Housing Type	Homeownership brings about social and economic benefits to individuals and families and is a preferred investment in market-based societies such as Canada. However, ownership rates are not uniform across social groups. Racial and ethnic disparities in owning a home have been noted in the literature, as have differences by immigrant generation. We bridge these two domains of inquiry by asking if these racial and ethnic differentials persist across generations that are successively removed from the immigration experience. Analysis of the 2001 Census of Canada Public Use Microdata File (PUMF) of Individuals finds interactions between racial and ethnic group membership and successive generations of immigrant offspring for both housing tenure and type of owned home. Condominiums may increasingly become a path to homeownership for racial and ethnic minorities and in particular, for the newcomers of these groups.	Monica	 Boyd	Ann	H. Kim
2007	167	Immigrant Adaptation	Intermarriage and Immigrant Income Assimilation in Sweden 2003	Intermarriage, or marital exogamy, is often seen as a key to immigrant assimilation. In this paper, intermarriage (especially between immigrants and natives) is studied for a large number of immigrant groups in Sweden using log-linear analysis of the entire population between 16 and 64 in 2003. In total we analyze 25 different immigrant groups, and compare with natives. The data include about 1.1 million married couples. Furthermore, the link between intermarriage and income assimilation is analyzed using logistic regression. Theoretically we connect to a human capital framework in which marrying a native is assumed to give the individual immigrant access to a native network, which tends to increase his or her position in the labor market.	Martin	 Dribe	Christer	 Lundh
2007	167	Immigrant Adaptation	Pace and Trajectory of Immigrants toward Homeownership: Variable Rates of Translating Human Capital into Residential Integration from 1970 to 2000	Homeownership is a principal indicator of achievement and integration for immigrants in the U.S., and this depends on their progress in education, English proficiency, and income, as their duration in the U.S. grows longer. The pace of advancement has varied across arrival cohorts, and immigrant groups are also different in their propensity of converting human capital to residential achievement. This study will use IPUMS microdata to track immigrant cohorts of ethnic Mexicans, Chinese, and Koreans, measuring their pace of change on different dimensions of human capital and economic achievement, and examining how their ability to translate these factors into residential integration has changed from 1970 to 2000. We also examine why Mexicans are so much more successful in becoming homeowners than their low levels of human capital would predict. The variable propensity to convert human capital into residential outcomes is a critical yet largely overlooked measure of the assimilation process.	Dowell	 Myers	Zhou	 Yu	Michael	 Haan
2007	167	Immigrant Adaptation	Beyond the Shadow of White Privilege? The Socioeconomic Attainments of Second-Generation South Asian Americans	There have been numerous studies of second-generation minorities in recent years but South Asian Americans have been completely ignored in this growing literature. We provide the first multivariate statistical analysis that focuses specifically on the socioeconomic attainments of second-generation South Asian Americans. Our results indicate that this group has educational attainments that significantly exceed those of non-Hispanic whites. The wages of South Asian Americans are also on par with those of non-Hispanic whites who have similar educational and other basic demographic characteristics. If anything, 1.5-generation South Asian Americans may be slightly advantaged in terms of wages relative to non-Hispanic whites. These conclusions apply equally to both male and female South Asian Americans. Some theorists of race relations have emphasized the socioeconomic advantages of non-Hispanic whites relative to minorities with darker skin tones, but these theories do not appear to be directly applicable to second-generation South Asian Americans.	Isao	 Takei	Hyeyoung	 Woo
2007	168	Determinants of Child Health in Developing Countries	Environmental and Socio-Demographic Risk Factors of Childhood Mortality: Evidence from Longitudinal Surveillance Data	We investigate the determinants of infant and child mortality in a rural sub-Saharan setting, exploiting several years of data from longitudinal demographic surveillance in the area. We present evidence on the extent to which environmental and socio-demographic risk factors influence child survival in the Kassena-Nankana district of Ghana. We use multivariate hazard models to disentangle the effects of these risk factors on infant and child mortality. Our results point clearly to effects of individual and household level covariates, and they further implicate contextual and environmental conditions, such as season, urban residence, and female migration, even in this relatively homogenous population. We find that males, children of parents with limited education, and mothers who are rural-rural migrants are disadvantaged. We conclude that a better understanding of the several forces underlying childhood mortality could help intervention program managers to target children who are most vulnerable in similar settings.	Kubaje	 Adazu	Michael	J. White
2007	168	Determinants of Child Health in Developing Countries	Clean Water Makes You Dirty: Water Supply and Sanitation Behavior in Metro Cebu, the Philippines	This paper illustrates the unintended consequences of water supply improvements. By insulating households from prevailing sanitary conditions, water supply improvements reduce the incentive to be clean. Using data from Metro Cebu, the Philippines, I find that expansions of municipal piped water lead to declines in sanitation and health. Based on these results, I develop a simple model where sanitation is a local public good with multiple equilibrium levels of provision. The model has the stark prediction that the prevalence of piped water in the neighborhood, rather than the household's own water source, determines behavior. Empirical tests support this framework, pointing to an important role for social norms and community enforcement in sanitation behavior.	Daniel	 Bennett
2007	168	Determinants of Child Health in Developing Countries	Is There Catch-Up Growth? Evidence from Three Continents	This paper investigates whether nutritional status at early ages affects nutritional status at later ages among children using panel data from China, South Africa and Nicaragua. The key research question is whether children display ‘catch-up’ growth: do children who are malnourished at young ages have any chance of recuperating their health status as they grow older? And if they do, what are the key family and community level factors that enable catch-up growth to occur? The answer to this question is crucial for public policy. If catch-up growth is not possible, policy efforts must focus on early interventions that prevent malnutrition. If catch-up growth is possible, efforts can also be devoted to ‘recovering’ children who are already malnourished. In this case, it is important to know the factors at the household and community level that enable or inhibit growth.	Sudhanshu	 Handa	Amber	 Peterman	Shadi	 Eskaf
2007	168	Determinants of Child Health in Developing Countries	Father Absence Due to Migration and Child Health in Mexico	This paper assesses how father absence due to migration affects child illness in rural Mexico; and whether inclusion in an important social welfare program—PROGRESA—alters this effect. Using prospective data and longitudinal regression models, I find that father absence due to migration increases the probability of illness among children under age six by 7%. This effect doubles to 14% when households are not receiving PROGRESA. When households are enrolled in PROGRESA, the effect of father absence due to migration is small and statistically insignificant. These results suggest that in poor, rural Mexican households paternal migration may have negative consequences for child well-being, especially in the short term. Further, social welfare programs may provide important resources that can protect child health when these households experience the temporary loss of a key family member.	Kammi	 Schmeer
2007	169	Determinants of College Enrollment and Attainment	Overlapping Disadvantages and the Racial/Ethnic Graduation Gap among Students Attending Selective Institutions	In this paper, I use a configurational approach to examine the extent to which the overlap between several education-enhancing resources (family income, parental education, and student's academic preparation) can account for racial and ethnic gaps in graduation likelihood among students attending academically selective colleges and universities in the United States. The results, based on the College & Beyond database, demonstrate that students with overlapping disadvantages are less likely to graduate compared to their privileged classmates. This burden of overlapping disadvantages was above and beyond the unique hardship associated with each background characteristic. Under-represented minority students are more likely to suffer from overlapping disadvantages than whites and Asians. To a large extent, the gross racial and ethnic gap in graduation dissolves among students with similar configurations of dis/advantages. I conclude that the racial/ethnic gap in graduation that exists within selective colleges and universities is related to the socioeconomic composition of their student body.	Sigal	 Alon
2007	169	Determinants of College Enrollment and Attainment	Can Educational Policies Affect Student Choices through Increasing Information, Peer Influences, or Both?	This research examines the extent to which college decisions among adolescents depend on the decisions of their peers by exploiting two unique features of the Texas Higher Education Opportunity Project (THEOP) data in order to identify the mechanism through which peer social interactions operate: student-reported preferences for specific colleges and student-reported information channels about college. These results have implications for broad types of policy interventions to increase college enrollment among disadvantaged groups.	Jason	 Fletcher
2007	169	Determinants of College Enrollment and Attainment	Inequality in Post-Secondary Educational Attainment among Traditional and Non-Traditional High School Graduates	This study analyzes the impact different high school credentials have on inequality of educational attainment. I compare the post-secondary degree attainment of students who graduate from high school through a “traditional” high school diploma with those who graduate by means of a General Educational Development (GED) certificate. Using detailed data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979-2002, I found that whether students complete any post-secondary degree is affected by the type of high school credential they attain, the timing at which the transitions out of secondary education and into post-secondary education occur, and the sequence of events within educational levels – even after taking into account differences in socioeconomic background, cognitive skills, and non-cognitive skills. This research demonstrates that a framework that takes into account the type, timing, and sequence of educational experiences within students’ careers offers a more complete understanding of inequality in educational attainment.	Carolina	 Milesi
2007	169	Determinants of College Enrollment and Attainment	Peer Social Capital and the Educational Progress of Minority Adolescents	This study examines the role of peer social capital as a predictor of adolescent academic outcomes, using multilevel models and a nationally representative sample. Results reveal that factors commonly associated with academic outcomes (e.g., school racial/ethnic and socioeconomic composition) as well as others, including peer network segregation, had a significant impact on both educational achievement and attainment, this study’s dependent variables. Furthermore, school composition is a significant predictor of achievement. Likewise, academic attainment was lower in schools where low-income students were concentrated. For some racial groups improved educational attainment occurred in schools with higher concentrations of minority students. However, peer social capital was a more significant predictor of both achievement and attainment for all racial/ethnic groups than peer network segregation. Finally, and counter to some studies, results indicate that African-American students have better academic achievement and attainment in schools where friendships are segregated by race rather than in non-segregated schools.	Igor	 Ryabov	Franklin	 Goza
2007	169	Determinants of College Enrollment and Attainment	Work Matters: Consequences of High School Employment on College Attendance	Can high school students successfully integrate employment with their studies? In recent decades, there has been a vigorous, and sometimes confusing, debate on the nature of the effect of work on academic achievement, school attachment, and college attendance. At the heart of the debate are the questions of selection and causality. In particular, researchers have begun to examine whether teenage employment merely reflects the relationship between antecedent social origins and achievement, or if adolescent employment patterns have an independent effect on high school or postsecondary outcomes. In this paper, we examine effects of teenage employment on college attendance, and find that the intensity of employment as well as the type of employment in high school directly impacts college transition trajectories.	Irina	 Voloshin	Charles	 Hirschman
2007	170	Abortion II	Women, Husbands, and In-Laws: Abortion Decision-Making in Madhya Pradesh, India	In this paper, we examine women’s decision-making capacity and the role of husbands and in-laws in shaping abortion behavior in Madhya Pradesh, India. Data come from a survey covering life course experience with pregnancies and abortion of 2,448 married women (15-39). Descriptive results show that 18% of all pregnancies were unwanted/mistimed, of which abortion was attempted for 42%. Pregnancies were more frequently unwanted by women than their husbands. Women faced considerable pressure to bear children (40%) or sons (30%) and had limited decision-making. Restricting our analysis to 1608 pregnancies unwanted by women or their husbands, we use step-wise logistic regressions to first model women’s own desires, autonomy (including restrictions on mobility, spending, incidence of domestic violence, and spousal age difference), and control variables. The second model includes the husband’s preferences, and the third those of in-laws to establish changes in the statistical effect of women’s preferences on abortion behavior.	Kerry	 MacQuarrie	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Christine	 MacAulay	Laura	 Nyblade	Anju	 Malhotra
2007	170	Abortion II	Contraception Matters: The Decline in Induced Abortion in the Former Soviet Georgia	Before the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, countries under Soviet influence relied heavily on abortion as a means of fertility control. The total induced abortion rate, more than three lifetime abortions on average per woman, is one of the highest in the world.    Characteristics of women who have legal induced abortions in Georgia are examined using two 6-year apart nationwide population-based reproductive health surveys.     Prevention of unintended pregnancy through contraception has reduced abortion levels from 3.7 to 3.1 abortions per woman, but many women still choose to terminate their pregnancies, underscoring the importance of subsidized family planning services and expanded coverage. The recent decline in complications after legal abortions illustrates that clinical practice has been improving and more abortions are performed at lower risk. Efforts to further replace abortion with contraception should focus on increasing access to a variety of high quality, affordable modern methods.	Florina	I. Serbanescu	Paul	 Stupp	Leo	 Morris
2007	170	Abortion II	Role of Induced Abortion in Attaining Reproductive Goals in Kyrgyzstan: A Study Based on KRDHS-1997	Estimates indicate that 46 million pregnancies are voluntarily terminated each year, of which 19 million are legal.  This paper aims to understand the dynamics of family planning use, reproductive preferences, and future intention to use contraception and abortion, and their fertility inhibiting effects among Kyrgyz women.  The total abortion rate for Kyrgyz Republic is 1.6 abortions per woman.  It seems to be on the higher side, though it has declined in recent past.  However, there is an increase in rates for women from backward strata.  The modified proximate determinant framework suggests that abortion is a prominent factor in creating fertility differentials among Kyrgyz women.  Women who have had an abortion, a majority of them intended to repeat it in the case of an  unintended pregnancy.  It is worth noting that among  contraceptive non-users, 46 percent of women not desiring an additional child, do not intend to use any method in future.	Alina	 Sulaimanova	Chander	 Shekhar
2007	170	Abortion II	Abortion-Politics and Media in Mexico	A free press has risen in Mexico, increasing the legitimacy of print media as the largest source of objective information on abortion. Using a sample of 100 newspaper articles containing the word “abortion,” this study examines the context in which abortion is discussed, the types of arguments that are presented both in favor of and opposed to abortion, and which social actors are associated with those arguments and given media coverage in the debate. Results show political parties and Catholic Church representatives as the principal social actors, while the principal arguments for and against abortion were ideological, legal/political, public health and rights-based. The study highlights the range of issues surrounding abortion that are circulating in Mexican press, providing a reflection of the climate in which the abortion debate exists. Understanding the views that exist towards abortion can help us to target policy interventions aimed at increasing access to safe abortions.	Emily	 Vala-Haynes	Roger	W. Rochat
2007	170	Abortion II	Impact of Religion on the Attitudes toward Abortion and Contraception Use in Contemporary Taiwan	Studies show that religion is strongly associated with opposition of abortion in the U.S. However, little is known about the effects of religion in non-Western societies, where non-Judeo Christian religious traditions have been dominant. Using a nationally representative sample of married women in Taiwan, we investigate how religion affects attitudes toward abortion and contraception use. Our analysis indicates that conservative religious groups, Taiwan Protestants and the New Religious Movement (Yi-Guan-Dao), are more likely to disapprove of abortion, particularly when household financial constraints or out-of-wedlock pregnancy is the reason, compared to Chinese traditional religionists (i.e. Buddhists and Taoists). However, Chinese traditional religionists tend to disapprove of birth control, except for sterilization after reaching the desired number of children. The nonreligious tend to favor abortion and birth control more under all circumstances. Despite these attitudinal differences, we find no significant effect of religion in predicting the likelihood of having abortion.	Jiexia	(Elisa)  Zhai	Wei-hsin	 Yu
2007	171	Adolescent Events and Circumstances and the Transition to Adulthood	The Effects of Adolescents' Extra-Curricular Activities on Young Adult Success	This study employs a life-course approach to investigate the role of participation in school-based extracurricular activities and sports for adolescents reared in non-traditional family structures (i.e., single-mother, single-father, and step-family households) and the effect of participation on early adult outcomes. Using Waves I and III from the Add Health data, we examine three young adult outcomes: high school completion, civic involvement and drug use. We find that adolescent extracurricular activity participation including sport, academic, service-based, and performing arts are protective for young adult’s future success. Adolescent extracurricular activities are important for children from all family structures, but seem to be less protective for children from single father families. Survey analysis techniques which control for the complex sampling design in Add Health are used.	Tucker	 Brown	Mary	H. Benin
2007	171	Adolescent Events and Circumstances and the Transition to Adulthood	The Educational Attainment Process among Adolescents with Disabilities and Children of Parents with Disabilities	Educational attainment marks a vital step in the overall transition to adulthood, especially for members of at-risk populations. Some adolescents utilize education to substantially enhance their human capital while others make poor decisions or face circumstances that result in too little schooling. This paper expands on previous research by examining two groups of adolescents previously ignored in research on educational attainment — those with disabilities and those who are children of parents with disabilities. Our results examine the effect of disability on parental and youth college expectations in 1997 as well as youth high school completion and college enrollment in 2003. We find that parental and youth educational expectations strongly predict high school completion and college enrollment and that educational attainment is not equal for children with and without disabilities. Most interestingly, we find a large disparity between parental and youth educational expectations for children with disabilities net of educational performance.	Dennis	 Hogan	Gary	 Sandefur	Carrie	L. Shandra
2007	171	Adolescent Events and Circumstances and the Transition to Adulthood	The Effect of Family Structure and Family Processes on Young Adult Criminal Behavior	There is much debate in the current literature about the influence of family structure on adolescent’s behavioral outcomes. Researchers frequently focus on the difference between two-parent families and single-parent families, primarily single-mother families. Using data from Waves I and III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I extend prior literature by analyzing the effect of an array of family forms on young adult’s criminal behavior, specifically self-reports of theft and violence. The analyses demonstrates that family processes, including closeness to parents, internalized control and parental monitoring, unmask the relationship between family structure and young adult’s criminal behavior. Family structure becomes a significant predictor of violent delinquency only when these family processes are taken into account.  Adolescents’ closeness to parents and parental monitoring decreases the amount of young adult theft and violence. Internalized control has no effect on violence. Parental supervision is not a significant predictor theft or violence.	Littisha	 Scott
2007	171	Adolescent Events and Circumstances and the Transition to Adulthood	The Effects of Nonresident Father Involvement on Offspring Well-Being during the Transition to Adulthood	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this study examines the influence of nonresident father involvement and father-offspring relationship quality on multiple dimensions of offspring well-being during the transition to adulthood. Previous research suggests that nonresident father involvement is positively related to a number of indicators of childhood and adolescent well-being. It is less clear how father’s involvement influences well-being during the transition to adulthood. This study seeks to improve our understanding of the link between nonresident father involvement and young adult offspring well-being, while also accounting for a number of additional factors including the mother-offspring relationship and mother involvement that may be related to levels of nonresident father involvement and offspring well-being during the transition to adulthood.	Mindy	E. Scott
2007	171	Adolescent Events and Circumstances and the Transition to Adulthood	Early Sexual Behavior and First Union Formation in Young Adults	Using the first six rounds of data from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, I analyze the role of sexual behavior on union formation for 6,700 young adults (ages 18 to 22). I investigate whether early sexual activity influences the likelihood of experiencing a co-residential union in early adulthood and whether it is marriage or cohabitation. Results show that earlier ages at first sex and more sexual partners increase the likelihood of experiencing a cohabiting first co-residential union. Sexually active adolescents are less likely to marry or remain single than their counterparts who delayed first sex and had fewer sexual partners. These findings suggest that individuals who enter early cohabiting first unions have different sexual behavior than those who enter early marriages or stay single. Cohabitation has emerged as an alternative union to marriage in which individuals’ early sexual behavior influences the kind of first union they first experience.	Jonathan	E. Vespa
2007	172	Adolescent Sexuality and Fertility among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Generational Differences in Early Fertility and Sexual Behavior among Male and Female Immigrants in the United States	This paper examines factors that predict early fertility and sexual risk taking behavior among generations of young U.S. immigrants. Differences between male and female immigrants are emphasized. The study compares predictors of sexual risk taking behavior among first and second generation immigrants in the United States to those for natives using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth of 1997 (NLSY97), the National Longitudinal Study of Youth of 1979 (NLSY79), and the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS88). Both differences in outcomes between natives and immigrants and differences in outcomes between generations and cohorts of immigrants are considered. Using discrete time logistic survival models and Poisson regression, the role of family background characteristics (such as family structure), community/contextual characteristics (such as concentration of immigrants), and assimilation (such as generation status) are considered.	Felicia	Yang DeLeone
2007	172	Adolescent Sexuality and Fertility among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Transition to Adulthood in the Post-Migratory Context:  African Youth and Their Families in Canada	Parenting styles and parent-child relationships play a fundamental role in the adolescent transition process to adulthood, affecting mainly sexual and reproductive health behaviors and outcomes. However, few studies have analysed these interplays within the context of a family’s migration history.     Our work subscribes to the emerging adulthood theory and the life course approach in social sciences. We focus on emerging adults and their parents from the sub-Saharan region who migrated to Montréal (Canada) during the 1990s and compare them to long-time settlers of European descent.     The ways intergenerational relationships influence adolescents’ behaviors and the extent to which gender roles and relationships influence sexual behaviors among cultural groups are addressed.     Preliminary results of focus groups and in-depth interviews show that while some strategies are widely shared by parents from each group (e.g., sexual education), specific perceptions vary (e.g., on reproductive outcomes, sexual education, and sexual activity).	Amelie	A. Gagnon	Nathalie	K. Mondain
2007	172	Adolescent Sexuality and Fertility among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Sexual Debut among Latino Teens: A Comparison of Mexican-Americans, Cuban-Americans, and Puerto Ricans	This study investigates the timing of adolescent sexual debut for the three largest Hispanic subgroups in the United States: Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, and Cubans. We disentangle the otherwise conflated ethnic identities by country of origin to determine whether there are significant variations in adolescent sexual debut across the three groups. We use data from Add Health. The dependent variable is the risk of first sexual intercourse, which is measured dichotomously as whether the adolescent had sexual intercourse before marriage and is defined in annual intervals from age 11 through 20. The independent variable is ethnicity: (1) Mexican; (2) Cuban; or (3) Puerto Rican. Multivariate analyses control for nativity, sex, race, family structure, SES, religious affiliation, religiosity, and place of residence.	Margaret	 Gassanov	Lisa	 Nicholson
2007	172	Adolescent Sexuality and Fertility among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Understanding Teenage Fertility Decline	Since the early 1990s, births to 15–17-years-olds dropped more than 40 percent; births to 18–19-year-olds dropped by only about 25 percent. In contrast, births to 20–24-year-olds were stable, and births to older women rose rapidly (20 to 64 percent). Most studies have attempted to explain teenage fertility decline using the 1988 and 1995 NSFG, which only included the beginning of the teenage fertility decline. The new 2002 NSFG data provide an opportunity to explore these issues using more current data and a unified approach. We pool the 1988, 1995, and 2002 waves of the NSFG to disaggregate fertility decline, contraceptive failure rates, sexual activity and method choice, exploring main effects, demographic interactions, and calendar year interactions. The estimation of the entire model from a single data set allows us to consistently estimate standard errors via the bootstrap. We then simulate changes in proximate determinants of fertility and bootstrap estimates of the sampling variability of those simulations.	Jacob	A. Klerman	Berna	M. Torr
2007	173	Changes in Union Formation over Time	Ethnic-Based Nuptial Regimes and Marriage Behavior in Indonesia	How persistent are ethnic-based nuptial regimes in the face of rapid modernization in a developing country context? Do cultural norms related to marriage influence actual marriage behavior? In this study we use a unique dataset from Indonesia to examine the association between ethnic nuptial regimes and observed behaviors for adults born 1951-1980. Using reports from traditional law (“adat”) experts, we compare expectations for age at marriage and post-marriage residence with actual marriage behaviors. We also examine the role of education in mediating the relationship between ethnic norms and marriage behavior, given the rapid increases in educational attainment in Indonesia since the 1960s. Preliminary analyses suggest that the influence of ethnic-based norms for marriage timing has grown over time. As age at marriage increases in Indonesia due to economic development and modernization, the hazard of marriage is more responsive to ethnic-based expectations for younger cohorts.	Alison	M. Buttenheim	Jenna	 Nobles
2007	173	Changes in Union Formation over Time	Mexican Migration and Educational Assortative Mating in a Binational Context	Mexican migration to the U.S. is characterized by relatively high rates of circular migration of men and relatively low rates of migration by women. Thus, the volume and pattern of Mexican migration may affect not only the level and timing of union formation, but also the kinds of unions that are formed in sending communities as well as receiving communities in the U.S. and elsewhere in Mexico. In this paper, we examine the relationship between migration and marriage patterns by comparing distributions of marital statuses and assortative mating patterns in 1990 and 2000 in communities within Mexico and the United States that vary in their migration patterns. Marriage rates are lower among Mexicans living in receiving communities with high levels of migration and sending communities with low levels of migration. Educational resemblance is higher for Mexicans in receiving communities with high levels of migration and lower for those in sending communities with low levels of migration.	Kate	H. Choi	Robert	D. Mare
2007	173	Changes in Union Formation over Time	Trends in Shotgun and Premarital First Births in the United States: Cohort, Period, and Educational Differences in Premaritally Conceived Births	Are yesterday's shotgun births today's nonmarital births? Or do trends in both reflect increases in sexual activity prior to marriage? In this paper, we document trends in shotgun and premarital first births by decomposing trends into age, cohort, and period components, and by estimating educational gradients in these outcomes. We focus on trends in shotgun and nonmarital first births because these outcomes reflect a conception outside of marriage, with the conception in both cases taken to term. We argue that decomposing trends in shotgun births are more complicated than has typically been acknowledged in past studies by the nature of the phenomena, which can be affected by trends and compositional shifts in childlessness, in the timing of first birth or first marriage. We (1) separate cohort from period influences on the age-specific rates, and (2) estimate competing risks for premarital conceptions vs. marriage. We provide speculative interpretations of our results.	Paula	S. England	Lawrence	L. Wu	Emily	F. Shafer
2007	173	Changes in Union Formation over Time	Racial, Educational, and Religious Endogamy in Comparative Historical Perspective	This paper attempts to draw broad comparisons between marriage patterns by race, by education, and by religion in the U.S. over time. I use census data for race and education, and a variety of data sources for religious intermarriage. The comparative approach allows several general conclusions. First, racial endogamy has declined sharply over the 20th century, but race is still the most powerful division in the marriage market. Second, higher education has little effect on racial endogamy for blacks and whites. Third, religious endogamy has declined over time but the decline predates 1970 and therefore can only be appreciated by comparing different data sources. Fourth, educational endogamy has changed over time, but the scale of the changes in educational endogamy is fairly small compared to changes in racial endogamy.	Michael	J. Rosenfeld
2007	174	Husbands, Wives, Marriage, and Health	Explaining the Psychological Benefits of Marriage among the Depressed	Past research has demonstrated that, relative to their non-married counterparts, those who are depressed prior to marriage benefit more from a transition into marriage than the non-depressed. Using the National Survey of Families and Households, I consider a series of mediating and moderating factors to explain the disparity in the psychological benefits of marriage between the previously depressed and the non-depressed. Prior studies suggest that the difference in benefits may be related to differences in marital expectations, differences in the impact of changes in social support outside the spousal relationship, or differences in the impact of changes in wealth. Preliminary findings indicate that the disparity is related most strongly to wealth and changes in the giving of social support after entering marriage.	Adrianne	 Frech
2007	174	Husbands, Wives, Marriage, and Health	Transition to Widowhood and Health Care Use among the Elderly	It has been well documented that individuals are more likely to die after the deaths of their spouses. This paper examines health care use as a link between widowhood and health; it asks 1) how does the transition to widowhood affect the individuals’ health care use and the quality of care they receive? And 2) do these changes contribute to the elevated mortality hazard for the widowed? This paper utilizes a unique dataset of one million couples identified and sampled from all couples enrolled in Medicare on Jan. 1, 1993. These couples were followed for up to nine years. Their survival status was ascertained; detailed information on health care use was collected. Preliminary findings suggested that quality of care declined around the transition to widowhood. Investigating health care use around the transition to widowhood may provide insight into the timing and methods of interventions that may attenuate the harmful consequences of widowhood.	Lei	 Jin	Nicholas	 Christakis
2007	174	Husbands, Wives, Marriage, and Health	Are Marital Status Differences in Health Increasing or Decreasing by Cohort? An Examination by Race and Gender for Younger Adults	While researchers continue to emphasize the value of marriage for health, we know surprisingly little about how the association between marital status and health has changed across birth cohort. In this paper, I use pooled repeated cross-sectional data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) to examine cohort pattern in the relationship between marital status and health between birth cohort 1918 and 1978. Self-rated health is the primary outcome measurement in the present study. Results from ordered logistic regression models show that health differences between the married and other non-married groups including widowed, divorced/separated and never married became widened across cohort from 1918 to 1978. Moreover, divergence trend in health between the married with the other marital groups was more profound among women than men and among non-Hispanic whites than African Americans.	Hui	 Liu
2007	174	Husbands, Wives, Marriage, and Health	His and Her Marriage Today: Gendered Models of How Wives’ Income Impacts Husbands’ Later Mid-Life Health	This study presents the theoretical development and empirical assessment of three models that describe how ideological norms about male breadwinning shape the effect of wives’ income on husbands’ health. Drawing from research on spousal health effects and on the gendered division of household labor, this study uses husbands’ health as a key measure of well-being and as a heuristic to understand the persistence of gendered marital inequality. Analysis of parallel spousal data from the Health and Retirement Study shows that a husband’s health is adversely impacted when he earns less than his wife, pointing to gendered expectations of primary breadwinning as a cause of poor health. This effect is pronounced among highest-earning men, for whom the cultural ideal of male breadwinning is strongest. These findings contradict earlier research that identifies wives’ work itself as contributing to husbands’ ill health.	Kristen	W. Springer
2007	175	Marital Relationships and Children: Historical Perspectives	The Shape of a Fertility Transition: An Analysis of Birth Intervals in Eastern Belgium	Henry’s “natural fertility hypothesis,” which asserts that fertility control consisted of “stopping” high parity births without increasing the “spacing” between births, has been central to research on both historical and contemporary fertility transitions. This hypothesis has never been universally accepted, and methods for detecting fertility transitions based only on “stopping” have been increasingly challenged. This paper offers a new perspective illustrated with fertility histories from 19th-century Belgium. We show that “stopping” and “spacing” can both be identified by examining survival curves for birth intervals. We also show that these features of birth intervals are captured by the “cure model,” which allows us to estimate effects of covariates on “stopping” and “spacing” separately. Our results confirm that stopping rather than spacing was the primary control strategy used during the fertility transition in 19th-century Belgium, and couples were abandoning behaviors (e.g. prolonged breastfeeding, abstinence) that lengthened birth intervals in previous generations.	George	 Alter	Michel	 Oris	Konstantin	 Tyurin
2007	175	Marital Relationships and Children: Historical Perspectives	“Until Death Do Us Apart” and Even Longer: Demographic Constraints and Social Disapproval of Remarriage in 19th-Century Italy	The study focuses on the analysis of remarriage patterns in two 19th-century Italian populations, Casalguidi (rural Tuscany) and Treppo Carnico (Alpine area, Friuli).  The use of individual-level data and the differences in the geographic localization, socioeconomic system, demographic regime, and household structure between the two communities offered us the opportunity to analyse the intimate mechanisms of the access to remarriage in two different contexts.  The study provides evidence of the key roles played by socioeconomic status, land tenure and household composition on the chances to remarry. The paper discusses such relationships in light of the social norms in force, as well as, of the two different demographic systems that exist, high-pressure regime in Casalguidi and low-pressure regime in Treppo Carnico.	Marco	 Breschi	Matteo	 Manfredini	Alessio	 Fornasin	Marianna	 Zacchigna
2007	175	Marital Relationships and Children: Historical Perspectives	Long Term Trends in Age Assortative Mating: Spain, 1922-2004	In this paper (i) we describe long term trends in age assortative mating using vital registration data of all marriages contracted in Spain between 1922 and 2004; (ii) we examine these trends to distinguish between change in the availability of eligible candidates and change in the force of attraction by using a marriage matching function that links actual marriage to the population of men and women simultaneously at risk; and (iii) we further explore trends in the force of attraction to analyze the intensity and changes in age homogamy and the degree of symmetry between male and female patterns. Besides the fact of using Spanish instead of U.S. data, the analysis covers a period of 82 years in which distinct marriage market scenarios arose. Thus, alternative hypotheses about how marriage market constraints modify age patterns of union formation can be tested.	Albert	 Esteve	Clara	 Cortina	Anna	 Cabré	Joaquin	 Recano-Valverde
2007	175	Marital Relationships and Children: Historical Perspectives	Children and the Fate of Ever-Married Men and Women in Early Modern Japan	What did it mean to have children or not to have children in a society with a strong emphasis on family continuation? How did the sex and number of children affect the chances of marital dissolution and remarriage? This study examines the outcomes of marriage focusing particularly on the role of children as an attempt to uncover the relationship between marriage and reproduction in a stem family society. Drawing data from the local population registers in two northeastern agricultural villages during the period of 1716-1870, this study examines the effect of children on the probabilities of divorce and remarriage. The event history analysis reveals that controlling for demographic and socioeconomic factors, having children secured marriage although infertility was not the cause of divorce. The presence of children also mattered differently for the probabilities of remarriage of men and women, and by the types of marraige---virilocal and uxorilocal marriages.	Satomi	 Kurosu
2007	175	Marital Relationships and Children: Historical Perspectives	Diffusion of a Social Norm: Tracing the Emergence of the Housewife in the Netherlands, 1812-1922	The emergence of the housewife in the Netherlands over the period 1812-1922 was strongly influenced by the social norm that women should withdraw from the labour market on the eve of marriage. Adherence to this norm is most clearly reflected in the emergence of the housewife among the lower classes, especially at the close of the nineteenth century among wives of farmers. Women in urban municipalities, however, set the norm far earlier and differences across social classes were significantly larger in towns than in rural areas. Paradoxically, the rise of the housewife did not change work pressures for lower–class women. This paradox is resolved by noting that they substituted registered work for unregistered work, e.g., in house industries, working in the family firm or farm.	Frans	W.A. van Poppel	Hendrik	P. van Dalen	Evelien	 Walhout
2008	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Human Development And Low Fertility	We study the relationship between human development indicators and fertility with focus on low fertility countries. The most developed countries led both the first and second demographic transitions, and during these transitions, development indicators were inversely correlated with fertility levels. Data for 100 countries for the period 1975-2005 suggest that countries with highest development are again leading the transition: these countries show signs of fertility recovery from very low levels closer to replacement levels, and among the most developed countries, the association between fertility and development has changed from negative to positive.	Mikko	 Myrskylä	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2008	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Low Fertility in Russia: Global Trend or a Special Case?	This paper elaborates on several possible explanations of the lowest low fertility in Russia. Two kinds of comparisons are undertaken. First, the comparison of demographic trends and dynamics in Russia with the ones in Eastern and Western European countries. Second, the comparison of Russian fertility is made across time periods, with the emphasis on steepness of birth rates decline after the start of implementation of political and economic reforms in the nineties. Special emphasis is made on the many-fold impact of economic conditions on fertility dynamics.	Yuri	 Frantsuz
2008	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Intrafamily Exchange and Europe's Low Fertility	The demography of lowest-low fertility remains poorly understood. While there is growing consensus that the postponement of childbirth is a major factor in the persistence of lowest-low fertility in Europe, the decoupling of fertility from its historical relationships with marriage and labor supply leaves numerous alternative explanations. These explanations emphasize changing marriage patterns and growing uncertainties in labor markets. We hypothesize that shifts in exchanges among family members of material support and labor play an important role in the postponement of fertility. We analyze a new dataset of over 500 kinships collected from eight countries in Europe and show that intra-family exchanges of wealth and child care are significantly related to the age at first birth as well as cumulative fertility. Employing both family and kinship fixed effects, we further show how family structure, distinguished by co-residency patterns and measures of proximity to near kin, has important independent effects on the postponement of childbirth.	Laura	 Bernardi	Robert	G. White
2008	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Gender Equity and Its Effect on Transition to Lower-Order Births in Moldova	The aim of this paper is to empirically assess the impact of gender equity on the timing of low-order births in the Republic of Moldova. The empirical analysis uses data from the 2005 Moldova Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS). Hazard modeling has been applied to study the transition to first and second birth. Considered for the first time are gender equity measures, indicators that are essential in evaluating premises of the second demographic transition theory. A main focus of the analysis is to study whether the effects of gender equity have changed across successive female cohorts and its implications for the timing of first and second births. We also address the relative importance of the effects of gender equity, education and wealth, and discuss the merit of using gender equity instead of education when modeling the timing of first and second births.	Igor	 Ryabov
2008	4	Cohabitation	Joint Investments in Marriage and Cohabitation: The Role of Legal and Symbolic Factors	Married couples invest more in the relationship than cohabiters. A debated issue is whether this stems from selection or real differences. We focus on legal and symbolic features presumed to differentiate marriage from cohabitation by distinguishing between: 1) cohabiters with a legal contract and those without, and 2) cohabiters with and without marriage intentions. Using data from the Netherlands, we find little evidence that legal aspects explain married couples’ greater investments. If so, cohabiters without a contract would invest the least. Instead, we find cohabiters with a contract to be least likely to specialize or share social activities. Marriage as a sign of commitment is a better explanation. Cohabiters with marriage plans resemble married couples and both invest more than cohabiters without plans. Although the findings underscore its symbolic meaning, marriage does not foster investments. Marriage plans are already enough, and actual marriage may rather confirm than foster commitment.	Anne-Rigt	 Poortman	Melinda	 Mills
2008	4	Cohabitation	The Path to Marriage: Cohabitation and Wealth Accumulation	Do married households benefit from greater wealth accumulation than non-married households? Previous work has shown that they do, but not all marriages share the same wealth trajectory. Using growth curve models and data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, we examine the association between pre-marital cohabitation and marital wealth accumulation. Results suggest that marital wealth trajectories of spousal-cohabiters differ from other married households: they begin marriage with significantly less wealth, though their rate of accumulation is greater across time compared to other pre-marital cohabiters and the directly married. Thus, pre-marital cohabitation appears to have no long-term effect on wealth accumulation for those who stay married; for spousal-cohabiters, the experience may enhance their wealth compared to other married households. These findings represent a departure from other cohabitation research because they suggest that some kinds of pre-marital cohabitation are associated with a positive effect on marital outcomes.	Jonathan	E Vespa	Matthew	A Painter II
2008	4	Cohabitation	Breaking Up or Tying the Knot:  A Longitudinal Qualitative Analysis of Union Transitions among Cohabiting Young Adults	Drawing on two waves of data from in-depth interviews with men and women who were cohabiting at the first interview, this paper explores the factors and decision-making processes that lead young adults to marry, remain cohabiting, or dissolve their unions. While several quantitative studies based on survey data have examined transitions out of cohabiting unions, we have little direct evidence about why cohabiters decide to change the status of their relationship or to remain cohabiting. The richness afforded by longitudinal qualitative data is likely to lead to an enriched understanding of an increasingly common family form by tapping cohabiters’ perceptions, feelings, and cognitions. Additionally, this paper is based on the premise that qualitative data are vital to move beyond the knowledge afforded by quantitative analyses to include a broader set of influences not always measured in large-scale surveys.	Pamela	J. Smock	Wendy	D. Manning
2008	4	Cohabitation	The Relationship Between Impending Parenthood and Cohabitation Outcomes: Changes across Time	In this study we examine partnership transitions and impending parenthood among two cohorts of US  women. We use data from waves 1 and 3 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH). Preliminary results indicate that a premarital conception decreases the odds of marriage for cohabitating women, but also decreases the likelihood of disruption. We further find that impending parenthood has changed across time. The event of a conception still decreases the odds of marriage, but the reduction is now only 2% versus 50% among the older cohort. The impact of a premarital conception on a marital transition has reduced significantly among the most recent cohort, and women that become pregnant are now only 2% less likely to marry compared to women that did not conceive. These findings indicate that the event of a nonmarital conception among cohabitating women carries little weight in their decision to transition into a marriage.	Anna	 Cunningham
2008	5	Gender, Labor Force, and Earnings	Wage Inequality and the Gender Wage Gap: Are American Women Swimming Against the Tide?	For over three decades wage inequality has been growing in the US while the gender wage gap declined. Current literature argues that the gender wage gap would have decreased even more, had overall wage inequality not grown, so women have had to swim against the tide to reduce the gender wage gap. I argue that when wages of men with no more than high school education declined, two things happened simultaneously: men’s mean wage decreased relative to women and male wage inequality increased (much more so than female wage inequality). The statistical method currently used assumes that there is only one wage structure, miscalculating the relationship between wage structure and gender pay gap. This paper uses a new method that takes into account gender differences in wage structure and shows that the increase in wage inequality went in tandem with the narrowing of the gender wage gap.	Zsuzsa	 Daczo
2008	5	Gender, Labor Force, and Earnings	Differences between Asian American and White Women in Work-Family Tradeoffs and their Consequences for Earnings	Asian Americans born or educated in the United States are unique among American minority groups in that they do not suffer a significant earnings disadvantage relative to whites with similar levels of human capital. Controlling for education and age, there is no significant difference in the earnings of Asian American and white men, but Asian American women have higher earnings than comparable white women. This study tests the hypothesis that Asian American women’s high relative earnings may result from their adjusting their labor force behavior less than white women in response to parenthood, leading to a greater accumulation of work experience over time. I find that Asian American women are less likely than white women to respond to parenthood with reductions in labor supply, and that furthermore their greater work experience accumulation over time explains their high rate of earnings growth.	Emily	 Greenman
2008	5	Gender, Labor Force, and Earnings	Women in Management, 1970-2000: Revisiting “Glorified Secretaries,” Resegregation, and Title Inflation as Gender Equality Stalls	As progress toward gender equality stalled in the 1990s, women continued to integrate managerial occupations, albeit at a slower rate. This raises the possibility that women’s influence in managerial positions does not carry the authority presumed in the titles they hold. In this light, we revisit Jerry Jacobs’ (1992) analysis of “glorified secretaries,” resegregation, and title inflation – which posed “skeptical” interpretations of women’s advancement into management – using U.S. Decennial Census from 1970 to 2000. Preliminary analysis shows that women’s entrance into managerial occupations has been quite broad. However, overall progress has clearly slowed, and wage progress has been less dramatic than increases in representation. Further, analysis of segregation shows mixed results, and even increases in overall and vertical segregation in one specification. We describe additional analysis to be performed over the next several months and implications of the research.	Philip	N. Cohen	Matt	 Huffman	Stefanie	 Knauer
2008	5	Gender, Labor Force, and Earnings	Women’s Employment in Mostly Male Occupations and the Household Division of Labor	Research on work and family has suggested that as women’s employment characteristics more closely resemble men’s employment characteristics – usually via economic  compensation and time investment – men and women become increasingly likely to engage in a more equal division of domestic work. However, given demographic shifts  in both the gender composition of the workforce and the social institution of the family, it is also important to consider how women’s male-dominated paid work might affect  unpaid work with their male partners. Longitudinal analyses of the NSFH indicate that women’s participation in mostly-male occupations increases their likelihood  of engaging in a more equal division of household labor. This effect remains after considering demographic characteristics, household attributes, gender ideology, and the elevated socioeconomic status and increased earnings which may accrue to women who participate in mostly-male occupations. These results suggest that processes of gender segregation are related across work and family contexts.	Carrie	L. Shandra
2008	6	Race/Ethnic Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	The Changing Role of Socioeconomic Status in Explaining Black-White Disparities in Healthy Life	Black-white disparities in health are well documented, and numerous studies have attempted to explain the disparity as the product of socioeconomic (SES) disparities between races. Most research has utilized cross-sectional data for this purpose; however, racial differences in SES have changed dramatically since the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement. Additionally, the distribution of health has also changed dramatically over the same period. Utilizing a new method for estimating healthy life expectancy applied to 1980-2003 National Health Interview Survey and vital statistics mortality data over the same period, we examine how the role SES plays in accounting for racial disparities in healthy life has changed over time. We find that (1) SES disparities between blacks and whites have declined over the period, (2) health disparities by race and SES have also declined, and (3) the role SES plays in accounting for race disparities in health has diminished over the period.	Scott	M. Lynch	J.	Scott  Brown
2008	6	Race/Ethnic Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Classifying Asian Americans by Race versus Ethnicity: Differences in Cancer Death Rates	Most US health statistics group Asian Americans into one race category, although many researchers question the value of the aggregation. However, small sample sizes in primary data collections and classification problems in administrative and vital statistics files generally preclude subgroup detail. In this large data linkage project, we determine site-specific cancer death rates for six Asian American subgroups and test for heterogeneity to better understand whether rates by race are actually misleading. We previously determined death rates for persons aged 65+ in the six largest Asian American subgroups using Social Security files, avoiding vital statistics classification deficiencies; unexpectedly, ethnic death rates were quite similar. In this project we link the Social Security death records to death certificates through the California Death Masterfile and the NDI. We find significant heterogeneity among Asian subgroups for about half of cancer sites. Asian Indians are most often the subgroup with a divergent rate.	Diane	S. Lauderdale	Dezheng	 Huo
2008	6	Race/Ethnic Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Health Selectivity and SES-Health Gradients in Mexico-U.S. Migration and Return: A Bi-National Perspective on Older Adults	In this paper, we use comparable data in Mexico and the U.S. to study health outcomes of native- and foreign-born Mexicans in the U.S. and of adults in Mexico according to their previous U.S. migration experience. First, we focus on self-reported conditions such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Second, we bolster the analyses by examining some biomarkers assessed in representative surveys in both sides of the border and examine patterns of mortality among U.S. immigrants in the US and Mexicans living in Mexico. Finally, we evaluate the SES gradient of these conditions and compare them across the two subpopulations. Given this research design, our analyses are somewhat shielded from biases that weaken studies based on samples on only one side of the border. These comparisons provide evidence for the degree and direction of selection in the U.S.-bound and in the Mexico-bound return migrant population.	Fernando	 Riosmena	Rebeca	 Wong
2008	6	Race/Ethnic Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Race, Obesity, and the Puzzle of Gender Specificity	Obesity rates, average weights, and median weights all differ significantly between African-American  and white women, even after controlling for differences  in income, education, age, geographic location, and several other factors. These differences have persisted without much alteration since the early 1970s, despite substantial increases in obesity rates among both   groups. This paper considers a number of explanations for these disparities focusing, variously, on economic factors, physiological factors, and sociocultural factors. Drawing on numerous data sources pertaining to adult American women and men spanning three decades, we argue that explanations  based on either economic or physiological factors are inadequate. We present evidence that differences in physical ideals between whites and African-Americans, together with lower stigmatization of overweight among black women, contribute to the differences between white and black women.	Mary	A Burke	Frank	 Heiland
2008	7	Migration, Race-Ethnicity and Community Change	Neighborhood Mobility in Central Cities, Suburbs, and Non-Metro Areas in Race-Ethnic Perspective	Previous chapters have studied mobility processes from the viewpoint of metropolitan and non-metropolitan entities as total aggregates. This chapter examines these processes separately within central cities and suburban areas, demonstrating that there are distinguishing differences between the two components of metro areas.  Further, it subdivides central cities, suburbs and non-metro territory into neighborhoods (census tracts), and researches mobility at this very local level. The focus is primarily upon demographic composition and distribution, particularly race-ethnicity.  Race-ethnic trends in Central Cities and Suburbs, 1990-2000. Table 1 reports the aggregate population size and race-ethnic composition in central cities and suburbs of the 364 metropolitan areas in 1990 and again in 2000, and the intercensal change.	Donald	J. Bogue
2008	7	Migration, Race-Ethnicity and Community Change	Redevelopment and the Rust Belt: Understanding Cultural Influences on Residential Preferences	Although redevelopment and gentrification is obvious in many once distressed U.S. cities, very little is known about the perceptions of these neighborhoods among the metropolitan community. This is largely due to the fact that most studies of gentrification or redevelopment tend to occur in redeveloped neighborhoods or consider redevelopment in absence of other influences on residential mobility. I use the cultural insights gleaned from community studies of gentrifying neighborhoods as well as those from the existing literature on residential mobility to examine who in the metropolitan area would consider moving to a redeveloped neighborhood and why they would consider moving there. Racial differences as well as age, when mediated through education, have a strong effect on who considers a redeveloped neighborhood while reasons vary by education, income and age. Implications for understanding the class impacts of redevelopment as well as insights into residential perceptions more generally are examined.	Michael	D Bader
2008	7	Migration, Race-Ethnicity and Community Change	Can Poor Black Families Escape Segregated Neighborhoods?: Residential Mobility Patterns and Geographic Opportunity in Three Housing Voucher Programs	Residential segregation is a persistent feature in American cities. While research shows that black families do not move into integrated neighborhoods as readily as whites, it is difficult to know whether patterns are the result of barriers or preferences. We extend previous research using data from three assisted mobility programs: the Gautreaux program in Chicago, the federal Moving To Opportunity experiment, and data from the Thompson program in Baltimore. Preliminary findings suggest that low income black families will move to more integrated neighborhoods if given assistance, and many stay in these neighborhoods for years. We find that while over time, families move to less white neighborhoods, these areas are less poor and less segregated than original communities. Program differences in the use of race or poverty thresholds and housing counseling seem to help these families escape ghetto neighborhoods.	Stefanie	 DeLuca	Peter	 Rosenblatt
2008	7	Migration, Race-Ethnicity and Community Change	The Dynamics of Ethnic Group Population Change: A Demographic Explanation of Clustering and Dispersal	Dispersal of immigrant-origin populations from areas of initial settlement is well evidenced in Europe and the USA. However, the persistent clustering of non-white groups has led to assumptions in political and media discourses that the cause is ‘white flight’ and non-white ‘self segregation’. This paper uses a census-based time series of population for Great Britain, and an approach drawing on demography and population geography, to explore local variations in population dynamics for ethnic groups. The paper demonstrates that ethnic geographies in Britain are driven largely by benign processes of natural change rather than by divisive migration patterns. By presenting results via a typology of population change, the paper theorizes about how migration relates to natural change, allowing alternative interpretations of geographies of ethnicity. Methodologically, the paper demonstrates the possibility and potential of decomposing population change into net migration and natural change by ethnic group, age and sex for small areas.	Nissa	 Finney	Ludi	 Simpson
2008	8	Child Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Contextual Effects of Children's Time Use on Health	Does the rhythm of children’s everyday lives vary in different community contexts and is this variation associated with children’s physical well-being? Neighborhood effects on children’s time use are often proposed to be a key mechanism in producing observed variability in health outcomes between places, but there has been almost no research connecting the two. We plan to use the 1997 and 2002 PSID-CDS to identify profiles of health-relevant time use, based on the multiple dimensions of activity, parental engagement and monitoring, and location. We will then determine whether and how children’s time profiles vary across neighborhoods and evaluate whether neighborhood mediated variation in time profiles is associated with cross-sectional and longitudinal measures of children’s Body Mass Index (BMI). Our preliminary results suggest intriguing differences in time use associated with neighborhood variation that appear to correspond to theoretical expectations.	Liana	C. Sayer	Rachel	E. Dwyer
2008	8	Child Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Toddler Bedtime Routines and Behavioral, Cognitive, and Health Outcomes	Despite interest in promoting sound sleep for toddlers, little is understood about whether advised techniques (e.g., regular bedtimes, routine sleeping arrangements) promote sleep and thereby child wellbeing. Moreover, little is known about the sleep patterns of children who may be at risk for adverse developmental outcomes. We use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a sample of children born primarily to low-income, single mothers, to first identify child and family characteristics associated with consistent child bedtimes and sleeping arrangements. We then estimate associations of children’s sleep routines with cognitive, behavioral, and health outcomes. We find that children from disadvantaged families have less consistent sleep routines and engage in more co-sleeping with parents than their more advantaged counterparts. These factors are associated with increased behavior problems, but less so with cognitive or health outcomes. This research has implications for interventions intended to reduce behavior problems among disadvantaged children.	Lauren	 Hale	Lawrence	M. Berger
2008	8	Child Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Family Stress and Childhood Obesity	One in every six children in the United States is obese, making it one of the most prevalent medical issues among youth today. Contemporary children and their families face numerous stressors that have the potential to negatively affect their health and well-being. In limited small-scale studies, stress has been associated with childhood obesity. Few studies, however, have specifically examined relationships between family stress and child obesity. We investigate whether and how family stress influences childhood obesity through examinations of data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and its Child Development Supplement. We estimate two multiple regression models: a probit using traditional categorizations of the child’s weight class and an approach whereby much less structure is imposed. Preliminary results show a positive relationship between family stress and childhood overweight: compared to normal weight children, a greater percentage of children who are overweight and at risk of overweight have been exposed to family stressors.	Steven	 Garasky	Susan	D. Stewart	Craig	G. Gundersen	Brenda	J. Lohman	Joey	C. Eisenmann
2008	8	Child Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Early Origins of Health Disparities: Infectious Burden and Socioeconomic Status in U.S. Children	Socioeconomic status is consistently associated with adult and child health. Recent work in biodemography suggests that life-time exposure to infection and inflammation may be an important determinant of later-life morbidity and mortality. Early exposure to infections during critical periods can predispose individuals to chronic disease, in part through the reallocation of energy away from growth needed for immune and inflammatory responses. Markers of inflammation are found to vary by socioeconomic status in adults(1, 2). Little is known about whether socioeconomic disparities in infectious burden and inflammation emerge at younger ages in the U.S.. This paper will use novel biomarker data to test whether the burden of common chronic infections such as Helicobacter Pylori (H Pylori) and Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is related to socioeconomic status in U.S. children ages 6 and older, and whether this infectious burden contributes to health gradients by SES in U.S. children.	Jennifer	 Dowd
2008	9	Mother’s Work and Child Outcomes	To Work or Not to Work: Predicting Timing of Maternal Entry into the Labor Force after Birth and Its Effect on Children	This study uses data from a low-income, ethnically diverse and immigrant sample to examine the timing of mothers’ employment the first year after birth and the influence of socio-demographic characteristics, work/family values and plans, maternity leave and social support on the timing of maternal employment after birth. It also studies the effect of the timing of maternal employment on children’s cognitive and socio-emotional outcomes. Survival analysis was used to predict the timing of maternal employment from predictors. Fifty percent of the mothers started working by the 9th month. Maternity leave benefit, plans to work and for childcare, work orientation, father’s employment and household earnings were all associated with the timing of employment after birth. The effect of social support on the timing of employment was moderated by ethnicity. Preliminary findings show that later employment during the first year was associated with better children’s socio-emotional outcomes.	Maria	A Ramos Olazagasti	Patrick	 Shrout
2008	9	Mother’s Work and Child Outcomes	Parenting of Infants: A Time Use Analysis	We provide the first study of time use patterns among parents of children under the age of one year using four waves of single-day time diary data from the American Time Use Survey. A sample of 2,326 parents is divided into partnered fathers, partnered mothers, and single mothers. For the three categories, we compare various measures of childcare and housework time for parents of infants as opposed to older children, and (for partnered respondents) compare ratios for father/mother provision of childcare and housework time across the child age groups. We also identify trade-offs wherein time is shifted from other time use categories to infant care. Finally, regression analyses of childcare time are used to understand the effects of respondent and partner working time arrangements, other family members providing or needing care, infant gender, and other demographic influences on levels of father and mother time caring for infants.	Robert	 Drago	Ya-Ning	 Lee
2008	9	Mother’s Work and Child Outcomes	The Effects of Maternal Employment on the Health of School-Age Children	An increasing number of women with children participated in the labor force over the past several decades, leading researchers from a variety of disciplines to consider the impact of maternal employment on children's health. The net effects are theoretically ambiguous given that maternal employment increases family income but places additional burdens on a mother’s time. Empirical identification is difficult because a mother's choice to work is endogenous. A child's health may directly affect a mother's labor supply, or a mother's choice to work may be indicative of the mother's preferences and skills. In this paper, I implement an instrumental variables strategy using data from the restricted version of the National Health Interview Survey (1985-2004). I measure the causal effect by utilizing exogenous variation in each child's youngest sibling's eligibility for kindergarten. I show that having a working mother increases the probability a child will have an adverse health event.	Melinda	Sandler  Morrill
2008	9	Mother’s Work and Child Outcomes	Parental Time, Family Income, and Child Outcomes	Parents face a number of decisions that involve a trade-off between the amount of time and money they can provide their children. This paper estimates the relative impact of parental time and family income on child outcomes. Parents generally allocate resources equally among their children at each point in time but the amount of resources available to distribute changes over time. As a result the first-born child gets more parental time while the second child experiences a higher level of family income at each age. Using this within-family variation in resources received by each child, I find that for the average family an hour of quality parent-child quality interaction produces the same amount of reading achievement as $172 of additional family income. Parental time inputs also decrease measures of behavior problems but neither time nor family income appear to influence math achievement.	Joseph	P. Price
2008	10	Demographic Implications of HIV/AIDS	HIV Infection, Marital Dissolution, and Migration in Malawi	Research on the relationship between migration and HIV infection in sub-Saharan Africa often shows that migrants are at higher risk of HIV infection because they are more likely to engage in risk behavior than non-migrants, and tend to move to areas of higher HIV prevalence. Instead of focusing on ways in which migration is an individual risk factor of HIV infection, I examine the possibility that HIV infection leads to migration. Using a longitudinal dataset of rural residents and migrants from Malawi, I find that migrants originating from rural areas are indeed more likely than non-migrants to be HIV positive and to have engaged in HIV risk behavior. However, HIV positive individuals are also more likely to migrate than HIV negative individuals. The explanation for this phenomenon appears to be marital instability, which occurs more frequently among HIV positive individuals and leads to migration after marital dissolution.	Philip	A. Anglewicz
2008	10	Demographic Implications of HIV/AIDS	Sex Differences in Adult Mortality (Age 15-64) in South Africa, 1997-2005: HIV and Other Sources	Females have typically had lower death rates than males at every age, except in situations of extreme female deprivation. Recently, in countries such as South Africa with high levels of HIV infection, female mortality has approached and for some age groups surpassed that of males. In 2005, female death rates at age 20-34 exceeded male rates. However even in 1997, female death rates from natural causes, as well as for many detailed causes of death, were higher than male rates at age 15-29, at a time when the effect of HV on mortality was minimal. Using death registration data, this paper examines sex differences in mortality overall and by cause in South Africa 1997-2005 for those age 15-64. It focuses on the role of HIV, both stated and unstated, in the extent and trend in sex differences in mortality.	Barbara	A. Anderson	Heston	 Phillips
2008	10	Demographic Implications of HIV/AIDS	The Impact Of HIV/AIDS on Adult Mortality in South Africa and the Impact of Antiretroviral Therapy on that Impact	The rapid spread of HIV and its impact on mortality made it necessary to establish a rapid mortality surveillance system, which has been extended to monitor basic details of deaths registered in the 9 provinces of South Africa. The number of deaths on the Population Register continued to increase between 2000 and 2004, where after a slowdown in the growth has been noticed. The increase is particularly marked for young adult ages and differs for men and women. Three distinct profiles were observed when then natural deaths by province were compared. When compared with data from cause-of-death analysis, the same age-specific pattern of deaths was observed, suggesting that there are no substantial biases introduces by this method of rapid surveillance. The comparison with estimates from a model also confirms this pattern but indicates that the slow down in the mortality is more significant that projected by the model.	Rob	 Dorrington	Debbie	 Bradshaw	Ria	 Laubscher	David	 Bourne
2008	10	Demographic Implications of HIV/AIDS	Socio-Demographic Impact of Antiretroviral Treatments in Northern Thailand	Over one million of Thailand’s 64 million inhabitants have been infected with HIV to date, and an estimated 540,000 persons are currently living with HIV/AIDS (PLWA). As with most affected countries, the epidemic had a profound impact on the society. In addition to negative impact upon morbidity and mortality, it also triggers stigmatization, affects intergenerational cohesion and put pressure on the health care system. Antiretroviral treatments, which became available under the universal health coverage system in Thailand from 2005, transformed HIV/AIDS from a fatal to a chronic disease. The socio-demographic impact of antiretroviral treatments provision on the life of PLWA, from the time of infection to disease/treatment can be assessed using longitudinal data taking into account the family, occupations, residence and health histories. We will present the initial results of a life-event history survey among 500 PLWA on long term antiretroviral treatment within a pilot program in Northern Thailand.	Sophie	 Le Coeur	Eva	 Lelièvre	Intira	 Collins
2008	11	Explanations for SES Gradients in Adult Health/Mortality	How Subjective Social Status Affects Health: Gender Differences and Reciprocal Relationships	Recent work exploring the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and health has employed a psychosocial concept called subjective social status (SSS) as a mediator in the relationship. Prior analyses estimate models of this relationship separately for women and men, and thus estimate whether effects in the model are significantly different from zero for both genders separately. This analysis extends beyond the prior ones, using multiple-group models to demonstrate that SSS has a significantly different effect on women and men's self-reported health. This analysis also finds some evidence for a reciprocal relationship, where self-reported health affects SSS as well.	Dana	 Garbarski
2008	11	Explanations for SES Gradients in Adult Health/Mortality	Does Perceived Discrimination Account for the “Relative Deprivation” Explanation of the Mortality SES Gradient?	The relative deprivation hypothesis is one of the frameworks used to explain SES differentials in health and mortality. One of the arguments of this hypothesis is that people compare themselves with their peers in better-off SES strata, and this produces stress and anxiety that translate into deleterious health. In this paper, we contend that self-perceived discrimination might be a way people have to express how they view this comparison, and therefore, perceived discrimination might explain SES differentials. We use data from the MIDUS study, which has an innovative scale to measure perceived discrimination. Mortality of first wave respondents has been followed up by linkage to the National Death Index. We will analyze whether SES differentials are changed after controlling for perceived discrimination, or the interaction of this perceived discrimination with SES variables. Preliminary results indicate that perceived discrimination has a weak association with mortality, but only among younger age adults.	Salvador	 Rivas	Beatriz	 Novak
2008	11	Explanations for SES Gradients in Adult Health/Mortality	Job Characteristics and Troubled Sleep Among U.S. Workers	Poor sleep quality is a common problem – estimates of prevalence range from 10-40% of the working population – and is costly for workers and others. Negative conditions at work have been cited in a small number of studies as a predictor of troubled sleep. A more complete understanding of the consequences of a range of negative working conditions for worker sleep quality and quantity in the United States is needed to inform policy and intervention. Troubled sleep may also help to explain the link between low socioeconomic status (and low quality jobs) and health. We compare two prospective, nationally-representative samples of U.S. workers and consider a variety of psychosocial stressors at work. Longitudinal data allows us to examine chronicity and change in exposure over different lag periods, and to examine the potential for reverse causation; these represent substantial improvements over the evidence available to date.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Jennifer	A Ailshire
2008	11	Explanations for SES Gradients in Adult Health/Mortality	Does Lower Subjective Social Status Yield Riskier Biomarker Profiles?	Both objective and, more recently, subjective measures of low standing have been linked to poor health outcomes. It is unclear, however, through which precise physiological mechanisms such standing may influence health. One possible mechanism is that those of lower status experience more frequent and severe stressors than their higher status counterparts. Such differential exposure, when experienced over extended periods of time, could engender biomarker profiles that are more dysregulated (and hence pose greater risk for poor health) in lower status individuals. Using a nationally representative survey conducted in Taiwan, we investigate whether lower subjective standing (both in terms of socioeconomic status in Taiwan and status in the community) is associated with riskier neuroendocrine biomarker profiles. With the exception of the biomarker DHEAS, we find that there is little evidence that links low status to riskier profiles, a finding which is congruent with much of the literature on this topic.	Omer	 Gersten	Tom	 Boyce	Paola	 Timiras
2008	12	Population, Development, and Natural Resources	Growing Rice and Growing Rich: Agricultural Participation and Labor Monetization in a Transitional Economy	Many studies suggest monetization is a factor causally related to myriad social and economic changes. But few researchers at present have addressed the difficult questions of how monetization occurs and what forces are behind it. I present data from rural Northeast Thailand, where ongoing monetization of multiple economic sectors has occurred in recent decades. Of paramount importance in this context is the traditional subsistence occupation of rice growing. Using a Heckman model to take into account endogenous selection into rice- and non-rice-growing households, I examine factors influencing the probability of households engaging in monetized labor acquisition for their 1994 and 2000 rice harvests. Findings suggest rice farming is part of a suite of agricultural behaviors and dominated by larger, younger families with fewer migrants. Households that engage in monetized labor transactions tend to be smaller, less traditional, and in possession of greater consumptive assets than those relying on non-monetized labor.	James	 Hull
2008	12	Population, Development, and Natural Resources	Economic Growth and the Environment: A Household Perspective from Cooking Fuel Choices and Indoor Air Pollution	This paper examines the relationship between economic growth and the environment from a household perspective through fuel-use decisions. Because household fuel choices directly influence the level of indoor air quality that can be treated as a private good, studying household fuel-use decisions allows us to empirically assess the effect of economic growth on the environment in certain cases such as an open economy with perfect environmental policies. This study has two major differences from the previous similar studies. First, in terms of the theoretical model, instead of using a simple static model, we adopt a dynamic optimization model in an open economy setting. Second, in terms of empirical analysis, instead of using indirect air quality measurements, we use household data from India with directly measured indoor air quality. In contrast to previous findings of inverted-U relationship between pollution and income, we find that pollution levels decrease monotonically as income increases.	Yabei	 Zhang	Reeve	 Vanneman
2008	12	Population, Development, and Natural Resources	Land Use Trajectories after Migration and Land Turnover	This paper will build on literatures on household-property land use change in the tropics by examining the transition in land use that takes place after an old owner leaves a property or sells a property. By examining effects both of leaving the property but not selling and of selling the property, we will be able to examine the difference between the intergenerational transition and a sales transition. To do this, we use longitudinal data collected on a sample of properties and their owners in the Altamira settlement area in the state of Pará in Brazil.	Leah	K. VanWey	Alvaro	O. D'Antona	Gilvan	R. Guedes
2008	12	Population, Development, and Natural Resources	Fertility in Peten, Guatemala: The Impact of the Individual, the Household and the Context on Fertility Behavior	This research explores fertility correlates in the Peten, a high fertility region of Guatemala, during the 1998-99 time period.  By taking into account land use and labor characteristics at the household and community levels in addition to individual level factors related to diffusion, gender equity, and socio-demographics the research aims to enhance the traditional application of the demand framework used to examine fertility.  Data from the 1998/99 Demographic and Health Survey containing a unique environmental module was used.  A multi-level model using a count variable (total children ever born) as the response where individuals are nested within their geographical location was compared to a negative binomial model as well as a traditional Poisson generalized linear model.  The results of the analysis highlight the importance of incorporating individual and household land and labor characteristics with factors related to diffusion to explain the variation in fertility behavior. 	Kathryn	 Grace	David	 Carr
2008	13	Statistical Demography	A Meta-Analytic Framework for Best-Practice Mortality Surface Estimation	Similar to the best-practice life expectancy, the best-practice mortality surface over age and time can be estimated. Reliability is a serious issue, because population size across countries varies over several orders of magnitude. Our solution is to estimate a latent mortality distribution, properly accounting for observed magnitudes. This brings a meta-analytic framework to mortality studies, opening many new opportunities to study variability between demographic units in a quantitative way.	Jutta	 Gampe	Paul	H.C. Eilers	Magdalena	 Muszynska
2008	13	Statistical Demography	Using the Bootstrap Method to Estimate Variances of Multi-State Life Table Functions	Demographers frequently use multi-state life table (MSLT) method to analyze expected duration in various states. Frequently, life table estimates are derived from sample surveys. Thus, measures of sampling variability are needed for valid statistical inferences. This study will compare variance estimates obtained using the bootstrap method, which takes sampling design into account, with other approaches in common use that don’t. Our data source is the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, a longitudinal survey of Medicare beneficiaries with stratification and multi-stage clustering. We will first estimate the variance of total and active (without limitations in activities of daily living) life expectancies at age 65, treating the MCBS as a simple random sample. Then we will estimate variances using the bootstrap approach. The bootstrap variance estimates are larger than the variance estimates ignoring the sampling design because of the clustering effect.	Liming	 Cai	James	 Lubitz	Mark	D. Hayward	Yasuhiko	 Saito	Aaron	 Hagedorn	Eileen	 Crimmins
2008	13	Statistical Demography	Probabilistic Projections of Populations With HIV: A Bayesian Melding Approach	Population projection models are valuable tools for demographers and public policy makers alike. A particular example is the model developed by Heuveline (2003), which captures some of the links between population growth and the spread of HIV/AIDS. This model requires relatively few inputs and can provide projections of HIV prevalence for populations for which reliable data are limited. We reproduce Heuveline’s work, but in a Bayesian context. More specifically, we use Bayesian melding to obtain measures of uncertainty around both the model inputs and outputs in the form of probability distributions. This approach provides useful information to policy makers concerning issues with planning and resource allocation.	Samuel	J. Clark	Jason	 Thomas
2008	13	Statistical Demography	Bayesian Hierarchical Mixture Models for High-Risk Births in California, 1968-2005	Birthweight shows complex patterns of heterogeneity and has strong implications for infant mortality and later-life demographic outcomes. Using NCHS registration data from 1968-2005, we model the distribution of birthweight in California as a two-component Gaussian mixture. The mixture has an intuitive interpretation: the first component represents the majority of the population and the second component represents a high-risk sub-population with lower mean birthweight and higher variance. Using a Bayesian framework, we estimate the joint posterior distribution of the mixture model via MCMC simulation. The flexibility afforded by fitting the mixture model by the Gibbs sampler allows us to model the (binary) indicator for component membership as a function of covariates. Our interest focuses primarily in mother's and father's race, their interaction, and proxies of SES available from birth certificate information. Results highlight the continuing importance of race as a predictor of birth outcomes in the United States.	James	H. Jones	Simon	D. Jackman
2008	14	Gender Dynamics and Reproduction	Baby Mama Drama, or Why His Kids Matter more than Hers	Using data from the Time, Love and Cash among Couples with Children (TLC3) study, this paper examines family processes in unmarried stepfamilies. I find that one of the central factors in unmarried stepfamily’s instability is conflict with, and jealousy of, the other parent of a partner’s other children. However, while both mothers and fathers in this sample have children by prior partners, it is the fathers’ exes who cause the most problems, leading to the colloquial moniker, “Baby Mama Drama.” The repercussions of this gender-specific conflict affect not only the father’s new family, but also his relationship with his prior children, presenting men with a troubling paradox in which being a father to all of his children precludes the promise of stability in his new relationship. The ramifications of this conflict are explored.	Lindsay	M. Monte
2008	14	Gender Dynamics and Reproduction	Spousal Emotional Nucleation and Fertility Limitation	This study investigates the consequences of spousal emotional nucleation for couples' fertility behavior. Existing theories relating the shift toward couple-centered marital relationships to fertility limitation are integrated. I expand the fertility literature's common focus on communication to include other dimensions of spousal emotional nucleation, a complex concept often posited in the fertility literature but not often measured. I use unique nine year long monthly panel data from the Chitwan Valley Family Study to construct detailed event-history models of these relationships. Empirical analyses demonstrate that several dimensions of spouses' decreased attachment to parents and increased conjugal bond have direct fertility limitation effects. Spousal communication about family planning retains strong effects even when considered within the broader framework of emotional nucleation, demonstrating its important independent role in the transition to use of contraception. These results should motivate greater research attention to the influence of husbands and marital relationship dynamics on fertility behavior.	Cynthia	F Macht
2008	14	Gender Dynamics and Reproduction	Social Interaction, Fertility Intentions and Male Involvement in Fertility Decline in Sub- Saharan Africa: Longitudinal Evidence from Ghana	It is common in research on contemporary fertility transitions to account for social interaction effects on individual behavior. However, few studies estimate the impact of social interaction in forming fertility intentions. Yet fertility decline requires both behavioral changes in contraceptive adoption and ideational changes in fertility intentions. Similarly, the role of men in fertility behavior has been widely acknowledged. This paper draws from previous literature to examine complementary effects of gendered social networks on changes in fertility intentions and the mediating effects of fertility intentions on the relationship between social interaction and fertility outcomes. Unlike most previous studies, this study uses longitudinal data to explore the impact of gendered social networks on changes in fertility intentions while controlling for unobserved determinants that bias the estimation of network effects. This enables the paper to address directly, causal inferences and the extent to which social interaction matters for fertility intentions and behavior.	Winfred	A. Avogo
2008	14	Gender Dynamics and Reproduction	Perceptions of Adolescent Sexual Activity and the Threat of Schoolgirl Pregnancy in Rural Malawi	Among girls who ever attended school, only 3.5 percent of 15-19 year olds in Malawi became pregnant before they left school. Despite its relative infrequency, schoolgirl pregnancy has emerged in public discussion in Malawi as a significant social problem. This paper explores parents’ beliefs about adolescent sexual activity and schoolgirl pregnancy, as well as how these perceptions intersect with adolescent sexual agency and influence family decision-making about girls’ schooling. In-depth interviews were collected in rural Malawi from 60 adults aged 25-50 who were the parent of at least one school-aged child. Preliminary analysis of the qualitative data suggests that parents assume pregnancy is a leading reason why girls do not complete school, and that parents equate sexual activity with eventual pregnancy. I hypothesize that parents’ overestimation of their daughters’ risk of pregnancy is contributing to greater school dropout rates among sexually active schoolgirls.	Monica	J. Grant
2008	15	Historical Demography	Social Security experience of the Cohort Born in 1919	Using the administrative and statistical records of the Social Security Administration, we fashioned a 1-in-100 sample of 24,500 persons born in 1919 in the 48 States who had some connection with the social security program. For persons in this sample we tabulate earnings histories and benefit-receipt histories to answer the question of how persons born in 1919 fared under the social security program. While some histories are complete as of the reference date, others have to be projected into the future. Key classification variables are gender, race, and lifetime earnings level. Besides the substantive results, the methods used to deal with data issues are presented, as well.	Bert	 Kestenbaum	Craig	A. Feinstein
2008	15	Historical Demography	Institutional and Discretional Discrimination in Public Sector Programs: The Union Army Disability Pension	The Union Army pension in the 19th century was nominally color-blind—an unprecedented and ambitious social policy experiment. But, from the outset, blacks applied less frequently and were approved less frequently. Prior to the 1890 liberalization, the Board became increasingly lenient (resulting in more applications), but this discretion was not extended to blacks, and the approval rate for their applications plummeted. The 1890 law institutionalized some of the Board’s discretion, which narrowed the black-white enrollment gap considerably. However, the specific claims made by blacks were still less likely to be approved, especially those cases that were harder to diagnostically verify. By the turn of the century, the enrollment gap had become predominantly a result of discretional discrimination rather than differential application rates. And finally, although blacks and whites received similar pension awards when they entered the system, increases for white pensioners consistently outpaced those given to blacks.	Sven	E. Wilson
2008	15	Historical Demography	Immigrants and Innovation in the United States	What are the benefits of immigration? A small body of literature has examined a variety of benefits of immigration to the U.S.: how they affect GDP, how they affect the efficiency of the labor market, whether they are a net fiscal gain or drain, and how much they lower price levels. To our knowledge, however, no studies have examined how immigrants affect the level and character of entrepreneurial activity in the U.S. This paper examines how the presence of immigrants, apart from the entrepreneurial activity of the immigrants themselves, facilities innovation and entrepreneurial activity. If, as we hypothesize, immigrants’ ability to learn new skills and methods at a lower opportunity cost than observationally equivalent natives fosters and encourages innovation and entrepreneurship (measured by self-employment, net business formation, and patent applications), immigrants are potentially a greater benefit to the U.S. economy than previous research might suggest.	Harriet	O. Duleep	David	 Jaeger
2008	15	Historical Demography	Reconsidering the Roles and Distance and Selectivity in Mass Migrations: The Case of the Twentieth-Century U.S. South	Focusing on migration within and out of the twentieth-century U.S. South, this paper seeks to problematize the well-established relationship between migration distance and migrant selectivity. Studies of mass migrations around the world have found that long-distance movers tend to be significantly more advantaged than those who move to nearby destinations. Short-distance moves are less expensive and typically required less abrupt social and cultural transitions than do longer distance moves. Nevertheless, this paper will suggest that those who moved within the twentieth-century U.S. South were a highly selective stream relative to the longer-distance migrants who left the South for other regions of the U.S. In the case of migration within and out of the mid-twentieth century South, the standard relationship between selectivity and distance breaks down.	Trent	 Alexander
2008	16	Sex Ratios in Asia	Missing Women, Hepatitis B, and Sex Ratios at Birth: A Reappraisal of the Evidence	Counts of missing women have been cited as an indicator of reduced women's welfare, especially in several Asian contexts. It has recently been argued that this demographic indicator is confounded by Asia's high prevalence of chronic infection with Hepatitis B Virus (HBV). The medical literature contains empirical evidence that those parents who are chronic carriers of HBV are especially likely to have sons rather than daughters. In recent work, Emily Oster (2005) presented evidence that the relationship was causal, drawing largely on a natural experiment represented by a mass vaccination campaign in Alaska in the mid-1980s. However, I find that analyzing this same event with data from a different source--one which is better suited to addressing the question--produces strikingly different results. My findings may help to ameliorate concerns that age-specific sex ratios and counts of missing women are confounded by a HBV-sex of offspring relationship.	Amar	A. Hamoudi
2008	16	Sex Ratios in Asia	Son Preference and Gender Inequality	This paper draws out some implications of son targeting fertility behaviour for gender inequality in developing economies. It is demonstrated that such behaviour has two notable implications at the aggregate level: (a) larger number of siblings for girls (Sibling Effect), and (b) girls are born as relatively elder children within families (Birth Order Effect). While the first tends to worsen gender inequality through monetary factors, the second does so in terms of non-monetary factors. Empirically testing for these effects, we find that both effects are present in many countries in South Asia, South-East Asia and North Africa but are absent in the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa. Using maximum likelihood estimation, we proceed to study the effect of covariates on son targeting and fertility behaviour for India, a country which displays significant sibling and birth-order effects. We find that income and geographical location of families significantly affect son targeting behaviour.	Deepankar	 Basu	Robert	 de Jong
2008	16	Sex Ratios in Asia	A Multinomial Model of Fertility Choice and Offspring Sex-Ratios in India	In countries with a cultural preference for sons, fertility decline may deteriorate already imbalanced sex-ratios. We use the fertility histories of over 90,000 Indian women to investigate the relationship between fertility choices and offspring sex-ratios in India. Our analysis reveals three main findings. First, within-family-size differences show that for the majority of the population parental education reduces anti-female bias in survival in large families but plays no role in small families. Second, between-family-size differences indicate an `intensification' effect, whereby small families have dramatically lower offspring sex-ratios than large families. Third, while maternal education and urban residence weaken the intensification effect, paternal education, a higher standard of living, and land ownership strengthen it. Our results suggest that fertility decline, together with economic growth, may worsen India's already imbalanced sex-ratios, pointing to the need fertility control policies to be supplemented with programs that counter offspring sex-selection in favor of sons.	Rubiana	M Chamarbagwala	Martin	 Ranger
2008	16	Sex Ratios in Asia	Son Preference and Reproductive Choice in Madhya Pradesh, India	This paper examines the ways in which preference for sons influences women’s reproductive choices in Madhya Pradesh, India. Using an approach based on the insights of the life course perspective, we explore the role of these preferences on use of modern contraception, abortion, and sterilization. We use a longitudinal dataset including information on 9,127 pregnancies from 2,444 women to explore how son preference influences use of temporary contraception, sterilization, and abortion. We include in the analyses a number of pregnancy specific factors shaping these choices, including the preferences of women and their families for sons, measures of women’s autonomy. This allows for a considerably more detailed and comprehensive assessment of the ways in which women’s behavior is influenced by cultural preferences for sons than has been the case in prior research.	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Kerry	 MacQuarrie	Tina	Y. Falle
2008	18	Demography with a Gender Lens	Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Study
Denies the Traditional Son Preference in China	This study is based on analyzing the unique data sets from the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey of interviews to 16,057 and 15,638 elderly aged 65-112 in the 22 provinces in 2002 and 2005. The results clearly demonstrates that having daughter(s) is beneficial at old ages in China, with respect to enjoying better filial piety of and relationship with children, care provided by children, and also maintaining a better cognitive capacity and reducing mortality risk, while controlling for various confounding factors. Such daughter-advantages are mostly more profound among the oldest-old as compared to younger elderly, and more profound in rural areas as compared to urban areas. We conclude that the publicly predominant perception of son preference in rural China, which leads to action of aborting the girl fetus to insure having at least one son under low fertility, is not a rational choice of peasants’ own interests for better old age care.	Yi	 Zeng
2008	18	Demography with a Gender Lens	Gender Inequality and the Demographic Dividend	This paper explores the effect of gender inequality on the ability of countries to take advantage of the emergence of an age structure that is particularly favorable to economic growth, a process often referred to as the ‘demographic dividend’. While gender inequalities are increasingly acknowledged as influencing economic growth, little attention has been paid to how these affect the ‘dividend’. This paper focuses on two facets of gender inequality that are particularly important to economic growth and the demographic dividend: secondary education and labor force participation. The analyses are based on panel data from a range of countries, which are used to estimate a random-effects model of economic growth over the 1965-1990 period. The results from preliminary analyses suggest that gender differentials do have an effect on economic growth, both directly and through diminishing the positive effects of favorable age structure.	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Anju	 Malhotra	Margaret	 Greene
2008	18	Demography with a Gender Lens	Gender in the 90s: Change in Beliefs about Gender in the U.S.	This research examines change in beliefs about women’s political and social roles from 1974 to 2006 using the General Social Survey. Previous research has found that trends toward increasingly egalitarian beliefs in the population began to level-off in the early 1990s. This research focuses in particular on the period from 1994 to 2006, examining how processes of cohort replacement and intra-cohort change contributed to social change in beliefs during this time. In a linear decomposition of change analysis, it is found that the fluctuating gender belief trends in the 1990s may be attributable to the opposing forces of cohort replacement (contributing to more egalitarian beliefs in the population) and intra-cohort change (which contributed to a decreasing acceptance of egalitarian gender beliefs across the 1990s).	Kristen	S. Lee	Paula	 Tufis	Duane	 Alwin
2008	18	Demography with a Gender Lens	The Gendered Double Standard of Aging in Middle and Older Age Marriage Markets	We argue that men choose female marital partners in part by beauty, that the standard of beauty favors young women, and thus, that the older men are when they marry, the more they find women their own age unattractive and prefer to marry younger women. We test hypotheses using the June CPS fertility supplement and the PSID. We show that 1) the older men are when they marry, the more years they marry down, 2) the hazard of marriage goes down more rapidly with age for women than men after age 40, 3) the ratio of single women to single men goes up with age (more than dictated by differential mortality). We also examine whether middle- and older-age men with more education and higher earnings are more able to marry down in age than less advantaged men.	Paula	S. England	Elizabeth	 McClintock
2008	19	Factors Affecting Fertility Timing	Childcare Cash Benefits and Fertility Timing in Norway	In 1998 a new cash-benefit for parents of small children was introduced in Norway. Its purpose was to provide a cash payment to parents who preferred to care for their children at home or to compensate those who were not offered external childcare provision. The policy was considered gender biased, creating reduced incentives for women to participate in the labour market and therefore encouraging a more traditional division of labour in the family. Given this background of the policy, we ask first “who takes the cash benefit?” Second, by applying simple matching techniques, we ask “Do couples taking the benefit behave differently in terms of their fertility timing?” Using information from Norwegian registers we find that more traditional households (in a broad sense) are more likely to take the cash benefit. Those taking the benefit accelerate childbearing significantly, though the reasons why they do so varies by socio-economic groups.	Trude	 Lappegård	Arnstein	 Aassve
2008	19	Factors Affecting Fertility Timing	Relative Wage Changes and Timing of Childbearing	Recent changes in the U.S. wage structure reflected a rise in demand for more skilled workers and females. I use relative wage changes to identify the effects of women’s wages and husbands’ earnings on the timing and spacing and on the age-specific and total birth rates. I use 1984-1996 SIPP panels to construct individual fertility histories and NCHS birth certificate data to construct age-specific and total birth rates. I get state, region, age and education specific wage series from the CPS/ORG data. I use two types of instruments for the wages: group indicators within group-level regressions and predicted labor demand shifts. Results using individual and group-level earnings indicate that higher female wage leads to delay of births. Male earnings do not play important role for the timing of childbearing. Results with grouped data on birth rates suggest that higher female wages delay births but have no effect on total fertility.	Aliaksandr	 Amialchuk
2008	19	Factors Affecting Fertility Timing	Employment Careers and Fertility in Italy: The Gender-Specific Effect within Couples	This research examines the effects of women’s labour market participation on reproductive behaviours in Italy, from a couple-level perspective. Few studies, in fact, have been focusing on the couple-level, although for most parents, employment decisions are negotiated within the context of heterosexual couples, where gender difference is created and maintained. Particularly, this paper aims at investigating the impact of both members’ labour force status on fertility outcomes. In addition, the hypothesis of “Self Selection” in contemporary Italian fertility development is tested. Namely, because the intensity of second and third birth concerns the selected group of women who already have one child, it can be advocated that this group has shown a preference for motherhood and committed to a child-oriented “life plan”. In order to investigate the “self-selection” hypothesis we will proceed by estimating the transition to the first, second and third child jointly, including a common unobserved heterogeneity factor.	Daniele	 Vignoli	Silvana	 Salvini
2008	19	Factors Affecting Fertility Timing	Influences of the Family of Origin on Fertility Behavior	This study examines the influences of the family of origin on people’s timing of first birth and final number of children. In addition to direct intergenerational transmission of fertility behavior, we include the role played by family life experiences during youth, and the social status of the parental family. Hazard analyses (N = 9,173) and Poisson regression analyses (N = 5,110) are performed using data from the 2003 wave of the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study. Besides a positive relation between parents’ and children’s fertility patterns, we find that people who had positive family experiences during youth, i.e. people whose parents hardly had conflicts and people who had many contacts with relatives, have their first child at a younger age and have more children. The socioeconomic and cultural status of the parental family also affects fertility timing and quantum, these effects are only partly mediated by the child’s own social status.	Arieke	J. Rijken	Aart	C. Liefbroer
2008	20	International Migration	Are Mexican Migrants to the US Adversely Selected on Ability?	Recent migrants to the United States have displayed lower earnings levels and a slower rate of earnings convergence with natives than previous immigrants. Borjas has argued that this reflects negative selectivity of immigrants; others, including Card, Chiquiar and Hanson, and Duleep and Regets, question this contention. Some of the ambiguity may be due to measurement problems, with educational attainment (or its labor market consequences) used in place of unobserved migrant quality. Using Mexican Migration Project data, we estimate models of migration probability. Our results suggest that educational attainment is not a good indicator of ability, since much of the observed variation in educational attainment in Mexico appears to be the result of local constraints in the supply of education. We propose an alternative measure of migrant quality that incorporates education supply constraints, and present evidence of Mexican emigrants self-selecting positively on ability.	Eric	R. Jensen	Sarah	 Gale	Paul	 Charpentier
2008	20	International Migration	Made in America (by Immigrants): How Protectionism Spurs Illegal Immigration	International trade theory predicts that in the presence of protectionism, labor will flow in to compensate for restricted trade. Preliminary estimations show that for an average American industry from 1974-1985, tariffs raised the foreign-born percentage of their workforce 1.4 percentage points, very significant since the mean percentage of immigrant laborers was 8.2. The mechanism drawing labor into the country is shown to be the inequality in wages across borders that result from protectionism. The evidence presented here does not aim to explain all of the reasons for immigration, but it does show a strong correlation between protected industries and immigration, clearly accounting for some of the movements. It further shows that though labor flows can substitute for free trade, immigration imposes an additional deadweight loss on the world economy. It also notes that by attracting immigration, tariffs may actually counteract their intended purposes in terms of wage and unemployment effects.	Tim	 Larsen
2008	20	International Migration	Remittance Volatility and Asset Accumulation	Remittances and migration are known to impact the consumption and asset accumulation patterns of households. While it is important to understand how changes in the level of transfers from family abroad affects asset accumulation, it is also essential to understand how the regularity and predictability of such inflows influence household asset accumulation. Some households receive remittances on a regular monthly basis. Other households receive these funds irregularly –perhaps when the emigrant returns home or when s/he has extra discretionary income. As a result, while some remittance-receiving households are able to forecast with reasonable precision remittance inflows, other recipient households are unable to do so. These two types of households will likely use the remittance inflows differently. Our study determines how the regularity of remittance receipts affects asset accumulation in remittance-receiving households.	Susan	 Pozo	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes
2008	20	International Migration	Trends in Skilled Migration to the United States	Among the foreign-born age 25 and older, 27.3% (over 7 million individuals) have a bachelor’s degree or higher, matching the proportion among natives of the same age. Yet, there is a dearth of research on skilled migration and on how immigration policy and macroeconomic factors have affected it. Policies aimed at skilled migration included changes in the annual cap on H-1B visas and an exemption from the cap granted to universities and non-profit organizations. We will fill this vacuum by tracking changes in the number and composition of the skilled immigrant population by occupation, education, region of origin, and other variables. Using CPS data from 1994 to 2006, we propose to study these changes, tentatively linking them to U.S. immigration policy and other macro level developments.	Mariano	 Sana	Katharine	M. Donato	Laurie	 Chancey
2008	21	Fertility, Politics and Public Policy	Unmet Need for Abortion in the United States	We examine the extent to which financial constraints prevent low-income women from obtaining abortions. We use data from several sources, including a nationally representative survey of abortion patients, a survey of state Medicaid agencies, and abortion incidence data. In 2000, 17% of abortions in states where Medicaid did not pay for abortion services were to women enrolled in Medicaid compared to 24% in Medicaid-funding states. We estimate that 33,000 additional abortions would have occurred if Medicaid paid for abortion services in all 50 states. Not all poor women are covered by Medicaid and most lack private health insurance. We estimate there would have been an additional 50,000 abortions in 2000 if poor women without Medicaid or private insurance had not been deterred by the cost. The number of abortions in 2000 would have been 6% higher in the absence of financial constraints.	Stanley	K. Henshaw	Rachel	K. Jones
2008	21	Fertility, Politics and Public Policy	Effects of Abortion Legalization: Complications Treated at a Tertiary Care Center in Kathmandu, Nepal 2001-2007	Abortion was broadly legalized in Nepal in 2002, and the policy implemented in 2004. Before legalization, abortion was treated as a criminal offense resulting in the imprisonment of women; the dramatic policy shift has the potential to reduce morbidity and mortality from unsafe abortion. This study examines the trend in abortion complications treated at a large maternity hospital in Kathmandu. Patient hospital charts were retrospectively abstracted for all women admitted to the hospital with symptoms, medical complications, or death from abortion during the years 2001-2007. To test the trend in the number and severity of abortion cases treated over the study period, we will analyze all abortion cases (over 10,000), coded for severity. The trend analysis will be adjusted for changes in hospital access, fertility, and contraceptive use. Interpretation of the trend, limitations of the study, and advocacy and policy implications will be discussed.	Jillian	T. Henderson	Kasturi	 Malla	Ashma	 Rana	Mahesh	 Puri	Cynthia	C. Harper	Maya	 Blum	Bishnu	 Choulagai	Philip	 Darney
2008	21	Fertility, Politics and Public Policy	Education and Permanent Childlessness: Austria vs. Sweden	In this paper we study the association between skill formation, field and level of educational attainment and permanent childlessness of Sweden and Austria in order to assess the impact of institutional factors on fertility behavior. Sweden and Austria offer particularly well suited cases to study this association since both have strongly coordinated market economies but different welfare-state setups. We find largely the same pattern of childlessness by educational field in both countries. In particular at each educational level women educated for teaching or for health occupations have lower childlessness than other lines of education. However, there is a pronounced difference in childlessness by educational level in Austria, with women with higher education having much higher childlessness than women with lower education. We do not find such a difference in Sweden. We attribute these differences to institutional differences in the two countries which bring about a different culture of reproductive behavior.	Gerda	 Neyer	Jan	 Hoem
2008	21	Fertility, Politics and Public Policy	The Effect of Abortion Legalization on Teenage Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in Future Cohorts	This paper examines the long-term impact of legalized abortion on teenage out-of-wedlock childbearing, which started declining in the early 1990s in the U.S. My fundamental argument is analogous to Donahue and Levitt (2001): by decreasing the number of unwanted births, legalized abortion could have reduced the likelihood of the teenage out-of-wedlock childbearing for the cohorts born after the legalization. I adopt a non-parametric approach that allows for a separate effect of the 1970 legislations in the repeal states- California, New York, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii- and Roe vs. Wade ruling in 1973 on Whites and African-Americans. I find that for African-Americans, both changes lead to a long-term reduction in out-of-wedlock teenage childbearing. For Whites, there is no evidence supporting a long-term effect of the 1970 legalizations, but the cohorts born after Roe v. Wade in the non-repeal states show a reduction in teenage out-of-wedlock childbirth.	Serkan	 Ozbeklik
2008	22	Health and Environment	Vulnerability to HIV in Humanitarian Emergencies: A Study of Tsunami Affected Communities in India	Understanding on vulnerability to HIV in humanitarian emergencies is limited to conflicts. Natural disasters like Tsunami are hypothesised to have increased vulnerability to HIV.   This unique study focused on understanding the vulnerabilities of Tsunami affected communities in India, to HIV; covering 30 locations through multi-stage sampling, across five states, using mixed methods. Vulnerability existed in almost all locations; heightened in two-thirds locations. Physical proximity of displaced populations was the primary factor contributing to a chain of events that led to increased vulnerability. Increased unprotected sex with non-regular partners was the key risk factor. Coastal communities in the tsunami hit areas were vulnerable to HIV even before Tsunami. The effects of humanitarian crises and aid measures influenced the behaviour and practices of the affected, significantly heightening vulnerability. There is need to mainstream HIV and AIDS components in humanitarian aid and include communities from disaster-prone areas into national HIV and AIDS interventions.	Shiv	K. Narayanan	Raghunathan	 Narayanan	Benoy	 Peter
2008	22	Health and Environment	Estimating Mortality in the Aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami	On December 26, 2004 the Sumatra-Andaman earthquake occurred in the Indian Ocean. Estimates suggest that worldwide casualties number around a quarter of a million people, with deaths in Indonesia accounting for over two thirds of total mortality. In this paper we focus on the impact of the tsunami on mortality levels and patterns in Aceh, Indonesia. We will analyze data from a longitudinal survey of some 40,000 individuals. The data (from the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery, or STAR) provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine the impact of this natural disaster on mortality in far more detail than is typically possible. Additionally, we can combine the STAR data with other sources of information and construct an estimate of total tsunami-induced mortality with a much higher degree of accuracy than can be done with data on body counts.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Thomas	 Gillespie	Bondan	 Sikoki
2008	22	Health and Environment	Using Meteorologically Based Dynamic Model to  Assess Malaria Transmission Dynamic Among Under Five Children in an Endemic Region	We develop, fit and validate a non-spatial dynamic malaria transmission model driven by meteorological conditions. 676 children aged 6-59 months were visited at home weekly from December 2003 to November 2004 for Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection detection. Anopheles daily biting rate, mortality rate and growth rate were evaluated. Digital meteorological stations measured ambient temperature, humidity and rainfall in each site. Malaria infection incidence was 1.1 episodes per person year. There was a strong seasonal variation of the Malaria infection incidence. The model estimate of monthly mosquito abundance and the incidence of malaria infection correlate well with observed values. The model has shown a potential for local scale seasonal prediction of P falciparum malaria infection. It could therefore be used to understand malaria transmission dynamics using meteorological parameters as the driving force and to help district health in identifying the risk period for more focused interventions.	Ye	 Yazoume	Catherine	 Kyobutungi	Hoshen	 Moshe
2008	22	Health and Environment	Household vs. Neighborhood Latrine Use: Child Health Effects in Urban Bangladesh	Inadequate sanitation is a persistent threat to child health, particularly in urban slums in developing countries. This study evaluates a sanitation improvement initiative in fourteen slum communities in Bangladesh. I estimate the effects of changing from unhygienic to hygienic latrines on child weight-for-height, a key measure of short-term nutritional status. I also test whether these effects are moderated by hand washing behaviors and by household food security. Fixed-effects methods address selection bias in the placement and adoption of improved latrines. Results suggest that the prevalence of improved latrines at the neighborhood level better predicts child weight-for-height than does household-specific latrine use. This neighborhood effect is driven entirely by latrine usage among households with young children; use of improved latrines by neighboring households with no young children makes no difference to child health. These findings have important implications for the targeting and implementation of sanitation projects in similar settings.	Alison	M. Buttenheim
2008	23	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	The Compression of Deaths Above the Mode	The frequency distribution of ages at death has been shifting to the right, but it has not retained exactly the same shape. The ages of deaths above the mode have become more compressed. The present paper investigates the reasons for this phenomenon. One of the simple models of mortality is found to be appropriate and mathematically tractable. Changes in the modal age of death and in the compression are shown to be driven by the way in which age-specific death rates fall at ages 70 and over. Both can be predicted from the death rates. Results are illustrated by data from the English Life Tables and Interim Life Tables, and these are confirmed by extensive data for six countries. This paper also illustrates how the slope of the mortality curve can be steepened while people are living longer, thus implying that the traditional ageing rate is not a valid measure of senescence.	Roger	A. Thatcher	Siu	Lan K  Cheung	Shiro	 Horiuchi	Jean	Marie  Robine
2008	23	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Age Components of the Best Life Expectancies	Oeppen and Vaupel showed that the best life expectancy observed in a given year has increased linearly from 1840 up to now. However, life expectancy has increased as the result of the decline in mortality at different ages, the weight of which has changed dramatically over time. What are the trends in the lowest age-specific mortality rates? Do they follow a straightforward pattern? HMD data will be enriched by other life tables collected by INED and MPIDR. To select significant large age groups, the difference between life expectancy at birth of the best-performing country and the mean life expectancy of the other countries will be broken down according to the weight of each age, around 1850, 1900, 1950, and 2000. For each significant large group, trends in lowest mortality rates or highest life expectancies will be analysed. The results could provide pointers for imagining possible retropolations and extrapolations for the Oeppen-Vaupel line.	Jacques	 Vallin	France	 Meslé
2008	23	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Comparing the Efficiency of Mortality Changes between Countries: An Evaluation of Past and Forecast Levels in Advanced Economies	The impact of an age-specific mortality change on life expectancy depends both on its quantity, and its “efficiency” – whether it occurs in an age-group that matters. Since 1840, some countries have stayed close to the advancing linear frontier for life expectancy. This implies that they have efficiently shifted the focus of mortality change from the young, through adults, to the elderly. This paper decomposes annual changes in life expectancy at birth for advanced economies into two components: quantity, and efficiency as defined for a social planner. In the past 50 years, France, Japan and Switzerland have been efficient, suggesting a positive association between the quantity and efficiency of mortality change. The United States has made both smaller and less efficient changes. Efficiency is ignored by forecasting methods. Applying the decomposition to a European Union set of mortality projections reveals an assumption of almost total collapse of efficiency for all countries by 2050.	James	E Oeppen
2008	23	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	A Contrarian View: is the Room for Improvements in Life Expectancy in Latin America and the Caribbean Shrinking?	Life expectancy prospects in Latin America and the Caribbean could be compromised. Older people attaining age 60 after the year 2000 carry the scars of experiences that can potentially translate into higher susceptibility to chronic conditions and higher levels of mortality. Once dismissed as unthinkable, declines in life expectancy already made their debut in modern societies: massively in Sub Sahara Africa with the HIV/AIDS epidemic and, more sparsely, but equally unexpectedly, in the former Soviet Republics. We argue that the route to further increases in life expectancy may be shutting down in LAC. However, unlike Sub-Saharan Africa and the former Soviet Republics, rerouting of longevity trends in LAC will be driven neither by sudden shifts of political regimes nor by the emergence of new diseases but, paradoxically, by conditions rooted on the unprecedented improvements in longevity that took place more than a half century ago.	Alberto	 Palloni	Mary	 McEniry	Ana	Luisa  Davila	Alberto	 Garcia
2008	24	Union Formation	Family Formation Decisions and a Test of the Marital Expectations Hypothesis	This study tests the marital expectations hypothesis, a qualitatively-derived theory that posits that low-income couples delay marriage because of its perceived economic requirements, but do not have the same standards for childbearing. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Survey, a study of new unmarried parents, I find that positive changes in couples’ incomes were associated with a 20% increase in the odds of marriage. Marriage odds also doubled if the couple became homeowners. Similar effects on the likelihood of having an additional child were not observed. Relationship quality did not mediate the associations between income, home ownership, and marriage. The decision to marry appears to be more sensitive to changes in income than does the decision to have an additional child.	Christina	M. Gibson-Davis
2008	24	Union Formation	Marriage among Welfare Recipients:
Relationship Commitment Interacts with Welfare Policy	This study extends prior research on welfare reform effects on marriage 1) by considering specific aspects of welfare reform expected to have the greatest impact on marital behavior and 2) by examining these effects according to indicators of personal relationship commitment. Using the 1996 and 2001 Panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) merged with state contextual data from the Welfare Rules Database (WRD) and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, multinomial event history models evaluate the roles of fertility events and cohabitation on the transition to marriage among 4,218 unmarried TANF-recipient women in varying state policy contexts. Preliminary findings support our thesis that welfare can be expected to promote marriage only when relationship commitment is also evident, but that state economic characteristics are at least as important as welfare policies.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Shelley	K. Irving
2008	24	Union Formation	The Role of Expectations and Earnings in the Entry into Marriage and Cohabitation	Do women’s earnings predict their propensity to marry, and if so, to what extent does this vary depending on their expectations for married life? I estimate event history models of marriage for White, Black, and Hispanic women using the NLSY1979. I find that earnings are an important positive predictor of marriage for White and Black women, but not Hispanic women. Among White women, work-family gender ideology moderates the relationship between earnings and marriage, suggesting that earnings are a more reliable predictor of marriage among women who hold egalitarian attitudes within marriage. For Black women, economic considerations are consistent predictors of marriage regardless of work-family gender ideology. Finally, I investigate whether cohabitation may serve as an alternative to marriage for some women, estimating a multinomial logistic model of cohabitation with marriage as a competing risk. I find that for Black women, income is a positive predictor for entry into cohabitation.	Jessica	H. Hardie
2008	24	Union Formation	Does Marriage Lead to Specialization in Sweden?: An Evaluation of Trends in Adult Earnings Before and After Marriage	Although a positive male marriage premium has been found in many studies, the source of the premium is unclear and debated – does it result from selection or specialization? Our paper analyzes trends in earnings for married and long-term cohabiting Swedish men and women who are parents children born in 1974-87. We use panel data on parents’ earnings from 1985 to 1995 to analyze trends in earnings before and after marriage. To identify the causal effect of marriage on earnings we use the marriage boom in Sweden in 1989, created by the reform of the widow’s pension system, and fixed-effects estimation. Our preliminary results suggest that all of the male marriage premium can be explained by positive selection whereas the female marriage penalty is explained by increased specialization in home production. We also examine the effect of marriage on total family earnings and find lower family earnings after marriage.	Donna	K. Ginther	Marianne	 Sundström	Anders	 Björklund
2008	25	Transition to Adulthood	“A Somewhat Different Journey”
Living with Down Syndrome: The Transition to Adult Life for Persons with Down Syndrome	This paper aims to identify the social and demographic factors, individual intellectual and personality characteristics of the adolescents, types of family functioning, and public policy interventions that as facilitators for young people with Down syndrome as they age from adolescents to adult life. A successful transition to adulthood in this context is understood as obtaining adequate degrees of self-sufficiency to live a relatively independent life. It should be noted that people with Down syndrome often differ significantly in their individual abilities. This proposed study is focused on this difference within the group of people with Down syndrome. This paper considers what available resources have significant effect on the person with Down syndrome to gain optimal levels of self-sufficiency. The goal is to present results from some of the most recent and unique data, together with providing new insights to the trajectory of persons in their transitional stages living with Down syndrome.	Lisbeth	Trille G. Loft	Dennis	 Hogan
2008	25	Transition to Adulthood	Well-Being in the Transition to Adulthood: Differences by Disability	Past research on the effects of disability on the transition to adulthood have shown significant impacts on the role accumulations associated with this period of the life course. I extend this research by considering how type of disability and experiences during the transition to adulthood impact the well-being - depression - of young adults. Results show significant impacts of little or no work experience, disability, and receiving government assistance are positively associated with increases in depressive symptomology; post-secondary educational attainment and current employment decrease levels of depression. These effects hold even when controlling for depression in adolescence. Results suggest that disability shapes transition experiences and these differential experiences yield significant mental health effects for young adults with disabilities.	Gina	 Allen
2008	25	Transition to Adulthood	Early Family Transitions and Depressive Symptoms	Research suggests that early cohabitation, parenthood, and marriage have negative long-term implications. Nevertheless, in the context of their resources and opportunities, early transitions may represent positive choices for some individuals. We studied the characteristics of young adults (N = 8,172) who did, versus those who did not, make early family transitions. We assessed changes in their depressive symptoms from adolescence to young adulthood. Individuals who made early family transitions were disadvantaged in many respects, but differed little from those who did not with respect to changes in depressive symptoms. The exceptions were women and men who became involved in unstable cohabiting unions. Also, women were more likely than men to cohabit or become parents when certain risk characteristics, such as delinquent activity, were present. Overall, those who make early family transitions stay “even” with those who do not, which suggests that some young adults make positive choices from limited options.	Alan	 Booth	Elisa	 Rustenbach
2008	25	Transition to Adulthood	The Impact of Religion on Early Union Formation and Educational Enrollment in Young Adulthood	In this study, I use the 1997 cohort of the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY97) to examine how various aspects of religious life are associated with both early union formation and educational enrollment. Broadly, I address two questions. First, does religious association with early union formation help explain religious associations with educational enrollment? Second, do religious associations with union formation and educational enrollment differ by gender? I find that both conservative Protestant young adults and young adults with high levels of religious participation do tend to marry earlier but this does not appear to disrupt their schooling. These associations hold for both women and men, though women (regardless of religious tradition or participation) are more likely than men to interrupt their schooling for marriage. Among religious predictors, only having conservative Protestant parents during adolescence predicts negative educational outcomes, and this effect is relatively stronger for men than women.	Charles	E. Stokes
2008	26	Race/Ethnic Inequalities	Effects of Household and Neighborhood Characteristics on Racial Inequality in the Duration of Children’s Exposure to Neighborhood Poverty and Affluence	I construct covariate-adjusted increment-decrement life tables to estimate racial differences in the duration of children’s exposure to neighborhood poverty and affluence. Using geocoded data from the 1999 and 2001 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, I estimate that black children born in 1999 can expect to spend about 9 of their first 18 years in poor neighborhoods, compared to less than 2 years for white children. Bivariate inequality in childhood exposure is reduced by 22% after controlling for racial differences in household characteristics, compared to a reduction of about 64% after controlling for racial differences in the racial composition and spatial location of children’s neighborhoods. These findings indicate that household and especially urban ecological factors strongly affect the amount of time that black and white children can expect to spend in poor and non-poor neighborhoods throughout childhood. I conclude by discussing some policy implications of the findings.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake
2008	26	Race/Ethnic Inequalities	Places and Poverty: How City Context Affects Hardship	Surprisingly little research to date has examined how city characteristics shape poverty. I focus on hardships associated with poverty, including material hardship, satisfaction with city and neighborhood, and feelings of safety, and how these hardships differ across a set of US cities. Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation along with data on 97 cities, I examine individual and city level effects. I focus on the effects of labor markets and race conditions while controlling for several other city characteristics. I find that there is significant and substantial variation across cities in hardship, but very few of the quantitative city characteristics explain this variation. Additionally, the effects of being black and Hispanic vary considerably across cities. These findings show that disadvantaged individuals experience differing rates of hardship across cities. However, to understand how cities shape these differences, far more nuanced considerations of how cities work are needed.	Valerie	 Lewis
2008	26	Race/Ethnic Inequalities	How Has Homeownership Changed?: Racial Inequality and the Determinants of Homeownership Transitions 1968-2005	This paper investigates the ways in which homeownership had changed for Americans since 1968 and the implication of these changes for racial inequality using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. I examine cohort change in the determinants of transitions in and out of homeownership with event history models. I found that after controlling for socioeconomic characteristics, racial inequalities for the transition into ownership have diminished across cohorts. I also find that there has been substantial growth in the effect of race for transitions from ownership back to renting, even after controlling for socioeconomic characteristics. Thus, ownership loss has emerged here as a larger and more pressing problem than previous scholars have noted. Event history models are then used to predict transition probabilities which are the basis of a series of simulations with multi-state life tables to investigate the potential effect of future policy or population change.	Vanesa	 Estrada
2008	26	Race/Ethnic Inequalities	Race Effects amidst the New Diversity: Assessing The Explanatory Power of Dichotomous, Trichotomous, and Polytomous Conceptions of Race on US Labor Market Outcomes	Large waves of immigration from Latin America and Asia have led many social scientists to conclude that the old “Black and White” characterization of American race relations is obsolete and insist on racial schema with more specificity. Others, however, have begun to recognize the persistence of the White advantage and/or Black disadvantage, even amidst this new diversity, and have suggested that dichotomous and trichotomous conceptions of race may continue to be useful for understanding and explaining American race relations. This paper uses 2006 American Community Survey to gauge how much of the total effect of race on employment and earnings can be captured simply by knowing who is White, who is Black, and who is neither. Preliminary indications are that the great majority of the effects of race lay in White advantage and Black disadvantage with relatively little of the overall race effect being associated with membership in other groups.	Amon	 Emeka
2008	27	Fathers in Families and Child Well-Being	Teenage Fathers’ Resources and Co-Residence and Child Outcomes: Evidence from a New National Survey	Nationally representative quantitative research has rarely examined how early parenthood affects teenage fathers’ children. Specifically, what resources do teenage fathers provide to their children compared to those that adult fathers provide, and how does resource provision differ by adolescent fathers’ residential status? What are the developmental outcomes of children born to a teenage father? The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort, which collected data when children born in 2001 were about 9 months and 2 years old, is used to address these questions. Comparisons show that teenage fathers’ children have significantly fewer resources than their counterparts with adult fathers in several key areas, including income, child support, coresidence, household SES, home environment, and mothers’ parenting quality. Children born to teenage fathers have worse outcomes in terms of weight at birth and behavior and cognitive development at age 2. The influence of teenage fathers’ coresidence is weaker and mixed but sometimes beneficial.	Stefanie	F Mollborn	Peter	J. Lovegrove
2008	27	Fathers in Families and Child Well-Being	Effects of Family Structure on Children’s Health and Medical Care: Focus on Single-Father Families	This study examines the relationship between family structure, with a focus on single-father families, and children’s medical care and health pooling the 1999 and 2002 panels of the National Survey of America’s Families. The sample (n=62,193) is a nationally representative group of children age 0-17 who reside with a single mother, a single father, or two-parents. Negative binomial regressions are used to model various doctor visits and logistic regressions are used to model postponement of medical care. Preliminary findings suggest that single fathers have different health services use patterns compared to both single mothers and two-parent families. Single fathers are less likely to take children for doctor visits and for children to have any hospital stays, whereas single mothers are most likely to postpone needed medical care and dental visits for children. Future analysis will examine differences across SES, insurance coverage, and sex of children.	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2008	27	Fathers in Families and Child Well-Being	Parenting as a Package Deal: Explaining trajectories of Child Involvement among Unmarried Fathers	Fatherhood has traditionally been viewed as part of a “package deal,” where a father’s relationship with his child is contingent upon his relationship with the mother. We evaluate the accuracy of this hypothesis using evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a recent longitudinal survey of nonmarital births in large cities. We find that father involvement drops sharply after relationships between unmarried parents end. These declines are particularly dramatic when the father and mother enter subsequent relationships and have new biological and social children. These declines are less dramatic for African American fathers, suggesting that fatherhood outside the context of a conjugal relationship may be more strongly institutionalized in the black community. We discuss the implications of our results given the high levels of relationship instability and multi-partner fertility among unmarried parents.	Laura	M. Tach	Kathryn	 Edin
2008	27	Fathers in Families and Child Well-Being	Single Custodial Fathers’ Involvement and Parenting during Adolescence and Outcomes in Emerging Adulthood	This study uses nationally representative data from the NLSY97 (Rounds 1 through 7) to examine the effects of single custodial fathers’ involvement and parenting of adolescents on offspring outcomes during emerging adulthood. Results suggest that the greatest proportion of single custodial fathers exhibited permissive parenting styles. Single custodial fathers did not differ from fathers in two biological parent homes in their levels of closeness, support, or awareness. Results also indicate that offspring that reside with a single father during adolescence have reduced odds of completing high school and greater odds of being disconnected during emerging adulthood compared to offspring that reside with two biological parents. Findings suggest that residing in a single father household during adolescence continues to affect offspring well-being as they enter emerging adulthood.	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Mindy	E. Scott	Emily	 Lilja
2008	28	Formal Demography	Modeling and Forecasting First Marriage: A Latent Function Approach	Hernes (1972) proposed a deductive model for diffusion processes and applied it to first marriage. Using a latent function, we generalize the Hernes model and base the assumption on observation. The Hernes model has a linear latent function, and hence is the simplest among the generalized Hernes models that are capable of dealing with diffusion processes of which the latent functions may be nonlinear. The linear latent function gives two advantages to the Hernes model. First, forecasts are based on linear extensions of historically linear trends, and the confidence intervals of forecasts are obtained analytically. Second, the starting and ending ages of the model could be chosen less arbitrarily by identifying outliers of a linear trend, which can hardly be done in nonlinear models. We use data on first marriage from Canada and the U.S. to demonstrate these advantages, and forecast decline and delay in first marriage for Canadian cohorts.	Nan	 Li	Zheng	 Wu
2008	28	Formal Demography	Variance in Death and Mortality Decline	Mortality change is commonly summarized in terms of trends in life expectancy, and  mortality models evaluated on their ability to match  historical trends. We show here that the variance of the age at death provides important  additional information. We show that historical increases in  life expectancy have been accompanied by striking decreases in the variance of the age of adult  death. Next, we show how the variance in age of adult death can be approximately computed  for any reasonable model of mortality rates, and illustrate this  with the Gompertz, the logistic, and models with multiplicative frailty. Finally, we present results on world-record trends in the variance in age of adult death, and discuss the implications  of our results for understanding secular mortality change.	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar	Ryan	D. Edwards
2008	28	Formal Demography	The Threshold between Compression and Expansion of Mortality	As a result of the steady increments in life expectancy and the relatively slow increase of the maximum lifespan, mortality compression is generally hard to avoid. However, empirical findings are mixed, both for and against compression. In this study we develop a method that allows us to closely investigate the dynamic process of mortality compression. It turns out that there exists a threshold age, say A*, such that reductions in mortality before it lead to mortality compression, whereas those after age it to mortality expansion. The overall effect of mortality reduction on compression can thus be decomposed into two components, the compression of deaths at younger ages and the expansion of deaths at older ages. Whether the compression of mortality occurs in the whole population depends on which component is greater.	Zhen	 Zhang
2008	28	Formal Demography	An Integrated Approach to Cause-of-Death Analysis: Cause-Deleted Life Tables and Decompositions of Life Expectancy	This article integrates two methods that analyze the implications of various causes of death for life expectancy. One of the methods attributes changes in life expectancy to various causes of death; the other method examines the effect of removing deaths from a particular cause on life expectancy. This integration is accomplished by new formulas that make clearer the interactions among causes of death in determining life expectancy. We apply our approach to changes in life expectancy in the United States between 1970 and 2000. We demonstrate, and explain analytically, the paradox that cancer is responsible for more years of life lost in 2000 than in 1970 despite the fact that declines in cancer mortality contributed to advances in life expectancy between 1970 and 2000.	Hiram	 Beltran-Sanchez	Sam	 Preston
2008	29	Characteristics of Populations Affected by Forced Displacement	Armed Conflict, Psycho-Social Support, and Migration	This is a theoretical and empirical study of the effects of armed conflict and social support on migration. While we understand that people migrate away from conflict, there is little research examining why some people migrate and others do not. In this paper, I examine how psycho-social support organizations moderate the relationship between conflict and migration. Using the Maoist insurrection in Nepal as a case study, I use data from a monthly panel study to create event history models that test the effect of the conflict and specific violent events on migration, and the interaction of psycho-social support organizations with violence. Results show that migration decreased during the general period of conflict and in months following low violence, but increased after months of high violence. Additionally I show that psycho-social support organizations such as temples, monasteries, social groups, and urban residence decrease the effect of the conflict on migration.	Nathalie	 Williams
2008	29	Characteristics of Populations Affected by Forced Displacement	Using U.S. Postal Service Delivery Statistics to Track Population Shifts Following a Major U.S. Disaster	After natural disasters, authorities, relief agencies and businesses have an urgent need to determine the impact on population distribution. But forces powerful enough to displace large populations also disrupt the administrative data used to track population change. Hurricane Katrina provided a dramatic example of such disruption. The proposed paper would examine the impact on U.S. Postal Service monthly residential address counts for parishes in Louisiana. Commercial firms rely on these counts as an indicator of population change, but little research has been reported on their performance during normal or extraordinary times. Pre-hurricane comparisons between USPS counts and Census housing unit data would establish a baseline. Then, starting with August 2005, month by month address counts would be examined to assess their effectiveness in reflecting population displacement and recovery at the parish level. This paper will provide a rare look at the performance of a widely used resource under extreme circumstances.	Allison	 Plyer	Ken	 Hodges
2008	29	Characteristics of Populations Affected by Forced Displacement	Displacement Dynamics in Southern Louisiana after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita	The scarcity of available data sources makes it difficult to study displacement dynamics after a large-scale natural disaster. However, policy-makers and service-providers require timely, detailed data reporting and describing the displacement of people due to disaster, the impact on overall population change, and the geographic redistribution of the resident population. In an attempt to provide a better understanding of displacement dynamics after the 2005 hurricanes, state agencies commissioned the 2006 Louisiana Health and Population Survey (LHPS). With technical assistance from the U.S. Census Bureau and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 2006 LHPS sought to provide the accurate population estimates and collect the demographic and health information in hurricane-affected parishes. Our proposed paper will utilize this unique dataset to describe the displacement dynamics (in-migration, out-migration, and relocation within parishes). These displacement dynamics add nuance to the broader “net effects” measures commonly reported in media reports of population changes.	Makiko	 Hori	David	 Bowman
2008	29	Characteristics of Populations Affected by Forced Displacement	Employment and Self-Employment in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina	We examine the effects of Hurricane Katrina on the labor market outcomes of prime age individuals in the states most affected by Katrina and for evacuees throughout the United States using data from the monthly Current Population Survey. In Alabama, Florida, and Louisiana, employment and unemployment by the end of 2006 were at similar rates as the end of 2003. In Mississippi, by contrast, employment and unemployment rates in late 2006 had not returned to their pre-Katrina levels. Evacuees that returned to their pre-Katrina state of residence had labor force participation rates and unemployment rates at or near those of non-evacuees. Evacuees that relocated (non-returnees) had lower employment rates and higher unemployment rates immediately following the hurricane and one year later. There is evidence of higher self-employment rates among non-returnees, possibly because of poor wage and salary job prospects or new opportunities for starting businesses in the wake of Katrina.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Lynn	 Karoly
2008	29	Characteristics of Populations Affected by Forced Displacement	Higher Ground: An Exploratory Multivariate Analysis of Characteristics Affecting Population Displacement in the Wake of Hurricane Katrina	This study is an exploratory analysis utilizing multivariate techniques upon Current Population Survey data. The objectives are three-fold: First, to examine the relationship between individual and household variables in an evacuee population. Second, identify population factors which have affects on the geographic spread and propensity of return of Katrina evacuees. Third, extract latent variables in an attempt to further explain these differentiations. While acknowledged as standard practice, correlation between individual and household variables has seldom been directly addressed. In addition, though the spatial components of vulnerable populations are well documented the spatial displacement of vulnerable populations is not. These deficiencies are addressed while evaluating the viability of multivariate techniques for assessing populations after disasters. Initial results indicate individual and household variable assumptions are valid and a limited set of variables can discriminate between returned and displaced populations across geographic groupings while meaningful latent variables have been extracted for future analysis	Jonathan	D Stringfield
2008	30	Religion, Changing Ideologies and Fertility	Developmental Idealism and Family and Demographic Change in Central and Eastern Europe	In this paper we provide explanations for the substantial declines in marriage and childbearing, increases in nonmarital cohabitation and childbearing, and shift from abortion to contraception in Central and Eastern Europe following the political transformations of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Our explanations focus on the political, economic, social, and cultural histories of the region, with emphasis on ideational influences from Western Europe and North America. We argue that developmental idealism was important in these family and demographic changes as it states that the political, economic, and family structures of the West are superior to those elsewhere and help to produce modern political and economic accomplishments. And, this ideational system helps to establish freedom and equality as human rights. We argue that developmental idealism and the political and economic changes of the late 1980s and early 1990s combined to produce the many changes in family and demographic behavior.	Arland	 Thornton	Dimiter	 Philipov
2008	30	Religion, Changing Ideologies and Fertility	Religion, Religiousness and Hispanic Fertility in the United States	Based on fertility survey data, this is an analysis of the extent to which the higher fertility of Hispanic women in the United States can be explained by religious differences with non-Hispanics. Preliminary findings indicate that Catholic – Protestant differences appear not to be relevant. Born Again Christians show somewhat higher fertility but this is evident among non-Hispanics as well. The analysis will focus on differences in religiousness, particularly as measured by the perceived importance of religion in everyday life which is much higher among Hispanics and strongly associated with fertility. The study will look at the persistence of the association with religiousness in both populations in connection with traditional family values, gender roles, marriage, poverty and education and wanted and unwanted births. This will be the third paper focusing on the relevance of religious factors for fertility, the first on Europe – U.S. differences and the second on Muslim fertility in Europe.	Charles	 Westoff
2008	30	Religion, Changing Ideologies and Fertility	Students’ Attitudes, Fertility Plans, and Perceptions of Parents and Childless/Childfree Couples	Rising average ages at first birth and increased acceptance of childlessness in the U. S. have raised concerns about future fertility trends and the prospects of very low fertility, particularly among college-educated men and women. The current study uses college students’ responses to hypothetical vignettes (N = 1,266) to assess contemporary perceptions of childless/childfree adults compared to parents and to examine their potential links with students’ attitudes and own fertility plans. We combine quasi-experimental, social-psychological methods with standard survey questions to evaluate their utility in demographic research on young adults’ fertility plans, attitudes, and perceptions. We also examine their connections with gender, race-ethnicity, religion, and family characteristics. Earlier analyses have documented the effects of vignette characteristics – race, gender, parent status, and socioeconomic status - in shaping students’ perceptions. The current analyses will build on this earlier work by connecting students’ perceptions with their attitudes, plans, and other characteristics.	Tanya	 Koropeckyj-Cox
2008	30	Religion, Changing Ideologies and Fertility	Fertility and Ideology: A Study of the Relation between Selective Memory and Childbearing among American Whites	In this paper, we venture to go beyond the usual literature on fertility and ideology, and study ideology as reflected in people’s memory of social and historical events. By doing so, we bring together the literature on collective memory and that on fertility differentials. We analyze the 1993 General Social Survey to understand the relation between childbearing behavior and selective memory of certain historical and social events representing political and religious ideology. Our results demonstrate that certain generation-based selective memory items, as reflected in the interaction between memory scores and age cohorts, are clearly related to the respondents’ levels of fertility. Indeed, ideology is important in explaining fertility, but the effect cannot be captured by the conventionally conceived instrument such as the liberal-conservative scale commonly used in instruments including the General Social Survey. Rather, our analysis shows that ideology resident in selective memory matters as a fertility differential, in particular for the older cohorts.	Tim	Futing  Liao	Libin	 Zhang
2008	31	Genes, Sexual Behavior and Fertility	Twinning and the Inheritance of High Fecundity	This paper will examine the importance of a genetic component of fertility by analyzing the birth intervals of daughters and granddaughters of women who gave birth to twins. Women who have twins get pregnant more quickly, and twinning is an inherited trait. We ask whether a family history of twinning reduces the length of birth intervals in subsequent generations. Data are drawn from more than 30,000 family reconstitutions in France from 1670 to 1829 collected by Louis Henry. Event history models suggest that a woman's relative risk of a birth was about five to ten percent higher if her mother gave birth to a twin, and this advantage was passed from daughters to granddaughters. Evidence of inheritance of fecundity disappears after 1780, however, and we suggest that the spread of family limitation makes it more difficult to detect small genetic differences.	George	 Alter	Gilles	 Pison
2008	31	Genes, Sexual Behavior and Fertility	Understanding Overall and Sexual Health in Older Women Using Saliva Sex Hormone Measurements	The relationship between sex hormone physiology and sexual function in older women is complex and, based primarily on small clinical or laboratory studies, only partially understood. The National Social Life, Health and Aging Project (NSHAP) data were used to explore the associations between endogenous sex hormone levels with global self-reported health and characteristics of sexual performance. Salivary sex hormone measures collected in the homes of a probability sample of 1550 women ages 57-85 exhibit internal validity and align with findings from the few comparable prior studies. In multivariate analyses, sex hormone concentrations appear to be associated with vaginal dryness and subjective genital arousal, but not frequency of sexual activity or attitudes about sex. As has been found previously, DHEA exhibits a significant association with global health. These descriptive analyses lay a foundation for more in-depth exploration of the relationship between sex hormones in later life and female sexuality and health.	Stacy	T. Lindau	Natalia	S. Gavrilova
2008	31	Genes, Sexual Behavior and Fertility	Social Context, Genes, and Number of Sexual Partners Among Male Youth	Sociological models are generally less predictive of black male sexual behavior than whites. None of the prevailing sociological theories (social control, strain, and cultural norm) seems to be able to explain the empirical puzzle. In this article, we describe the interaction between the DAT1 gene and socioeconomic-cultural factors (SCF). By introducing the 40-bp variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) in the DNA samples from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we found gene by SCF interaction analysis has revealed a rich set of socioeconomic-cultural predictors of number of sex partners at both individual and contextual levels. These SCF findings are only visible in the gene-SCF interaction analysis in which the SCF effects are allowed to be moderated by the DAT1 genetic variants. Our empirical analysis has lent support for all three theoretical perspectives: social control, strain, and norm theories, but none of the three theories is dominant.	Guang	 Guo	Yuying	 Tong
2008	32	Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse	Domestic Violence against Married Women in  Egypt	We explore associations of domestic violence against women (DVAW) with childhood exposures, absolute and relative household resources, and family organization in community context among 5,485 ever-married Egyptian women. A higher female-to-male ratio of ever schooling was associated with marginally lower odds of minor physical violence against women, and indirectly with lower odds of psychological abuse. Women’s maltreatment in childhood was associated with ~1.6 times higher odds of psychological and physical violence. A one-point increase in women’s score for household standard of living was associated with 12–19% lower odds of psychological and physical violence. A U-shaped association between spousal gaps in schooling and DVAW suggests that women’s marital dependency and status inconsistency elevate their risk of such violence. Women married to a paternal cousin had 30–40% lower odds of psychological and physical violence. Simulations expose the dominant roles of childhood exposures, marital dependency, and family organization in DVAW from all classes.	Kathryn	M. Yount	Li	 Li
2008	32	Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse	Social Change, Community Context, Wives and Husbands’ Experiences and Domestic Violence against Wives	Using the measures and analytical approaches specifically designed to study the impact of macro-level social change on individual-level family behaviors this paper investigates the influence of community context on domestic violence among the women in Chitwan Valley, Nepal – a predominantly patriarchal society that is in the midst of dramatic social change. Though previous research on domestic violence has emphasized the role of prevailing patriarchal ideology, the recent dramatic changes in the South Asian societies are likely to have important influences on domestic violence in the opposite direction. The results show that wives’ childhood community context, both wives’ and husbands’ adulthood community context, and couples’ non-family experiences each tend to reduce domestic violence. Husbands’ positive attitudes towards mother-in-law obedience, on the other hand, are associated with a higher likelihood of domestic violence. These associations point toward social psychological mechanisms linking macro-level social change to the individual-level of domestic violence.	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	William	G. Axinn
2008	32	Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse	Concentrated Disadvantage and Adolescent Dating Violence Victimization	Although adolescent dating violence is a prevalent problem associated with many negative health outcomes, most research has focused on individual-level risk factors. Guided by social disorganization theory, we analyzed data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to explore how school features relate to physical dating violence victimization. In weighted multilevel random effects models, the variability in dating violence victimization risk attributable to differences between school contexts was very small - 7% for males and 5% for females. In bivariate analyses, school social disorder was positively related to dating violence victimization among females; among males, victimization was positively associated with school concentrated disadvantage and negatively associated with collective efficacy. However, after adjusting for individual-level socioeconomic status, school-level  factors were unassociated with dating violence victimization for both genders. Differences between students in the same school appear more important than differences between school settings in explaining risk for dating violence victimization.	Aubrey	L. Spriggs	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern	Amy	H. Herring
2008	32	Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse	The Implications of Violent and Controlling Unions for Mothers' Mental Health in Fragile Families	We use two waves of the Fragile Families and Child Well-being Study to examine links between non-violent/non-controlling, controlling-only, and controlling/violent unions, dissolution, and mental health. We find that mothers in controlling-only and violent/controlling unions have significantly greater odds of being clinically depressed and more depressive and anxious symptoms than do mothers not experiencing control or violence. These mothers are also more likely to dissolve their relationships over a two-year time frame. Mothers who remain in controlling/violent unions have 115% greater odds of becoming clinically depressed, 684% greater odds of becoming clinically anxious, and 474% greater odds of experiencing an increase in anxious symptoms when compared to mothers who remain in non-violent/non-controlling unions. Mothers who dissolve these controlling/violent unions also experience significant increases in poor mental health compared to mothers in non-violent/non-controlling unions, as do mothers who dissolve a non-violent/non-controlling union. Implications for future violence and union dissolution research are discussed.	Kate	S Adkins
2008	34	Impacts of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on the Populations of the Affected Areas	Evaluation of the U.S. Census Bureau's Population Estimates for Counties Affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita	The rapid, large-scale migration from parts of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas due to Hurricanes Katrina and Rita were unparalleled in U.S. history. The U.S. Census Bureau had to incorporate this migration into its annual population estimates. The Census Bureau supplemented the Internal Revenue Service data typically used to measure domestic migration with data from the United States Postal Service’s National Change of Address file. This paper will evaluate the Census Bureau’s vintage 2006 population estimates for the hurricane-affected counties with a focus on these special processing efforts. Several other organizations also produced population estimates for the hurricane-affected counties (e.g., Claritas, the Louisiana Recovery Authority, and RAND). These independently compiled population estimates were developed using a variety of demographic techniques and data. In this paper, we plan to compare the methodologies for the different sets of population estimates and the data sources used in these estimates.	Victoria	A. Velkoff	Jonathan	 Takeuchi	Rodger	V. Johnson
2008	34	Impacts of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on the Populations of the Affected Areas	New Orleans’s Latinos: Growth in an Uncertain Destination	Latino immigrants arrived in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina struck on August 29, 2005. The recovery economy has brought a steady stream of Latino migrant workers, but demand has been spatially and temporally uneven. As rebuilding progress has slowed and wages have dropped the growth of Latinos in the city appears to be leveling off, though not declining. However, little is known about the post-Katrina newcomers. Using survey data collected at visits of the mobile consulates of Mexican, Brazil, and Nicaragua, we investigate the expected durations of these national origin groups. We find that the best predictors of staying in New Orleans are owning a home, being accompanied by spouses and/or children, and having been a pre-Katrina resident. The post-Katrina arrivals appear to be either very mobile or uncertain about their stay in New Orleans.	Elizabeth	 Fussell	Miriam	J. Northcutt
2008	34	Impacts of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on the Populations of the Affected Areas	The Effect of Hurricane Katrina on Prisoner Reentry in Louisiana: A Natural Experiment	In August 2005, Hurricane Katrina ravaged the Louisiana Gulf Coast. Because many of the neighborhoods where ex-prisoners normally reside are uninhabitable, it is unclear where newly released prisoners from Louisiana correctional facilities now reside. It also remains unclear whether this likely geographic displacement of returning prisoners because of Hurricane Katrina will have any adverse, or even beneficial, effects on returning prisoners. Through the use of a natural experiment, this study seeks to establish whether the dispersal of ex-prisoners away from their former neighborhoods will lead to lower levels of recidivism. The first part of the study describes the geographic pattern of prisoner reentry in Louisiana before and after Hurricane Katrina by mapping the addresses upon release for two separate cohorts of returning prisoners, one released prior to Hurricane Katrina and one released afterwards. I then estimate the causal effect of hurricane-induced geographic displacement on the likelihood of recidivism among ex-prisoners.	David	 Kirk
2008	34	Impacts of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on the Populations of the Affected Areas	New Orleans after Katrina: Alternate Visions of Justice	This paper uses the views of people who have returned as one prism through which to understand what is at stake in the planning process in New Orleans. It is organized around what residents consider to be their rightful expectations about the society’s treatment of them and their neighborhoods. These fit into a framework of self-interest (the view that “I” have a right to return and that I should be made whole for the failures of government that were exposed by Katrina) and community interest (the view that not every neighborhood should be rebuilt but mine should upgraded). The paper will place these views in the context of a city whose black neighborhoods were disproportionately impacted, and where socially “neutral” policies – such as concentrating public investments and infrastructure in less damaged zones and restricting development in low-lying areas – have evident racial and class implications.	John	R. Logan
2008	35	Migration, Transnationality and Fertility	International Migration and Women's Reproductive Health in
Mexico	We estimate the impacts of international migration on the contraceptive choice of women in Mexico. We find that women belonging to migrant families and having past migration experience have higher propensity to use contraceptive pills and condoms. For instance, migrant family women are 75% more likely to use contraceptive pills and 37% more likely to use condoms with their partners. We obtain these effects after controlling for traditional economic variables such as income and access. To establish a causal effect, we use historic municipality level migration and return migration as instruments for the current decision to migrate, correcting for the potential self-selection involved in international migration. We argue that these results are robust to different specifications and estimation strategies and are not driven by individual or spatial  omitted variables.	Prabal	 De
2008	35	Migration, Transnationality and Fertility	Intergenerational Discrepancies in Fertility Preferences 
among Immigrant and Dutch Families	This study investigated the fertility preferences of parents and children in immigrant and Dutch families. I explored the preferred ages for having a first child as well as preferred family size among 1,290 parent-child dyads from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study and the Social Position and Provisions Ethnic Minorities Survey. I examined intergenerational differences in fertility preferences and asked how ethnic origin, socio-demographic position and parents’ values influence intergenerational discrepancies. Results indicated that there are clear absolute differences in preferred timing and family size between the ethnic groups. With respect to preferred family sizes I find intergenerational differences among all ethnic groups: children prefer smaller families than their parents. There is, however, no indication that intergenerational differences are larger among immigrant families. Regarding timing of childbearing I find larger intergenerational discrepancies among Moroccan families only. Furthermore, parent and child characteristics are of limited importance for intergenerational discrepancies.	Helga	A.G. de Valk
2008	35	Migration, Transnationality and Fertility	Migrants, Second Generations and their Family and Fertility Choices: A Pan-European Analysis	We use a pan-European comparative survey, the European Social Survey, to study fertility choices of migrants of first and second generations, as well as of stayers in countries of origin and natives of destination countries. We focus on five sending countries: Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain, nowadays characterized by low and lowest low fertility levels, and Turkey, where fertility is still above replacement. We then 1) explore the opportunities given by micro-level datasets, available on a relatively large number of countries for research; 2) describe, also by developing “cœteris paribus” regression models, the key behavioral and attitudinal differences between first and second generation migrants, stayers in country of origin, and citizens of destination countries; 3) exploit the heterogeneity of destination countries to test the effect of welfare provision on fertility choices. Analyses are based on descriptive statistics and generalized linear (mixed) models on completed fertility and fertility intentions.	Agnese	 Vitali	Francesco	C. Billari	Frank	F Furstenberg, Jr.
2008	35	Migration, Transnationality and Fertility	High Fertility in City Suburbs: Compositional or Contextual Effects?	Fertility rates are known to be higher in city suburbs. One interpretation is that the suburban ‘context’ influences the behaviour of individuals who reside there while an alternative is that the ‘composition’ of the suburban population explains the higher fertility levels. Furthermore, suburban in-migrants who intend to have children may have a significant influence on suburban fertility rates. Using Finnish longitudinal register data we show that fertility rates are higher in the suburbs and rural areas and lower in the cities. Fertility variation across these residential contexts decreases significantly after controlling for women’s demographic and socio-economic characteristics. However, it does not disappear entirely suggesting that the local context may have some influence on fertility. While movers to suburbs do display higher fertility levels than non-migrant residents, their overall impact is not great because they form a small share of the suburban population.	Hill	 Kulu	Paul	J. Boyle
2008	36	Public Policy and Child Wellbeing	Public Policy, Demographic Change, and the Incidence and Severity of Long-Term Child Poverty through the 1990s	Although annual child poverty dropped to historic lows in the late 1990s, it is not known if long-term poverty followed similar patterns. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics we show that long-term poverty rates declined from the 1980s to 1990s for white children, but remained steady for black children. For both, rates of long-term deep poverty remained at 1980s levels, with black children almost 18 times as likely as white children to be persistently deeply poor. These trends were simultaneously driven by changing demographic and policy realities. Income packages of the long-term poor shifted from consisting of roughly equal parts wages and government assistance in the 1970s to a plurality of government assistance and wage supplements in the 1990s. Changes in long-term poverty due to changing demographics over time and across race groups are estimated using a modified version of the Oaxaca-Blinder regression decomposition for non-linear models.	Lloyd	D. Grieger	Jessica	J.B. Wyse
2008	36	Public Policy and Child Wellbeing	Liberal Welfare State Policies and Health: The Effect of The Earned Income Tax Credit on Child Well-Being	In this analysis, we investigate the health effects of liberal welfare state policies by examining how enactments and expansion of state and national earned income tax credit (EITC) programs impact the health of the children of the working poor. Using two data sources — Children of the NLSY79 and U.S. Natality Data — to conduct a difference-in-difference analysis, we examine the effect of the EITC on birth weight, preterm birth, and child height.	Kate	W. Strully	David	 Rehkopf	Ziming	 Xuan
2008	36	Public Policy and Child Wellbeing	Welfare Receipt and Early Childhood Cognitive Scores	Childhood exposure to income poverty is associated with a host of negative characteristics in terms of education, labor market, and physical and mental health outcomes. Yet, past research indicates that family participation in social welfare programs such as TANF may be associated with negative child outcomes, such as reduced probability of graduation or fewer years of completed schooling. We examine the effects of TANF participation on children’s early cognitive development using methods to address concerns about endogeneity and measurement error with panel data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Our results indicate that participating in TANF is associated with positive cognitive development but that there may be a negative dosage effect reducing the positive returns of cash assistance for long-term recipients.	Colleen	M Heflin	Sharon	 Kukla-Acevado
2008	36	Public Policy and Child Wellbeing	Economic Costs of Early Childhood Poverty	Empirical research illustrates that relative to non-poor children poor children are less successful in school and in the labor-market as adults, have poorer health, and are more likely to commit crimes and engage in other forms of problem behavior. Our paper focuses on the long-run impact of low income early in life, net of correlated family factors, on adult outcomes measured as late as age 37. We draw on national data from the PSID, the longest running longitudinal study of household income in the US. Income is measured in every year of a child’s life from the prenatal period through age 15, distinguishing income early in life (prenatal through 5th year) from income in middle childhood and adolescence. We find statistical links between early childhood poverty and five adult outcomes: completed schooling, labor-market hours and earnings, and receipt of income from both the Food Stamp and AFDC/TANF cash assistance programs.	Greg	J. Duncan	Ariel	 Kalil
2008	37	Social Mobility: Across and Within Generations	Unobserved Heterogeneity, Demographic Mechanisms, and the Intergenerational Effects of Increasing Women’s Schooling	Measuring the intergenerational effects of increases in women’s schooling is complicated by the fact that the processes that create generations, such as marriage and childbearing, are endogenous to women’s schooling. Previously we developed an approach to assessing intergenerational effects that included these endogenous demographic mechanisms using a formal model of population projection. Here we extend that work by examining how unobserved heterogeneity affects intergenerational processes. First, we estimate joint models of fertility and children’s schooling. Second, we test the population level effects of increased childlessness, which might occur if certain types of women forgo fertility altogether. Third, we show that even if endowments and marriage sorting processes explain all of the direct effect of women’s schooling on children’s schooling, the intergenerational effects of increasing women’s schooling are usually not zero because of effects that accrue through demographic mechanisms and population level processes. We compare results by race and birth cohort.	Vida	 Maralani	Robert	D. Mare
2008	37	Social Mobility: Across and Within Generations	Understanding the Relationship between Parental Income and Outcomes in  Middle Childhood	In this paper we use unique cohort data from the UK to explore the association between family income and children’s cognitive ability (IQ and school performance), socio-emotional outcomes (self esteem, locus of control and behavioural problems) and physical health (risk of obesity). We develop a decomposition technique that allows us to compare the relative importance of the adverse family characteristics and home environments of low income children in accounting for different outcomes. We find that poor children are disadvantaged at age 7 to 9 across the full spectrum of outcomes, but that the factors underlying these deficits differ markedly. We conclude that many aspects of growing up in poverty are harmful to children’s development, and that narrowly-targeted interventions are unlikely to have a significant impact on intergenerational mobility. Some specific mechanisms that we highlight are maternal smoking and breastfeeding, child nutrition, parental psychological functioning and the home learning environment.	Paul	 Gregg	Carol	 Propper	Elizabeth	 Washbrook
2008	37	Social Mobility: Across and Within Generations	Educational Homogamy of Married and Cohabiting Couples: Do Marriage and Cohabitation Become More Similar as Cohabitation Becomes More Common?	Past studies have shown that married and unmarried couples differ in assortative mating patterns but the nature of these differences and their variation across social classes and institutional backgrounds remains unclear. This paper contributes to the previous research by comparing educational homogamy of married and cohabiting couples in Canada and by investigating changes over time. Specifically, it contrasts English Canada where cohabitation serves mainly as a prelude to marriage and Québec where cohabitation has become the modal way to form a family.  Canadian census data are used and the method of log-linear modeling is applied. Results reveal two tendencies. First, married and cohabiting couples are more similar in terms of homogamy and odds of crossing educational barriers if cohabitation is more common. Second, spouses display higher levels of educational homogamy in the social context where cohabitation is less institutionalized, whereas no clear trend is observed if cohabitation is widespread.	Dana	 Hamplova	Celine	 Le Bourdais
2008	37	Social Mobility: Across and Within Generations	Occupational Change and Income Mobility from 1950-2006	In the United States from the 1950s to the present there has been a dramatic change in the occupational structure: with a rise of employment in the service sector, a decline in industrial jobs, an increase of employment in the construction sector, and a dramatic increase in wages for management compared to other occupations. We examine these changes of rank and level of occupational income over time and develop a time varying socio-economic index to better model these trends. With this updated scale we estimate the changes in income mobility from 1972 to 2006 and compare these results to a model of social mobility based on the Duncan socio-economic index and model based on a fixed occupational income scale. Last, we evaluate the usefulness of occupational scales for modeling income mobility, given the changes in within and between occupational incomes over the last half of the twentieth century.	Daniel	A Long	Aaron	 Truchil
2008	38	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Physical Activity Portfolios, Education, and Race/Ethnic Disparities in Body Mass in the U.S.	Although some studies have examined race and SES preferences in leisure time activities, few studies have used large national datasets to identify and link unique activity profiles to demographic trends in health. Using data from the National Health Interview Survey, we provide four aims to guide our examination of the associations between sociodemographic factors—including socioeconomic status and race/ethnicity—and physical activity profiles and body mass. First, we use factor analysis to determine how unique physical activities group into latent activity profiles. Second, we examine the associations between race/ethnicity and education, and the physical activity profiles. Third, we document the associations between kilocaloric expenditure and the activity profiles. Finally, we examine whether the physical activity profiles mediate or moderate the associations between race/ethnicity, education, and body mass.We hypothesize that engagement in different activity types influences kilocaloric expenditure, are in part due to cultural and socioeconomic differences, and have lasting impacts on BMI.	Jarron	M. Saint Onge	Patrick	M. Krueger
2008	38	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Shape of the BMI-Mortality Association by Cause of Death, Using Generalized Additive Models: NHIS 1986-2002.	This paper employs generalized additive models (GAMs) to describe the shape of the association between BMI and cause-specific mortality. GAMs are a type of nonparametric models that allow a regression-like analysis without imposing a priori constraints on the functional form of the predictors, and provide a flexible but parsimonious description of the predictors’ effects. We examine the association between BMI and mortality from diabetes, cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, cancer, and external causes. The analyses are based on the National Health Interview Survey 1986-2000 linked to the National Death Index, providing basic mortality information on over 1,000,000 individuals through 2002. The results indicate that the shape of the association between BMI and mortality for each cause depends strongly on the duration of followup with a clearly defined optimal BMI associated with low mortality at short followup duration but a much flatter shape for longer duration. Explanations for these patterns are discussed.	Anna	 Zajacova
2008	38	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Mortality Attributable to Obesity among Middle -and Older-Aged Adults in the U.S.: Results from the Health and Retirement Study	Obesity is considered a major source of premature mortality. While the number of studies exploring the association between obesity and mortality is large, few studies measure attributable deaths from obesity. We measure relative and attributable risks associated with obesity among middle-aged adults from the nationally representative Health and Retirement Study (1992-2004). While class II/III obesity (BMI≥35.0) increases mortality by 53% compared to normal BMI (18.5-24.9), class I obesity (30.0-34.9) and overweight (25.0-29.9) are not associated with mortality. With respect to attributable mortality, obesity (BMI≥30.0) is responsible for only 2% of deaths in this population. Results are robust to confounding by diseases, SES, smoking, and other correlates. These findings challenge the viewpoint that obesity will stem the long-term secular decline in US mortality.	Neil	 Mehta	Virginia	W. Chang
2008	38	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	The Optimal Weight at Middle and Old Age: The Trade-Off between Active and Inactive Life Expectancy	The obesity epidemic is a global phenomenon. Evidence of the health consequences of high bodyweight is conflicting. Recent studies do not show that overweight and mild obesity increase mortality risks, but it does raise chances to disability.   We use the US Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) to estimate the impact of BMI on limitations of activities of daily living expressed as life expectancy (LE) with or without disability at middle and old age and compare it to smoking and education.  Results show that overweight and obesity are a minor cause of death, but a major cause of disability, especially for women. At age 55, obesity (BMI 30-34.9) increased LE with disability with 2.0 [0.6-3.4] years for men and 3.2 [1.6-4.8] years for women compared to normal weight (BMI 23-24.9). Low education decreased disability-free life, but did not change life expectancy with disability. Smokers lived shorter both with and without disability.	Mieke	 Reuser	Luc	 Bonneux	Frans	 Willekens
2008	39	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Premarital Cohabitation and Marital Stability		Bo	 Lu	Anna	 Cunningham
2008	39	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Social Engagement	In Canada, cohabitation has transformed from a marginal to a normative life experience. However, there are uncertainties about how cohabitation fits into kinship systems. Of especial interest is whether cohabitation represents a marriage-like institution in terms of its organizational, functional, and social attributes. This article compares cohabiting-couple unions to marital unions on social engagement to determine if cohabitation is advancing toward becoming a complete institution. The article compares cohabitation to marriage on several dimensions of social engagement, including social contact with relatives, number of close friends, development of social networks, social participation, and reciprocal exchange. For these comparisons, the article uses 2003 General Social Survey (GSS-17) data (N = 25,000) and multivariate statistical techniques. These dimensions of social engagement are crucial sources of social capital, which is a cornerstone of durable union relationships. The article concludes with an empiric-based re-conceptualization of what cohabitation represents in socio-demographic terms.	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2008	39	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	The Distinct Society: Cohabitation and the Recent Evolution of Other Demographic Behaviors in Quebec		Benoît	 Laplante
2008	39	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	The Diffusion of Cohabitation Among Young Women in Europe: A Longitudinal Analysis	The Diffusion of Cohabitation Among Young Women in Europe: A Longitudinal Analysis      Tiziana Nazio, Oxford University, United Kingdom  and  Hans-Peter Blossfeld, Otto-Friedrich-Universitat Bamberg, Germany	Hans-Peter	 Blossfeld
2008	40	Union Dissolution	A Comparison of Fathers’ Mental Health Before and After Cohabitation and Marital Dissolution	We compare the mental health consequences of cohabitation dissolution and marital dissolution using data from the second and third waves of the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being study.   We use propensity score matching and fixed-effects regression techniques to attempt to account for selection bias. We find that all fathers increase in both rates of clinical depression and depressive symptoms, but fathers who dissolve their union experience a greater increase in both, regardless of the type of union dissolved. We also compare fathers who dissolved a cohabiting to those who dissolved a martial union and find that fathers dissolving a marital union experienced a greater magnitude of change in rates of clinical depression and depressive symptoms using propensity score matching. However, in fixed-effects regression results we find no significant differences in the magnitude of change in rates of clinical depression or depressive symptoms between previously cohabiting and previously married fathers.	Claire	M. Kamp Dush	Kate	S Adkins
2008	40	Union Dissolution	Divorce as Risky Behavior	We extend the orthodox divorce model by assuming that women are risk averse, marriage is risky, and divorce is even riskier. As long as divorce is location-independent riskier than marriage, our model yields the familiar result that the risk premium that compensates agents for the greater risk associated with divorce decreases monotonically in their level of relative risk tolerance. In short, we predict that the probability of divorce increases in individual risk tolerance. We assess this prediction by using a sample of women from the NLSY79 to estimate a probit model of divorce. We control for a rich array of determinants of the gains to marriage and divorce, plus a measure of relative risk tolerance derived from responses to “income gamble” questions. We find that risk tolerance is an important determinant of divorce: e.g., a 1.5 standard deviation increase in risk tolerance raises the predicted probability of divorce by 11%.	Audrey	 Light	Taehyun	 Ahn
2008	40	Union Dissolution	Consequences of Incarceration: A Multi-Sample Analysis of Parent Relationship Status, Father Imprisonment, and Race in the United States	The prison system in the United States has undergone a massive expansion over the last three decades. Despite the fact that this prison expansion disproportionately affects black and low-income families, it has remained on the periphery of the discussion of family structure change and instability among these groups. I estimate the association between male partner imprisonment and change in parent relationship status over time using three national datasets: The Fragile Families and Child Well Being Study, The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997. I also give special consideration racial differences in imprisonment and estimate the possible multiplicative effects of race on the association between parent relationship and male imprisonment. Preliminary findings highlight very strong associations between father imprisonment and parent relationship dissolution, but also reveal racial differences in the likelihood of parents staying together after imprisonment.	Jessica	 Jakubowski
2008	40	Union Dissolution	New Estimates on the Effect of Parental Separation on Child Health	This study examines the causal link between parental separation and the health status of young children. Using a representative sample of children all born out-of-wedlock drawn from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we investigate whether separation between unmarried biological parents has a causal effect on a child's likelihood of developing asthma by age three. Adopting a treatment outcome framework to account for self-selection of relationship dissolution, we find that children whose parents separate within three years after childbirth are seven percent more likely to develop asthma by age three, relative to children whose parents remained romantically involved. We show that socioeconomically disadvantaged fathers are more likely to end their relationship with the child’s mother within three years after childbirth. If these fathers had maintained romantic involvement with the child’s mother, their child would be more likely to develop asthma by age three.	Shirley	H. Liu	Frank	 Heiland
2008	41	Innovative Applications of Administrative Records in Demographic Research	New Approaches to Creating Data for Economic Geographers	Policymakers, faced with increasing demands to make decisions at a local level, are turning to statistical agencies to provide local data. Advances in matching technology, combined with the reduced cost of archiving, indexing, storing, and curating large-scale datasets, now mean that it is technically feasible to provide information at fine levels of geographic detail by means of combining administrative and survey datasets at lower cost and potentially greater coverage. This paper describes an approach that uses administrative data from U.S. unemployment insurance records to enhance the coverage and accuracy of work location information in the American Community Survey.	Matthew	 Freedman	Julia	 Lane	Marc	 Roemer
2008	41	Innovative Applications of Administrative Records in Demographic Research	Who’s Right?: A Novel Use of Survey and Administrative Data to Assess State Population Estimates	The Census Bureau and many states report annual estimates of state populations. Some states rely on the Census Bureau’s estimates, while others produce their own estimates. In this study, we exploit both the large sample size of the American Community Survey and a survey item that is new to the survey (as compared to the decennial census) to evaluate the accuracy of state population estimates for highly populated states. Specifically, we compare ACS estimates of the number of women giving birth in the prior year to vital statistics administrative data. Births and the number of women giving birth are thought to be universally recorded in state administrative data, and thus serve as a guide to assess the accuracy of state population estimates among this segment of the population. The results of this research could have important implications for improving estimates of state populations, and will shed new light on the accuracy of those estimates.	Hans	 Johnson	Joseph	M. Hayes
2008	41	Innovative Applications of Administrative Records in Demographic Research	Earnings Losses of Older Displaced Workers: A Detailed Analysis with Administrative Data	This paper provides detailed estimates of earnings losses of older workers (ages 40 and over) who experience mass layoffs relative to a continuously employed comparison group. Relative to previous research that utilized survey data, the analysis here employs administrative data from unemployment insurance records in the State of Connecticut. This provides the basis for detailed, disaggregated estimates by age, gender, and industry of employment. The results indicate that earnings losses from mass layoffs are sustained six years following job loss. For the average worker aged 40 at the time of job loss, earnings remain 14% below the comparison group six years later. The equivalent figure for those ages 70 and over is 63%. The earnings losses by gender are generally larger for men than women, but typically represent similar proportions. Across industries, the largest losses occur in the Business and Professional Services, Finance Insurance and Real Estate, and Manufacturing industries.	Kenneth	 Couch	Nicholas	A Jolly	Dana	W Placzek
2008	41	Innovative Applications of Administrative Records in Demographic Research	Going Behind the Gender Wage Gap: Are Women Less Educated or Are they in Worse Firms?	Using linked employee-employer data, this paper measures and decomposes the differences in the earnings distribution between male and female employees in Germany. I extend the traditional decomposition to disentangle the effect of human capital characteristics and the effect of firm characteristics in explaining the gender wage gap. Furthermore, I implement the decomposition across the whole wage distribution with the method proposed by Machado and Mata (2005). Thereby, I take into account the dependence between the human capital endowment of individuals and workplace characteristics. My decomposition detects that female employees are better educated then men in the lower tail of the wage distribution but that they work in inferior firms. In the upper tail of the distribution men and women work in similar firms but the female employees have less human capital.	Anja	 Heinze
2008	42	Economic Growth, Gender, and Intergenerational Relations	Low Fertility, Human Capital, and Macroeconomics	In the standard Solow neo-classical growth framework, low fertility leads to capital deepening and, hence, to higher per capita consumption. Samuelson raised the possibility, however, that lower population growth may reduce welfare if workers make intergenerational transfers to the elderly (Samuelson 1975; 1976). This paper revisits Samuelson’s conjecture and addresses two questions. First, can low fertility lead to a decline in per capita consumption when the saving rate is endogenously determined? Second, how are conclusions modified if low fertility leads to greater investment in human capital (Becker 1960; Becker and Tomes 1976; Becker and Barro 1988)? Empirical analysis is based on new estimates of the economic lifecycle (age profiles of consumption and labor income), public and private spending on education and health, intergenerational transfers, and other cross-sectional and time-series data. The data are being compiled by research teams in 23 countries collaborating on the development of National Transfer Accounts.	Ronald	 Lee	Andrew	 Mason
2008	42	Economic Growth, Gender, and Intergenerational Relations	Fertility, Female Labor Force Participation, and the Demographic Dividend	We estimate the effect of fertility on female labor force participation on a cross-country panel data using abortion legislation as an instrument for fertility. We find a large negative effect of the fertility rate on female labor force participation. The direct effect is concentrated on those aged 20-39 but we find that cohort participation is persistent over time giving an effect in older women. We present a simulation model of the effect of fertility reduction on income per capita taking into account these changes in female labor force participation as well as population numbers and age structure.	David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning	Guenther	 Fink	Jocelyn	E. Finlay
2008	42	Economic Growth, Gender, and Intergenerational Relations	Impacts of Health Condition on Economic Growth in the 1990s: An Analysis for the Brazilian States	This paper aims to test the relationship between health and economic growth. Two main causalities were discussed: if health would directly increase labor productivity or if it would, indirectly, intensify the positive effect of education on growth. We run two basic specifications: the first one includes the proxy for health together with traditional variables usually discussed in the economic growth literature; the second one includes interaction term to capture the indirect effect of health through education. We used as proxy health status infant mortality rate and proportion of deaths by vascular diseases, diabetes, cancer, transmissible illnesses, AIDS, homicides and badly-defined causes. Our main results indicate that health spurs growth: the better the population health conditions the higher the economic growth independently of the health measure analyzed. However, the main effect of health status on economic growth is indirect. Localities presenting higher infant mortality rates tended to show lower educational returns.	Kenya	V. Noronha	Lízia	 Figueirêdo	Monica	V. Andrade
2008	42	Economic Growth, Gender, and Intergenerational Relations	Social Capital’s Dark Side and Patriarchy in India	Social capital is often extolled as a benevolent resource, but in India it may also work to enhance restrictions placed on women’s autonomy, revealing a darker side. Using new data from the India Human Development Survey (N=41,544), I examine the relationship between social capital and women’s autonomy. I argue that households which are well tied into their communities avail themselves to greater scrutiny and thus anticipate and react to the prescriptions of dominant, patriarchal norms. This study employs multivariate logistic and ordinal logistic regression to model the relationship between four measures of women’s autonomy and the social capital of households: 1) wearing a veil; 2) eating order during meals; 3) mobility; 4) and decision making. A male-first eating order and restrictions on mobility are demonstrated to be associated with higher levels of social capital.	Lester	 Andrist
2008	43	School and Teacher Quality: Levels and Distribution	School Quality and Student Achievement in Kenya	I utilize data from the Kenyan secondary school system to obtain causal estimates of the effects of school quality on student achievement. Whereas most studies on the effects of school quality on student achievement generally face difficulties in obtaining unbiased estimates due to the non-random selection of students into schools, the placement of students into government secondary schools in Kenya is based on national primary schools test scores and district quotas. Using a unique data set containing high school and primary school test scores, district of origin and school level information for every high school exam taker in the country, I compare the high school examination outcomes of students from the same district who had very similar primary school test scores but were assigned to different schools due to the quota. I extend the analysis to examine whether peer effects or school inputs have a greater effect on student performance.	Isaac	 Mbiti
2008	43	School and Teacher Quality: Levels and Distribution	Measuring Primary and Secondary School Characteristics: A Group-Based Modeling Approach	In this paper we introduce a new way to evaluate the educational resources that young people encounter as they make their way from kindergarten to high school graduation. Using recent methodological advances in group-based modeling and a unique data set, we empirically test for and identify a series of categorically distinct “school quality” trajectories. The results show that these trajectories vary significantly in terms of their shape and slope, their prevalence within the sampled population, and in the sociodemographic makeup of their constituent members. We conclude by offering some initial thoughts on how this approach can be used to assess dependencies between school characteristics, educational outcomes, and occupational attainment across the life-course.	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners	John	R. Warren
2008	43	School and Teacher Quality: Levels and Distribution	Do the Most Effective Math and Science Teachers Leave?: Evidence on Turnover among Middle School Teachers in a Large Urban School District	Using a merged teacher-student data set from a large urban district, we examine whether the most effective teachers are more likely to leave their school district or transfer within the district. We employ a multi-level model to see whether middle school math and science teachers who added the most value (in terms of fall to spring academic growth, measured by standardized tests) were more likely to leave or transfer. We find that teachers who remained in the district value were more effective with their students than those who left. Among teachers who remained in the district, value added did not predict whether a teacher would transfer schools.	Ruth	Curran  Neild	Vaughan	 Byrnes	Elizabeth	 Farley-Ripple
2008	43	School and Teacher Quality: Levels and Distribution	Measuring and Assessing School Quality in Rural Malawi	In developing countries, the school is the main learning and socializing institution outside the family. Investments in schooling are critical for individual poverty alleviation, the achievement of gender equity and empowerment, and societal economic growth. This paper uses the first wave of a longitudinal study on primary school quality and its effect on adolescents in two districts in Malawi to 1) develop indicators of school quality; 2) rank schools by these indicators; 3) examine variability in these indicators by exposure to significant donor investment in teacher training programs and community infrastructure and involvement; and 4) investigate, using the school as the unit of analysis, the association between school quality and several educational outcomes including a) estimates of primary completion and secondary progression, b) aggregated scores on the literacy and math exams administered as part of the data collection, and c) results on the exam for the primary school leaving certificate.	Paul	C. Hewett	Barbara	S Mensch	Joseph	 Chimombo	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Richard	 Gregory
2008	44	School Demography	An Overview of School District Demography Resources from the U.S. Census Bureau	The American Community Survey is U.S. Census Bureau’s first standard demographic data product to provide pre-summarized school district demographic data, but the Bureau has a long history of developing customized school district demographic, geographic, and fiscal data to support educational planning and program administration. This presentation briefly reviews the historic development of school district demographic and geographic data production at the Census Bureau, and then provides an overview of current activities. Extended attention will be given to the advent of annual ACS school district custom tabulations, but the discussion will also highlight Title 1 small area income and poverty estimates, district geographic boundary updates, school locale assignments, and the annual survey of school district finance. The presentation will conclude with brief comments on current and future plans for school and school district data products.	Douglas	 Geverdt
2008	44	School Demography	Incorporating Census Data in School Demography	This presentation will address various ways that Census data might be used in school demography projects from the perspective of an applied user. We will highlight specific variables that we have found useful for providing background information to K-12 school districts and institutions of higher education, offering examples from our work. In particular, we will focus on the transition toward American Community Survey data, including its use, opportunities, and challenges with respect to school demography.	Richelle	 Winkler	Sarah	 Kemp
2008	44	School Demography	Linking Tax-lot and Student Record Data - Applications in School Planning	This paper is about school demography, school planning, and linking tax-lot files to student record data for better school planning. The tax-lot data provide information on such things as housing structure type, housing values, year built, square footage, and assessed land and structure values. The student record data provide such information as age, race, and gender of the students. GIS tools are used to link the tax-lot and student record data. Knowledge of how students are associated with various types of housing can help in understanding demographic changes and in providing better school enrollment forecasts. This paper explains and illustrates how this linkage is achieved and provides some examples of how the resultant data are used in school planning. It also attempts to provide some insights into limitation of the tax-lot database when used for other than its principal purpose, providing fair tax bills.	Richard	 Lycan
2008	44	School Demography	Does Projecting School District Enrollments by Race Produce More Accurate Results?	Since different races have unique fertility rates and migration patterns, performing school district enrollment projections by race and aggregating to a total may be more accurate than performing enrollment projections with all races combined. Twelve school districts in New Jersey of varying overall size and majority race percentages were used in this study. Using historical enrollment data for a five-year period, the Cohort-Survival Ratio method was employed to project enrollment for a four-year period, 2003-04 through 2006-07. Separate projections were completed both by race and with all races combined. Projected enrollments were compared to actual enrollments in each district for both methods used. Absolute Mean Error Rates (AMER) were calculated for each district for the prediction time period. The results showed that the projections with all races combined had lower AMERs for smaller districts than when projections were performed by race, but the results were mixed for larger districts.	Richard	S Grip
2008	44	School Demography	Cohort Projection Models for School Enrollment Are a Special Case of Vector Autoregressive Models in Macroeconomics (and Why This Might Help Us)	Current forecasting practice, which is mandated administratively, and sometimes legally, makes use of the cohort projection framework--the useful demographic observation that the number of 9th graders in year t+1 looks a lot like the number of 8th graders in year t. In this paper, I outline the standard cohort projection framework and show that it is a special, deterministic case of a familiar macroeconometric model for forecasting, the vector autoregressive model (VAR). In macroeconometric forecasting, there is a tendency to let the data decide the parameters of these models (which can be rearranged as cohort projection ratios); or the data are blended by Bayesian methods with some prior about the parameters, such as a random walk. Viewed from this perspective, what we do in school forecasting amounts to a prior so strong that we ignore the data! Maybe we should relax this unrecognized habit. I illustrate with data.	Herbert	L. Smith
2008	45	Demography of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders	Uneven Growth in the Enumerated Native Hawaiian Population	The enumerated Native Hawaiian population increased remarkably between 1990 and 2000. Who are the new Native Hawaiians? I use demographic techniques to develop a picture of the age, gender, educational attainment, and birthplace patterns within this newly identified element of the Native Hawaiian population. The analyses reveal demographic correlates of changing racial identification. I am particularly interested in learning whether it is possible that every surviving person who reported Native Hawaiian in 1990 reported single-race Native Hawaiian in 2000. If the population numbers do not support this possibility, then the analyses would provide evidence that multiracial Native Hawaiians must be included in cross-time analyses of this population. This analysis also provides policy-relevant information about ways in which the Native Hawaiian population has changed and may continue to grow.	Carolyn	A. Liebler
2008	45	Demography of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders	Like a Like: Dispelling the Younger Hawaiian Population Statistics Myth	In response to claims of bias in reports of Native Hawaiian well-being statistics, this paper applies a simple methodology, age standardization, to selected measures of well-being to determine whether observed disparities among Native Hawaiians persist when controlling for age structure. Although age-standardizition of Census 2000 data reduced gaps between Native Hawaiians and the control population, non-Hispanic Whites, for most of the well-being measures examined, it did so only marginally: Native Hawaiians continue to exhibit significantly worse educational, health and economic disadvantages. These findings show no support for the hypothesis that the younger Native Hawaiian population age structure is the source of social, educational, health and economic disadvantages. These findings have substantial implications, both locally and globally, as supplements to the existing efforts of indigenous populations to create broader understanding (and responsible reporting) of native concerns with reliable and accurate data.	Nolan	J. Malone
2008	45	Demography of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders	Who Marries Immigrants?: Marriage Trends among America's New Second Generation	Rates of Asian and Hispanic intermarriage with whites declined for the first time during the 1990s (Qian & Lichter 2007). One hypothesis, which we test here, is that the recent influx of new immigrants has apparently provided an expanding marriage market for second-and third-generation Asians and Hispanics, reinforced cultural and ethnic identity, and slowed the process of marital assimilation. In this paper, we use data from the March Current Population Survey (1994-2006) to identify second-generation Asians and Hispanics who marry (1) foreign-born pan-ethnics; (2) native-born pan-ethnics; and (3) whites. A working assumption is that marriages to foreign-born pan-ethnics (vis-à-vis marriage to either native-born minorities or to whites) both challenge straightline assimilation theory and represent a possible departure from full social and economic incorporation of new immigrant groups into American society. Our results reveal declining rates of marriage over the study period with whites and their native-born minority counterparts.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Julie	H Carmalt
2008	45	Demography of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders	Declining Significance of Race?: The Case of Japanese American Marriage Patterns	Japanese Americans are a useful group with which to test the thesis that the significance of race is declining. They are often noted as having earnings similar to non-Hispanic whites, yet have also experienced exclusionary events in the U.S and exhibit a tendency toward racial/ethnic homogamy. I analyze the trends in Japanese Americans’ intermarriage level with non-Hispanic whites and their marriage timing relative to that of non-Hispanic whites using several data sets: the Japanese-American Research Project, the General Social Survey, the Census, and the Japanese Evacuation and Resettlement Study. Of particular interest are their level of intermarriage with non-Hispanic whites and their marriage timing relative to whites (with some focus on German Americans and Italian Americans) before and after historical events such as the World War II internment and redress. Results have implications for the link between exclusionary historical events and the level of integration of a racial/ethnic group.	Hiromi	 Ono
2008	46	Contextual Influences on Employment and Motherhood Outcomes	Motherhood, Caregiving Status, and Employment Outcomes in High-Income Countries: A Cross-National Analysis	In this paper, we assess the effects of being a mother, relative to childless women and fathers, on several labor market outcomes. We analyze and compare the “motherhood effect” across countries, including the U.S. and a diverse group of European countries. Our outcomes include employment, work hours, and earnings, as well as various markers of job quality, such as being a professional, supervising others, holding a permanent job contract, and job tenure. In addition to analyzing the effects of motherhood status per se, we extend existing research by directly assessing the effect of self-reported care giving status (i.e., caring for children or others) on multiple employment-related outcomes. We also consider the determinants of engagement in care giving and how those vary cross-nationally. To carry out our analyses, we use new microdata (available as of 2007) from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), a cross-national archive of harmonized microdata sets.	Helen	 Connolly	Teresa	 Munzi	Janet	C. Gornick
2008	46	Contextual Influences on Employment and Motherhood Outcomes	Reproducing Occupational Inequality: Marriage, Parenthood and the Gender Divide in Occupations	It is well established that class and gender predict occupational placement across advanced industrialized countries. We document a third dimension to occupational segregation associated with family responsibilities. Using data from ten countries contained in the Luxembourg Income Study we find that family responsibilities influence occupational selection differently for men and women. There is less variability in the effects of family status characteristics on men's occupational selection than on women's across countries. Furthermore, family responsibilities consistently sort men into high-wage occupations, whereas the pattern for women is bifurcated - simultaneously sorting women into low- and high-wage occupations. The next stage of the research is to combine the micro-level data with national-level data on labor market conditions, family policies, and the division of household labor to explore cross-national variation in the influence of family responsibilities on placement into specific occupational categories.	Jennifer	L. Hook	Becky	 Pettit
2008	46	Contextual Influences on Employment and Motherhood Outcomes	Familistic Attitudes, Dual Burden and Fertility in Italy	The objective of the paper is to explore variables pertinent to contemporary lifestyles and attitudes in Italy in order to evaluate their relationship/effect on dual burden outcomes and the desired number of children. More specifically, we are interested in understanding how both attitudinal variables related to the SDT and indicators of gender relations affect women's level of satisfaction with the division of domestic work and the desired to have a child within three years. Intermediate variables and control variables, such as women’s education, women’s cohort, women's external work, their proximity to their families, and the presence of young children are also taken into account. Regional and cohort variation is also examined. The nationally 2003 representative survey, Famiglie Soggetti Sociali provides the data source. Our results provide some support for dual burden and SDT viewpoints.	Ester	L. Rizzi	Maya	 Judd	Michael	J. White	Laura	 Bernardi	David	I. Kertzer
2008	46	Contextual Influences on Employment and Motherhood Outcomes	Family Policy and the Causal Effect of Mother's Employment on Childbearing Outcomes in Norway	Family policy in the Nordic countries makes a combination of female labour work and childrearing feasible, and the majority of mothers, including those with small children, are employed outside the home. This paper investigates the relationship between family policy and the casual effect of mother's employment on childbearing outcomes in Norway. Using a simultaneous equation modeling approach we take into account the possible endogeneity of mother's employment status due to fertility preferences. The analysis is based on longitudinal information on mothers work activity, parental leave use and childbearing from administrative register data of all intact unions during a 10 year period. We assume there are policy implications for the effect of the mother's employment on her fertility decisions, i.e. differences due to human capital investments and parents use of parental leave policy, but only small differences due to the mother's labour market attachment.	Trude	 Lappegård	Mette	 Gerster
2008	47	Family Change in Historical Perspective	Determinants of Marriage Timing and Prevalence in Northeast China, 1749-1912	We examine marriage in Liaoning and Heilongjiang in Northeast China between 1749 and 1909. We extend on previous analysis of the influence of household and family context on the timing of male first marriage in Liaoning in several ways. First, we carry out what to our knowledge is the first quantitative analysis of the determinants of female first marriage for a historical Chinese population. Second, we compare the importance of socioeconomic status, institutional context, and family and kin organization in shaping marriage chances. Through application of discrete-time event history analysis to a large database of life histories constructed from household registers, we show that category of institutional affiliation was an important determinant of marriage chances, alongside individual and family socioeconomic status. We conclude with an assessment of the implications for marriage patterns in China of hypergamy, arranged marriage, and widow and widower remarriage.	Shuang	 Chen	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	Z. Lee
2008	47	Family Change in Historical Perspective	The Cambodian Family after the Khmer Rouge Genocide: Continuity and Change	Between wobbly past foundations after the Khmer Rouge genocide (1975-1979) and fast and challenging recent modernization changes, the Khmer family attempts to adapt itself and maintain continuity. In this paper, we will focus on characterizing both demographic changes and the determinants of these changes that have taken place in Khmer households structures during the last decade. Furthermore, a comparative perspective of individuals' life spans who did or did not experience the KR regime will permit a better understanding of the impact of those socioeconomic events on family life cycles. MIPopLab panel data and sequential analyzes will demonstrate the effect of the main demographic events on Khmer household changes.	Floriane	 Demont	Patrick	 Heuveline
2008	47	Family Change in Historical Perspective	The May-December Relationship Since 1850: Age Homogamy in the U.S.	The discrepancy between the ages of husbands and wives in the U.S. has fallen continuously throughout the twentieth century: husbands were nearly five years older than their spouses in 1900, but were just over two years older in 2000. Though this pattern was noted more than twenty years ago, we trace this evolution back into the second half of the nineteenth century. We find that the gap between husbands and wives’ ages actually rose from 1850 until 1880, before it began its twentieth century decline. We explore this previously unknown increase in age heterogamy, assessing the role of the Civil War, the changing role of women in the economy, and the westward expansion of the U.S. Though all played a role, the last was most important. We also explore the impact of age heterogamy wives and their children.	Joseph	 Ferrie	Karen	 Rolf
2008	47	Family Change in Historical Perspective	Cohabitation, Marriage, and Divorce in the United States: Trends and Racial Differentials, 1970-2002	On a time scale of more than three decades, this paper offers a unique description of marriage/union formation and dissolution for four racial/ethnic groups. We pool retrospective histories from a number of surveys and use this common data set to estimate the life-time likelihood of experiencing the marital/union status transitions, following the multi-state status life table approach. Our estimates confirm general findings in the literature, but our methodology also allows estimation of unique summary measures. The findings include a tremendous increase in life-time probability of cohabitation, a substantial decrease in direct transition from never-married to married, and a significant decrease in overall probability of ever-married and re-married, as well as a substantial decrease in probability of transition from cohabiting to marrying. We also present and discuss for the first time about the enormous racial differentials in marital/union formation and dissolution in the past more than three decades	Yi	 Zeng	S.	Philip  Morgan	Zhenglian	 Wang	Danan	 Gu	Chingli	 Yang
2008	48	Genetic Influences on Health and Mortality	Genetics and the Social Science Explanation of Individual Outcomes	Accumulating evidence from behavioral genetics indicates that the vast   majority of  individual-level outcomes of abiding sociological interest are   genetically influenced to a  substantial degree. This ubiquitous influence raises the question of the   place of genetics  in social science explanations of these outcomes. Genomic causation is   described from a  counterfactualist perspective, which makes its complexity plain and   highlights the  distinction between identifying causes and substantiating explanations.   For explanation,  genomic causation of outcomes must be understood as strictly mediated by   the body.   One implication is that the challenge of behavioral genetics for   sociology is much more a  challenge from psychology than biology, and a main role for genetics in   explanation is as  a placeholder for ignorance of more proximate influences of   psychological and other  embodied variation. Social scientists should not take this challenge   from psychology as  suggesting any fundamental explanatory place for either it or genetics,   but the contingent  importance of genetic and psychological characteristics is itself   available for sociological  investigation.	Jeremy	 Freese
2008	48	Genetic Influences on Health and Mortality	DNA Collection in a Social Science Study: A Pilot Study of Peer Impacts on Attitudes and Drinking Behavior	We report the experiences and participation rates of a pilot study of college drinking behavior incorporating both web survey and DNA collection components.  78% of the eligible sample completed the web survey, and 83.2% of those submitted DNA samples, for an overall participation rate of 64.9%.  No evidence of lower participation rates along gender or racial/ethnic lines was observed, although there is some suggestive evidence of different levels of participant comfort with the process by race.  We conclude that genetic data can readily be collected by traditional social science research teams.	Amy	 Lucas	Jonathan	 Daw	Hedwig	 Lee	Craig	 Owen	Emily	 McKendry-Smith
2008	48	Genetic Influences on Health and Mortality	The Origins of Sex Imbalance in Early Age Mortality	Sex difference in mortality during infancy and childhood is decomposed into the effects of pre-birth environmental factors, child biology, and parental preferences. Exploiting variation in sex difference in mortality in the population of twins and within male-female twin pairs, and variation in parental bias in sub-Saharan Africa and India, we show that : (1) pre-birth environmental factors account for a large fraction of the higher mortality rates generally observed among males in the general population; (2) male biological make-up contributes to the elevated mortality of male children only during infancy, but its role has been previously overstated; however, contrary to the long-held biological theory of sex gap in morbidity and mortality, male biological make-up favors male survival during childhood; (3) parental discrimination against females increases mortality in this sex in India, but usual estimates of sex gap understate its effect by 400 percent during infancy, and 150 percent during childhood.	Roland	 Pongou
2008	48	Genetic Influences on Health and Mortality	Effects of BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutations on Fertility and Later-Life Survival	The purpose of this study is to address three questions. First, from an evolutionary standpoint, what mechanisms might explain why BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations persist in human populations given their adverse health consequences effects? Second, how has fertility behavior changed with the advent of genetic testing where individuals may now make family planning decisions based on a family cancer history or predictive genetic risk information heretofore unavailable? What is the mortality consequence of being a BRCA1/2 mutation carrier? We use the Utah Population Database linked to two large samples where BRCA1/2 mutation status is known; we have identified 177 putative obligate carriers and 449 tested carriers as well as 200,000 matched controls. We find that female mutation carriers have excess fertility and post-menopausal mortality; there is also support for a shrinking influence of carrier status over time.	Ken	R. Smith	Heidi	 Hanson	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Saundra	 Buys
2008	50	Socio-Cultural and Gender Dimensions of Sexual Behavior and STDs	Differences in Men’s and Women’s Sexual and Romantic Partnerships in Kenya: How Big is the Gender Gap?	Young men and women in Kisumu, Kenya experience strikingly different patterns of risk of acquiring HIV/AIDS. These differences are undoubtedly related to differences in partnership formation, disruption, and sexual behaviors within these partnerships. Previous research on men and women have found enormous gaps in young men’s and women’s reported levels of sexual contact, sexual frequency, and condom use; yet they have been unable to identify the source of these differences primarily due to severe data limitations. This paper draws on newly collected and exceptionally rich data containing the ten-year relationship histories of 1629 young men and women interviewed in Kisumu, Kenya during the summer of 2007. These data also contain 311 matched married and unmarried couples. Using these data, we are able to explore differences in men and women’s relationship history experiences, their aspirations and perceptions with respect to these relationships, and their differences in reporting within these relationships.	Shelley	 Clark	Caroline	 Kabiru
2008	50	Socio-Cultural and Gender Dimensions of Sexual Behavior and STDs	Busy Bodies?: An Analysis of Sex Partner Counts of American Teens	This study is a 3-part analysis of the number of heterosexual partners reported by American adolescents. Part 1 shows that, on average, boys report 80 percent more partners than girls, mirroring recent CDC data on American adults. Exploring determinants of an individual’s partner count, we find some interesting asymmetries between boys and girls. Part 2 moves beyond means to dispersion, a factor in STD transmission), and finds correlations between dispersion and socioeconomic factors. The third part compares dispersion among boys with dispersion among girls, finding gender asymmetry that may be a precursor to phenomena such as multiple-partner fertility, family complexity, and effective polygyny. Overall, the degree of dispersion for boys is slightly greater. Looking instead at subgroups defined by ethnicity, religiosity, household income, or parental education level, the direction and degree of the gender asymmetry vary significantly.	Eirik	 Evenhouse	Siobhan	 Reilly
2008	50	Socio-Cultural and Gender Dimensions of Sexual Behavior and STDs	Sexual Behavior among Adults in the U.S..: A Couples-Based Approach	We adopt a couple’s perspective to gain a better understanding of factors that affect the sexual behaviors of adult couples in the U.S. Specifically, we use personal and relationship characteristics as reported by each partner in marital, cohabiting, and dating relationships to examine how the female and male partner reports are related to reports of their sexual behaviors and whether the female or male’s reports are more influential. We take relationship power explicitly into account and examine its main and interactive effects on the couple’s behaviors. We also examine whether the effects of male and female characteristics differ by relationship type. Data used for this study come from the recently completed National Couples Survey, in which completed interviews were obtained from both partners of 1,009 adult couples.	John	O.G. Billy	William	R. Grady	Daniel	H. Klepinger	Morgan	 Sill
2008	50	Socio-Cultural and Gender Dimensions of Sexual Behavior and STDs	Meanings, Myths and Measurement: Estimating HIV/AIDS Prevalence in the Southern Caucasus	This paper examines patterns in HIV screening in the southern Caucasus (1994- 2006) to illustrate how epidemiologically knowledge is constructed within the constraints of local meanings and mythologies relating to disease. Using official testing data, legislation on testing, media reports and in depth interviews with National HIV/AIDS center staffs, IGO officials and epidemiologists in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, I analyze the cultural and contextual factors influencing testing coverage, sentinel studies and estimation. Social beliefs regarding HIV/AIDS influence information reception, risk perception, voluntary testing, mandatory testing and sentinel testing approaches. The wide variations in estimated HIV prevalence in the region, mandatory testing structure and lack of consensus regarding the number of individuals engaged in risk-related behavior continue to limit the generation of precise estimations through standard epidemiological techniques and estimation procedures, making the shift to evidence based assessment in the region contentious. Estimation modifications reflecting local conditions are discussed.	Cynthia	 Buckley
2008	51	The Demography of HIV/AIDS	Sex Ratios of HIV Prevalence: Evidence from the DHS	Amid growing concern of a ‘feminizing’ global HIV/AIDS pandemic, new nationally representative HIV seroprevalence studies from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) make possible for the first time an assessment of variation in the sex ratios of HIV prevalence. This paper analyzes variation in the female-to-male ratios of HIV prevalence estimated in 16 recent DHS from Africa. Results confirm that while in the context of generalized epidemics, women tend to have higher HIV prevalence than men, prevalence sex ratios vary widely across countries, reflecting highly disparate burdens of disease by gender in some populations. Prevalence sex ratios are associated with several commonly identified correlates of HIV prevalence, such as the prevalence of other sexually transmitted diseases and summary measures of socio-economic status, inter alia. However, multivariate models explain very little of the variation in prevalence sex ratios observed across regions in the 16 DHS surveys.	Sara	 Hertog
2008	51	The Demography of HIV/AIDS	Aggregate Effects of HIV/AIDS on Development	The demographic structure of the population and its evolution are key in the process of economic development. In this context, HIV/AIDS appears to be a major disruption that drastically alters population dynamics and composition through well-defined channels: 1) it raises (prominently) the death rates of prime-age individuals raising widowhood and orphanhood and shortening life expectancy; 2) it reduces fertility rates (and population growth); 3) it increases marital reshuffling (divorces go up); and 4) it dampens the productivity of the sick raising their consumption/income ratio (and hence the need of transfers for them). I calibrate a population projection matrix model that inherits the properties of the HIV/AIDS demography using the MDICP panel data set. I incorporate this HIV/AIDS population dynamics into an economic development theory that explains transitions from Malthusian-stagnant-growth regimes to modern-growth regimes in order to quantify the impact HIV/AIDS has on growth take-off dates and speed of economic transitions in Sub-Saharan countries.	Raul	 Santaeulalia-Llopis
2008	51	The Demography of HIV/AIDS	Critique of Early Models of the Demographic Impact of HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa Based on Contemporary Empirical Data from Zimbabwe	Soon after HIV/AIDS emerged in sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s, it was recognised that the full demographic impact might not become apparent for more than 20 years. Early mathematical models varied in their predictions of the severity of the impact on population growth. In pessimistic scenarios, reductions in rates of natural increase of 3.5% per annum to below zero were envisaged but little impact on dependency ratios was expected. Twenty years into the epidemic in eastern Zimbabwe, where HIV prevalence peaked at around 33% in the worst-affected areas, HIV/AIDS reduced the rate of natural increase from 2.9% to 1.0% per annum. The dependency ratio fell from 1.21 to 0.78, the impact of AIDS mortality being outweighed by fertility decline. In hindsight, the more pessimistic early models over-estimated the impact on population growth by over-extrapolating initial HIV growth rates or not allowing for heterogeneity in transmissibility and sexual risk behaviour.	Simon	 Gregson	Constance	 Nyamukapa	Benjamin	A. Lopman	Phyllis	 Mushati	Geoff	P Garnett	Roy	M Anderson
2008	51	The Demography of HIV/AIDS	Has the HIV Epidemic Peaked?	This study first reviews the highly diverse regional and country patterns of HIV epidemics and discusses possible causes of the geographic variation in epidemic sizes. Past trends and projections of the epidemics are presented next and the peak years of epidemics are estimated. The potential future impact of new prevention technologies is briefly assessed. The study concludes with a summary of the future impact of the epidemic on key demographic variables. The main conclusion of this analysis is that the HIV epidemic reached a major turning point over the past decade. Incidence and prevalence rates have peaked in all world regions between the early 1990s and 2008. But in part due to the life-prolonging effect of ART and population growth, the absolute number of infected individuals is expected to remain high, thus posing a continuing challenge to public health programs.	John	 Bongaarts	Thomas	 Buettner	Gerhard	 Heilig	François	 Pelletier
2008	52	Comparative Perspectives on Undocumented Workers	Just the Facts: Official Reports, Mass Media and the Politics of Unauthorized Migration Estimates in the United Kingdom and United States	The production and dissemination of statistical and demographic information has increased significantly in the last decade given advancements in computational power and information access through the Internet. As such, numbers have become even more powerful and political than when The Politics of Numbers (1987) was released two decades ago—for few subjects has this been more apparent that unauthorized migration. Using content analysis of mass media, internet sources, congressional/parliamentary transcripts, and a short survey of demographic professionals working on immigration-related topics, this paper tracks and analyzes estimates of unauthorized migrant populations issued in high profile UK (2004) and US (2005/06) reports and their subsequent effect on political discourse. Rather than assessing the validity of statistical techniques, the paper focuses on the relationship among quantitative information on unauthorized migration, its production, the mass media, and political power in the United Kingdom and the United States.	Jennifer	 Blakeslee
2008	52	Comparative Perspectives on Undocumented Workers	Household Access to Resources Requiring Identification: Relations with Family Process and Child Development in Low-income Immigrant Families	We apply social exclusion theory to examine how experiences of being an undocumented parent affect family process and children’s development. We examine one dimension of social exclusion relevant to undocumented parents – access to institutions that ask for or provide identification. We created an index of household-level access to four resources (savings account, checking account, driver’s license, and credit card). We hypothesized that groups likely to have higher proportions of undocumented parents would report lower levels of access to these resources, and that lower access would be associated with higher hardship and distress, and lower levels of cognitive stimulation. In turn, we hypothesized that hardship, distress, and stimulation would predict children’s cognitive ability in a standardized assessment. Our hypotheses were largely supported, using three waves of prospective data from a birth cohort study of 324 low-income Mexican, Dominican, and U.S.-born African American parents and their young children in New York City.	Hirokazu	 Yoshikawa	Erin	B. Godfrey	Ann	 Rivera	Catherine	 Tamis-LeMonda
2008	52	Comparative Perspectives on Undocumented Workers	Undocumented Migration and Brokerage: An Exploratory Network Analysis of the  Brazil-US. Migration System	We investigate the role that the intermediate agents (i.e. brokers) carry out in the international migration process of Brazilians to the USA. Considering that around 60% of the Brazilian immigrants in the US enter irregularly in the country, we aim to identify those intermediates that facilitate clandestine migration focusing the analysis on migrants' personal networks. We propose the exploratory social network analysis applied to the case study of Brazilian migration from Governador Valadares, the main outflow area of Brazilian migrants in irregular situation in the US. We analyzed the so-called industry of illegal migration and identified the social actors that intervene (i.e. brokerage) in the migration process – mainly the returned migrants and local middlemen. We try to find out how their roles and functions determine the clandestine migrants' flows, the crossing strategies at the US-Mexico border, and the probability of success of the Brazilian immigrants in the US.	Dimitri	 Fazito	Weber	 Soares
2008	52	Comparative Perspectives on Undocumented Workers	Dimensions of Net Unauthorized Migration over Three Decades	Demographers have tracked the U.S. foreign-born population and the unauthorized share, but uncertainties persist. Component-based estimates for net legal migration are vulnerable to biases on period of arrival, inclusion of residents not yet adjusted, and accounting for return migration. These errors and any inadequacies of the foreign-born estimate affect accuracy of unauthorized migration estimates as residuals, particularly with more detailed characteristics. This presentation is an overview of research on U.S. unauthorized migration, national and state-level populations, in the context of current population programs and the 2010 census, highlighting the value of new strategies and expanded data collection.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield
2008	53	Work and Family	The Importance of Work: Changing Work Commitment Following the Transition to Parenthood	We use a longitudinal approach to examine changes in subjective work commitment among recent mothers in Sweden. In a sample of childless women in 1999, we study changes in the importance of work by 2003 for those who have children compared to those who do not. In 1999, there are no significant differences between the two groups. However, structural equation models show that in 2003, women who gave birth in the period are less work committed. Additional analyses including women with older children indicate that the negative relationship between becoming a parent and work commitment is restricted to the first few years of the child’s life; when women have children older than four years of age, they are not less work committed than non-mothers. We interpret the lower commitment among recent mothers’ as a way of temporarily adjusting to difficulties of juggling work and family during the early pre-school years.	Marie	M. Evertsson	Richard	 Breen
2008	53	Work and Family	Explaining Trends in “Opting Out” among Women, 1981-2006	Using data from the March 1982-2007 CPS and other sources, we analyze trends in “opting out” among women using a direct measure of this behavior: that a woman was not employed last year because she was “taking care of home or family.” Our previous work focused on college-educated mothers, for whom we found that less than 30 percent of the run-up in staying home since 1993 (and none of the pre-1993 decline) was due to factors measured by the CPS: geographic location, personal characteristics, family composition and income. This paper will extend this analysis to all women and expand our earlier probit model to include measures of family wealth, workplace demands, the gender wage gap, and child care costs derived from other sources. The results will enhance our understanding of a high-profile and poorly understood phenomenon, and shed light on women’s decision-making concerning work and family.	Cordelia	 Reimers	Pamela	 Stone
2008	53	Work and Family	Influences of Family Structure and Partner Characteristics on Mothers’ Employment Trajectories	Few studies have compared the employment patterns of new mothers by their marital and relationship statuses. Different patterns in employment by relationship status are likely given the sizable differences in mothers' access to resources such as other family income and child care help as well as differences in human capital and in preferences for work versus homemaking. Additionally, little is known about how unmarried partners may affect mothers’ employment. In this paper, I examine the employment patterns of married and unmarried mothers in the five years after a birth using growth curve models and data from the Fragile Families Study. I find that married, cohabiting and non-resident mothers work a similar number of weeks per year despite significant differences in human capital and social support. All else equal, unmarried mothers work more. Considering fathers’ characteristics adds only marginally to our understanding of mothers’ employment.	Christine	 Percheski
2008	53	Work and Family	Parental Leave Policies and Parents' Employment and Leave-Taking	Utilizing data from the June Current Population Survey (CPS) Fertility Supplement merged with data from other months of the CPS, we describe trends in parents’ employment and leave-taking in the months immediately after they have a new child and analyze the extent to which these behaviors are affected by parental leave policies. The period we examine – from 1988 to 2004 -- is one in which such policies were expanded at both the state and federal level, and we provide the first comprehensive evidence as to how these expansions affected employment and leave-taking for both mothers and fathers over this period. Our main finding is that leave expansions substantially increased leave-taking by new mothers but had little impact on fathers.	Christopher	 Ruhm	Jane	 Waldfogel
2008	54	Child Care, Schooling and Development	Child Care during the Summer and First Grade Year: How Extent and Type of Care Relate to Child Socioemotional Skills	Nearly half of all school-age children are exposed to non-parental care in their early school years and summers, yet, how these typical school-age child care arrangements relate to child outcomes is poorly understood. The present study addresses this gap in the school-age child care literature by examining the links between extent and type of child care during the summer before first grade as well as during the first grade year and children’s socioemotional well-being using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten cohort (ECLSK). In addition, this study uses multiple imputation to produce two different sets of results and compares the estimates from these different imputation specifications with more typical regression estimates. Preliminary results indicate that attending center child care during the summer before first grade is related to increased behavior problems at the end of first grade. First grade child care experiences do not appear to relate to child socioemotional well-being.	Amy	E. Claessens
2008	54	Child Care, Schooling and Development	Impacts of Classroom-based Interventions on Child Behavior Problems: Preliminary Findings from a Randomized Experiment in Head Start Settings	This study investigates the efficacy of a multi-component classroom-based intervention, the Chicago School Readiness Project (CSRP), in reducing preschoolers' behavior problems. Children in the CSRP were enrolled in Head Start programs located in the most disadvantaged Chicago neighborhoods, facing various levels of developmental risks. As a randomized experiment, the CSRP provided multi-component classroom-based intervention to support children's school readiness and to reduce the risk of elevated behavior problems. Using data collected in the fall and spring of Head Start year, preliminary analyses found that overall CSRP benefited children in the treatment group as compared to the control group, whereby children in the treatment group manifested significantly fewer internalizing and externalizing behavior problems, measured by the Behavior Problems Index (BPI) and the Caregiver-Teacher Report Form (C-TRF), than did their control group-enrolled counterparts. The effect sizes ranged from 0.70 to 1.06. The effects were moderated by child gender, race/ethnicity, and family risks.	Fuhua	 Zhai	Cybele	 Raver	Stephanie	 Jones	Christine	 Li-Grining	Bonnie	 Solomon
2008	54	Child Care, Schooling and Development	Parental Satisfaction and the Supply and Quality of Childcare	In order to assist parents with young children to balance family and work, many governments attempt to ensure the provision of accessible childcare. This study investigates how changes in the supply of subsidized childcare are correlated with changes in the utilization of childcare and maternal workforce participation. It combines the new data on the number of subsidized childcare centers in Australia with the 2002-2005 HILDA (longitudinal household survey) based on households’ residential areas. The household-level fixed-effects estimates show that an additional center per 100 children is accompanied by a 35-50% increase in the proportion of households (with more-educated mothers) using center-based childcare and a 14-36% reduction in the proportion of these households using registered nannies. It is also associated with a 32-62% increase in these mothers’ workforce participation. These findings suggest that the effect of subsidized childcare on maternal economic participation is likely to be limited to relatively educated mothers.	Chikako	 Yamauchi
2008	54	Child Care, Schooling and Development	The Spread of Common Illnesses and Effectiveness of Infection Control Practices in Child Care Settings	We explore “infection control practices (ICPs)” as measures of child care quality, and compare “ICP quality” to more widely-used measures of “process quality”. Although we consider a variety of child care settings, we pay particular attention to home-based care because it is relatively neglected in studies of child care quality, yet used disproportionately by low-income women and increasingly subsidized. Results to date indicate: like children in centers, children in large family day-care experience elevated illness rates, especially respiratory infections; lower-income families use settings with poorer ICPs; and better ICPs reduce respiratory illness. Thus, regulations or informational programs that promote ICPs would disproportionately benefit low-income children and families. Results are confirmed in analyses of longitudinal data that control for unmeasured child or family characteristics (child fixed-effects). Future analyses will examine cognitive and behavioral outcomes. The sample is children followed from birth age 4.5 in the NICHD Study of Early Child Care.	Sanders	 Korenman	Rachel	 Gordon	Robert	 Kaestner
2008	55	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Coherent Forecasting of Multiple-Decrement Life Tables: A Test Using Japanese Cause of Death Data	It is attractive to forecast components of mortality, such as causes of death, so that the aggregate is a plausible all-cause forecast, but this has been difficult to achieve. The relative values of the components often fail to behave in a coherent way, leading to an implausible aggregate. This paper abandons the absolute distances of mortality rates and forecasts the relative numbers of deaths in the d(x) columns. Since the d(x) values obey a unit sum constraint for both single and multiple-decrement tables they are intrinsically relative rather than absolute values across decrements as well as ages. Death densities are transformed into the real space so that the full range of multivariate statistics can be applied, then back-transformed to positive values so that the unit sum constraint is honoured. Illustrations of singular value decomposition and regression-based forecasts of d(x) are evaluated for single and multiple decrement life tables.	James	E Oeppen
2008	55	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	The Absolute and Relative Effects of Cohort and Period Mortality Shocks on Later Mortality	I study the effects of cohort and period mortality shocks on later mortality using historical mortality time series for Denmark, England and Wales and Sweden. I define cohort shocks as unexpectedly high/low mortality rates at infancy and early childhood, and period shocks as unexpectedly high/low period mortality rates. The results suggest that for both men and women, cohort shocks measured from annual data are weakly if at all associated with mortality later in life, but period shocks are strongly and positively correlated with mortality at all ages. The effect of a period shock, however, declines with age, indicating that at older ages the proportion of variation not explained by cohort or period effects increases.	Mikko	 Myrskylä
2008	55	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Death Distribution Methods for Estimating Adult Mortality: Sensitivity Analysis with Simulated Data Errors, Revisited	Hill and Choi attempted to test how well the variable-r techniques for estimating adult mortality (Generalised Growth Balance and the Synthetic Extinct Generations methods) perform in the context where data deficiencies violate the assumptions underlying the models. From this work they concluded that each method had strengths and weaknesses and that superior estimates could be derived using a combination of the two methods. However, the version of the SEG method they tested did not account for differential coverage of the censuses. This paper tests the more general version of the model on the same set of scenarios and finds that the SEG method performs so well as to call into question the recommendation that one should use a combination of the two methods. In addition the paper explores the generalisation of these results to scenarios that represent mortality conditions in an African country with a generalised HIV/AIDS epidemic.	Rob	 Dorrington	Ian	M Timaeus
2008	55	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Examining Variance in World Life Spans since 1960	Variance in life span represents a fundamental inequality in well-being, and like shorter average life span, it is also an economic cost. Previous research has explored the trends in average life expectancy worldwide and economists have estimated their contribution to human well-being. Trends in the variance are less well understood because mortality data are either scarce or virtually nonexistent for developing countries. Statistical demographers and epidemiologists are now engaged in many efforts to improve mortality measurement in developing countries. In this paper, I report preliminary results from a new study of historical trends in the variance in the age at death that merely examines what we currently know about mortality in developing countries.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2008	56	Migration and Education	International Migration and Schooling as Alternative Means of Social Mobility in Mexico	Our hypothesis states that the migration experience at the household and the community level can change family preferences, increasing the value of migration as a more efficient means for family social mobility, and decreasing the value attributed to formal education. In this case, the relaxation of monetary constraints attributed to remittances may not increase the amounts families spend in schooling, and can even decrease them as families invest more in trying to get another member into the international labor market. Using the National Survey of Mexican Rural Households (ENHRUM), this paper tries to understand the role migration and remittances play in the schooling decisions of rural households. We analyze two different dimensions of education: school attendance and schooling years, for two different groups of population classified by gender: 11 to 15 and 16 to 19 years old. Our results show strong gender effects of household migration experience on schooling	Carla	 Pederzini	Liliana	 Meza
2008	56	Migration and Education	Moving in and Moving up: Migration and Schooling Outcomes among Children in Nairobi Slums	This paper seeks to establish whether there is a difference in various schooling outcomes among recent migrants and long term residents in two slum communities in Nairobi. Data come from two longitudinal studies; the Nairobi urban demographic and health surveillance system (NUHDSS) and the education research project that is nested on the NUHDSS.     Most of the existing research is based on mobility into better environments, however, this study will be looking at a situation that is unique- mobility into a poorer physical environment and areas lacking in school infrastructure. Results indicate that although recent migrants are less likely to progress from one grade to another, they are also less likely to drop out of school compared to long term residents. These findings have implications on existing education policy which should take special consideration of migrant children, who have to adjust to various challenges including but not limited to schooling.	Kanyiva	 Muindi	Evangeline	N Nderu	Ousmane	 Faye
2008	56	Migration and Education	Parental Migration and Children's Education in Mexico: How Important is Child Age at the Time of Parent's Migration?	What are the long-term effects of parental migration on child education? Does child age at the time of parental migration play a role in the outcome? This paper uses a family fixed-effects regression model to get around the endogeneity of parental migration and suggests that pushing a father's U.S. migration earlier in a child's life leads to an increase in a child’s educational attainment—by as much as two years if that migration is undertaken before the child’s birth. These results are consistent with a story in which U.S. migration enables families to save for their children's educations and/or a situation in which the experience of U.S. migration translates to increased investments in children's educations. These findings also suggest that policies aimed at targeting migrant workers should generally promote migration before the birth of children over migration later in life.	Francisca	M. Antman
2008	56	Migration and Education	Immigrants and Natives in the U.S. Science and Engineering Workforce, 1994-2006	Between 1994 and 2006 the foreign born-to-native S&E ratio (FSE/NSE) doubled. I decompose this change into a migration effect (which accounts for migration in general), a proportional college effect (which accounts for the relative proportions of college graduates among migrant and native workers) and a proportional S&E effect (which accounts for the relative proportions of S&Es among migrant and native college-educated workers.) Results show that the migration effect explains about three-quarters of the increase in FSE/NSE during 1994-2006. The proportional S&E effect was largest in 1995-1998, suggesting that the friendliest immigration policy toward scientists and engineers is a booming economy. Increases in the H-1B visa cap in 1999 and in 2001 were of little consequence: if the foreign born-to-native S&E ratio had been determined by the immigration of S&E alone, it would have actually decreased in 1998-2001, even as government took action to promote precisely this type of migration.	Mariano	 Sana
2008	57	Factors Influencing the Relationship between Socioeconomic Status and Adult Health	Social Change and Socioeconomic Disparity in Health over the Life Course: The Case of China	With the use of a longitudinal dataset (China Health and Nutrition Survey), we examine socioeconomic differentials in health over individuals’ adult life course in China. Further, we study how their health trajectories can be shaped by ongoing socioeconomic transformation and how historical events may leave different imprints on successive cohorts’ life experiences and consequently diverging health outcomes. The study builds on and extends recently developed methodologies on cohort variations in age trajectories of health in the U.S. First, we test the cumulative advantage theory by modeling SES differentials in growth trajectories of health within cohorts (i.e., the age by SES interaction effects net of cohort effects). Second, we test the inter-cohort change hypothesis by modeling variations in SES disparities in trajectories of health across birth cohorts (i.e., three-way interaction effects between cohort, age and SES). Third, we test whether the cohort difference in health disparities is conditioned by rural and urban residence.	Feinian	 Chen	Yang	 Yang	Guangya	 Liu
2008	57	Factors Influencing the Relationship between Socioeconomic Status and Adult Health	Reversal of Fortune: Income Disparities in Cholesterol Before and After the Era of Statins	Cholesterol levels, a central risk factor for cardiovascular disease, have been significantly altered in recent years by pharmaceutical innovation. Introduced in the late 1980’s, statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) offered, for the first time, highly effective drug control. In this paper, we examine income disparities in cholesterol before and after the introduction of statins. As an expensive and potent new technology, statins may be disproportionately adopted those who are better resourced, creating or exacerbating social disparities. Using NHANES data from 1976 to 2004, we find that income gradients for both total cholesterol and fasting LDL were initially positive, but then reversed and became negative in the era of statin use. While the advantaged were once more likely to have high levels of cholesterol, they are now less likely to have such unhealthy outcomes. These secular changes serve as forceful example of social conditions as a fundamental cause of disease.	Virginia	W. Chang	Diane	S. Lauderdale
2008	57	Factors Influencing the Relationship between Socioeconomic Status and Adult Health	Reaping what we Sow: Early 20th Century State School Policies, Cognitive Skills, and Elder Health	Although cognitive skills correlate with health, whether cognitive skills influence health remains controversial, in part because of the dynamic relationship between socioeconomic status and cognitive skills. We examine the influence of cognitive skills on health by estimating long-term health benefits of cognitive skills attained as a consequence of social policies. We treat measures of school quality (teacher-student ratio, teacher salaries, and term length) as instruments for cognitive skills in US-born whites from the 1901-1947 birth cohorts with less than 13 years of school. We use changes in state school quality to generate instrumental variable (IV) estimates of the effects of cognitive skills (vocabulary, mental status, and word list memory) on health (disability, self-rated health, and prevalence of chronic conditions) in Health and Retirement Study participants. We find that improvements in cognitive skills induced by school policies predict reductions in disability, independent of attained education and measured background factors.	Maria	 Glymour	Jennifer	 Manly
2008	58	The Impact of Life-Changing Events on Retirement Well-Being	Whether the Poverty of Women in Childhood and Adult Ages Affect Quality of their Health in Later Years?	India has entered into last legs of demographic transition without competing advances in epidemiological scenario. This has raised apprehensions about the quality of healthy life in elderly years particularly of women who have traditionally been discriminated throughout their lives. This paper compares disease and disability burden between men and women in old ages against the relatively poverty of women in access to nutrition, health care, education etc, in childhood and adult years. Analysis is based on data drawn from secondary sources for a reference period of 1981-2001. The analysis notes minimal gender specific differences in the prevalence of chronic diseases and disabilities in the old ages. Also, it does not find any relationship between disease and disability burden of women in old age and the quality of life in earlier years. The explanations are found in the family institutions that provide protection, care and respect to women in old age.	R.S.	 Goyal
2008	58	The Impact of Life-Changing Events on Retirement Well-Being	Do State Child Support Enforcement Programs Reduce Gender Disparity in Retirement Wealth?	Women retire with less money than men do. Among determinants of retirement wealth distributed unequally between genders, disparate financial consequences of divorce and single parenthood are important causes of gender disparity in retirement wealth. Pervasive nonpayment or underpayment of child support may be to blame. This study investigates whether state child support enforcement (CSE) programs reduce gender disparity in retirement wealth. Literature suggests that tougher CSE can reduce poverty and welfare dependency, while it increases employment among women. While evidence of the negative effect on male employment is lacking, tougher CSE lowers disposable incomes of men. This study uses data from PSID to estimate how and whether state CSE policies influence gender disparity in retirement wealth. A regression-based residuals approach is used to proxy the rigor of CSE.	Yunhee	 Chang
2008	58	The Impact of Life-Changing Events on Retirement Well-Being	Socioeconomic Status, Differential Access to Public and Private Safety Nets, and the Effects of Health/Disability Shocks near Retirement Age on Financial Well-Being	We analyze how the effects of health and disability (HD) shocks on financial well-being of the population near retirement-age differ across various indicators of socioeconomic status (SES). Mean effects may be misleading due to differential access to public and private safety nets which serve as buffers against adverse effects of HD shocks and due to other sources of heterogeneity. Means-tested public programs, primarily SSI and Medicaid, play the buffer role in case of a disability shock for the majority of the working-age population at the lower end of the SES distribution. In contrast, access to employer-based health insurance, pensions, and wealth provide a buffer for those at the higher tail. It is those in the middle of the SES distribution who are expected to be more affected by such shocks due to limited access to either public or private buffers. Seven waves of HRS and SSA restricted data are used.	Irena	 Dushi	Kalman	 Rupp
2008	59	Late life Disability: Trends, Measurement and Policy Implications	Frailty, Vulnerability, and Disability in the  Older Adult Population: The Health and Retirement Study	Frailty (a geriatric condition indicating susceptibility to stressors) is postulated to be distinct from diseases and disability in characterizing the health status of the older adult population.    We performed secondary data analysis of the 2004 and 2006 waves of the Health and Retirement Study, a nationally representative health interview survey. Our study sample included respondents ≥65 years old who completed physical performance tests (grip strength, walk speed) (n=1,657, representing 28.2 million). We examined two models of frailty (Fried, Strawbridge) and compared them to a clinical model of vulnerability (Assessing Care of Vulnerable Elders [ACOVE]).    Demographic determinants of frailty/vulnerability for all three models included age, female gender, and decreased net worth. Controlling for demographic characteristics and chronic diseases using multivariable logistic regression, each frailty/vulnerability model predicted two-year disability (incidence/progression of dependency in basic and instrumental activities of daily living): Fried: adjusted odds ratio 3.2 (P	Christine	 Cigolle	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Zhiyi	 Tian	Caroline	 Blaum
2008	59	Late life Disability: Trends, Measurement and Policy Implications	Baby Boom Health Approaching 60	Is the Baby Boom generation less healthy than previous cohorts in middle age? We assess recent trends in multiple indicators of health for people ages 40-59. Since 1982, mortality and reports of poor/fair health have declined. From 1997 to 2006, the prevalence of reports of some diseases has increased, but prevalence of functional limitations and most measures of disability is stable. Conclusions about trends vary by specific health indicator, time period, and age range, but overall Baby Boomers appear to be doing as well as, if not better than, those of similar ages in the past.	Linda	G. Martin	Vicki	A. Freedman	Robert	 Schoeni	Patricia	 Andreski
2008	59	Late life Disability: Trends, Measurement and Policy Implications	Do Early-Life and Contemporaneous Macro-Conditions Explain Health at Older Ages?: An Application to Dutch Trends in Functional Limitations	Understanding health trends is crucial to assess future prevalence of health disorders and for the design of efficient health policies.  The paper presents an approach to thoroughly assess the role of early life and contemporaneous macro conditions in explaining health trends later in life. In particular, we investigate the role of exposure to infectious diseases and economic conditions during infancy and childhood, as well as the effect of current health care facilities.   Specific attention is paid to the impact of omitted relevant variables, unobserved heterogeneity and to selective attrition. We apply our approach to recent Dutch trends in functional limitations at older ages. Our analyses are performed using data from the Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam. The prevalence of functional limitations is found to increase in the nineteen-nineties, in part due to restricted access to health care services.	France	 Portrait	Rob	 Alessie	Dorly	J. H. Deeg
2008	59	Late life Disability: Trends, Measurement and Policy Implications	Time Trends in Disability Trajectories in Germany between 1984-1987 and 1995-1998: A Study Based on the German Socioeconomic Panel	In this article we explore changes in disability trajectories between the 1980s and the 1990s. Similar disability trajectories are identified by a cluster analysis in the two time periods, however, their relative frequency changes over time. At young ages (50 to 69) healthy trajectories became more frequent while disability trajectories involving severe disability lost importance. At old ages (70-79) moderate and severe disability trajectories gained importance while healthy trajectories became less frequent. No significant difference exists at ages 80+. Attrition became less frequent in the second time period than in the first. In addition to structural changes in the ten-year age groups this may explain the increasing proportion of decedents in the second time period. We find sex-specific differences in the changing distribution of frequencies over time. The reduction of unfavorable health trajectories is stronger among males than females. This is particularly true for the trajectory stable severe disability.	Gabriele	 Doblhammer
2008	60	New Approaches in Demographic Data Collection and Measurements	The New Relationship History Calendar:  Improving Sexual Behavior Data Among Youth in Kenya	Adolescence and early adulthood is a period of rapid change for young people worldwide. Demographers are particularly interested in how reproductive and sexual outcomes are shaped by these early life course transitions and contexts. Complex survey design and instrumentation, including ACASI, have yielded elaborate, high-quality data on adolescents in the U.S. Implementation of these methods is not always feasible or successful in developing countries, and therefore new approaches are needed. We develop a new survey method, the Relationship History Calendar (RHC), which collects detailed, 10-year retrospective data on the sexual histories and other life course events of youth. We assess the quality of sexual behavior data gathered with the RHC through a field experiment conducted in urban Kenya. We find that reporting on sexual behaviors is improved with the RHC, particularly for males, in comparison to a standard questionnaire, and that respondents enjoy and are more comfortable with the RHC.	Nancy	 Luke	Eliya	M Zulu
2008	60	New Approaches in Demographic Data Collection and Measurements	Analyzing the Effectiveness of a Non-Verbal Response Card: Evidence from Ethiopia	We present the results from a test of a new response method for use with sensitive questions in the context of a face-to-face interviewer administered questionnaire. The non-verbal response card that we develop offers a simple, low-tech alternative to computer-assisted self-interviews for use in low income rural settings where illiteracy is common. We tested this new method in a survey of 1,268 randomly sampled adolescents age 13-24 in a rural zone of Ethiopia. A comparison of responses to sensitive questions regarding sexual attitudes, knowledge and behavior reveal significant differences in response patterns between a control group that provided verbal responses and an experimental group that used the card. These results suggest that conventional face-to-face interviewer administered surveys may in selective populations provide seriously biased estimates of adolescent sexual behavior and attitudes regarding contraception and sexual behavior.	David	P Lindstrom
2008	60	New Approaches in Demographic Data Collection and Measurements	Talking Together: Challenges and Solutions in Research with Couples	The call for more fertility-related research among couples has been sounded among demographers for at least a decade. In this paper, I review some the benefits and challenges of couple research based on my own experience doing qualitative research, and potential solutions to the challenges. The benefits of couple research include the ability to better understand couple communication and to do data reliability checks. The greatest challenge is selectivity bias, resulting from a sample composed of overly functional couples. Couples who agree to be interviewed appear to be much more likely to be living together and to be in highly communicative relationships than couples who do not participate. Other problems addressed in this paper include interview timing, differential interview quality, ethical considerations, and redundant data. I suggest that the best solution to these problems is to first recruit and interview individuals, and subsequently to recruit those individuals’ partners.	Julie	 Fennell
2008	60	New Approaches in Demographic Data Collection and Measurements	Two-home Family Situations of Children and Adults: Observation and Consequences for Describing Family Patterns in France	With the increasing diversity of family situations, many people – children as well as adults – now “usually” live in more than one dwelling. The aim of this paper is, first, to estimate the proportion of people living in two or more households, and second, to describe the consequences of these two-home situations on basic estimates of family situations based on “routine” surveys or censuses. Preliminary results are presented for France, while in the final paper a comparison will be made with Australia.   Some 3.5% of children aged under 18 live in two or more dwellings, 2.2% share their time between both parents’ homes, and 1.3% live partly with their parents and partly away from home or at boarding school. When these situations are taken into account, the proportion of children not living with both parents falls from a biased estimate of 22.3% to 18.9%.	Laurent	 Toulemon	Sophie	 Pennec
2008	60	New Approaches in Demographic Data Collection and Measurements	The Commodity Chain of the Household: From Survey Design to Policy Planning	The practicalities of data collection, analysis and policy formulation require a social unit to be defined, generally referred to as a household, although households as defined by survey practitioners may bear little resemblance to the social units that many people live  in. Although household surveys are integral to planning for development in most poor countries, frequently little attention is paid to the issue of how the survey ‘household’ was defined and what this might mean for interpretation.  This research establishes contrasts, contradictions and changes in how households have been defined and used in sub-Saharan African surveys and the implications of these definitions for analyses and policy-making, using two strands of evidence: a review of household surveys (post-1970) and censuses (post-1950) in sub-Saharan Africa, contextualised by comparison with European household surveys; Secondly, in-depth interviews with household survey commissioners, producers and consumers which  are analysed using content analysis of verbatim transcriptions.	Ernestina	E. Coast	Tiziana	 Leone	Sara	 Randall
2008	61	Economic Perspectives on Intrafamily Resource Flows	The Proximity of Adult Children to their Mothers	Although studies of intergenerational proximity often focus on proximity between individuals and mothers, the location decisions of adult children are often made jointly with spouses. For a couple, the decision of whether to live close to his mother or her mother will depend on the relative costs (elderly care) and benefits (child-care) of each situation. In this study we ask two questions. First, are couples more likely to live near her mother of his? Second, do the relative distances reflect the characteristics of the mothers, or of the couple, and is there a strong gender effect? We present descriptive analyses using the three waves of the NSFH. Preliminary results suggest that proximity patterns are responsive to both the child-care needs of adult children and the long-term care needs of mothers, but that the gender of the adult child plays a crucial role in determining the geography of the family.	Janice	 Compton	Robert	A. Pollak
2008	61	Economic Perspectives on Intrafamily Resource Flows	The Health Benefits of Grandchildren	Grandchildren may affect their grandparents’ health for several reasons. For example, grandchildren provide incentive to adopt healthier behaviors since grandparents can look forward to interactions with their grandchildren, thus increasing the value of future health stocks. Conversely, if grandchildren intensify the bequest motive, grandparents may consume less, including less health care, to increase their estates. Yet there is little evidence on the impacts of grandchildren on elders’ health. We use the HRS to examine differences between elders with and without grandchildren in self-rated health, number of nights spent in a hospital or nursing home, total medical expenditures, body-mass index, depressive symptoms, amount of physical activity, smoking, and alcohol consumption. We use OLS to determine if there is a significant association between having grandchildren and each health indicator. We use instrumental variables and fixed effects models to address the possibility that unobservables may affect both being a grandparent and health.	Robert	D. Plotnick
2008	61	Economic Perspectives on Intrafamily Resource Flows	Do Good Kids Finish First?: Characterizing the Bequest Motive in Mexico	While bequests play a central role in economic models of saving and account for a large fraction of the wealth transferred between generations, there is little consensus on why people leave assets when they die or how they decide their distribution. This paper tests the major bequest motive theories directly using a uniquely appropriate longitudinal data set (the Mexican Health and Aging Study) that includes a population-representative sample of bequests in Mexico. I compare child characteristics and care-giving behavior in the 2001 wave of the survey to the observed bequests of parents who die before the 2003 wave. Preliminary results show that children who provide support to parents and have more frequent contact with them were significantly more likely to receive a higher bequest than their siblings. This provides strong support for Bernheim's theory that parents use their bequest strategically to induce children to provide services.	Douglas	 McKee
2008	61	Economic Perspectives on Intrafamily Resource Flows	To Whom Shall I Leave It?: Land Inheritance in the Brazilian Amazon	Why do family members get involved in transfers? More specifically, how parents decide to whom they will leave their assets (e.g. land, wealth)? Love and altruism, on one side, and exchange (self-interest or reciprocity), on the other, are the main socioeconomic explanations for parental behavior regarding distribution of family resources. This paper investigates how parents distribute land among their children and what are the interests involved in two traditional settings in the Brazilian Amazon, comparing effective and intended bequest. We contribute to the literature studying rural areas of Altamira and Santarém and using novel data from the Amazon Deforestation and the Structure of Household survey (University of Indiana at Bloomington). We use longitudinal data for Altamira Survey (1997/1998 and 2005) and cross-sectional data for Santarém Survey (2003). A cross-comparison is important so that we can account for differences in the influence of cultural contexts and social norms over land transmission.	Bernardo	L. Queiroz	Gilvan	R. Guedes
2008	62	Sibling Effects Across the Life Course	The Effects of Siblings, Parental Socioeconomic Status, Adolescent Aptitude, Educational Attainment, and Wealth on Health in Later Life	Little is known about the influence of siblings on the health of older adults. The present study created and tested a series of models with data from a sample (N = 3,968) of high school graduates from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. Using SEM, the study aimed to determine if sibling effects on health in later life could be found and whether these effects were direct or indirect, mediated by the adult’s own educational attainment and wealth. Direct sibling effects on health were not found and when the structural paths from parental socioeconomic status and adolescent aptitude to educational attainment were added to the model, indirect sibling effects on health became non-significant. Although the final model was cross-validated, structural invariance between men and women was not found. The results suggest that sibling effects should be regarded within the complex context of socioeconomic effects on health.	Toni	 Falbo	Sung	Hun  Kim	Kuan-yi	 Chen
2008	62	Sibling Effects Across the Life Course	Parenting, Birth Order and School Achievement	Interest on the effect of birth order on human capital accumulation has recently re-emerged. The debate about its existence seems to be settled, but identification of the main mechanisms remains somewhat elusive. While the latest research aims at rediscovering dilution theory, we advance complementary economic hypothesis regarding the causal mechanism underlying birth order effects in education. In particular, we entertain theories of differential discipline in which those who are born later face more lenient disciplinary environments. In such context, the later born will be likely to exert lower school effort, thus reaching lower achievement levels. We provide robust empirical evidence on substantial attenuation of TV viewing restrictions for those with higher birth order (born later). We speculate this may arise a) as a result of parental reputation dynamics and/or b) because of the changing relative cost of alternative punishment technologies available to parents.	V.	Joseph  Hotz	Juan	 Pantano
2008	62	Sibling Effects Across the Life Course	Comparing Old NLSY Sibling Data to New NLSY Sibling Data:
Sexuality and Fertility Patterns in the NLSY	The NLSY79 and the NLSY-Children surveys include all biological children in a sampled household, and have been the basis for many sibling studies (including behavior genetic studies). However, genetic relatedness of siblings in these surveys has never been assessed directly, through survey questions, but rather has been inferred with kinship algorithms (using external information about living relationships). The first direct assessments are now available in the 2006 datasets. In this study, I present descriptive analyses of the direct survey questions. Next, I present a matching analysis showing similarities and differences in the number of twins, full siblings, half siblings, cousins, and adoptive siblings across the two methods. Finally, I present analyses of female measures of age at first intercourse and age at menarche. These outcomes have been studied extensively using inferred links, and provide comparison of model-based results from the two approaches to ascertaining kinship relatedness.	Joseph	L. Rodgers
2008	63	Socioeconomic Attainment and Assimilation of Asian Americans	Intergenerational Mobility of Asian Post-1965 Immigrants and the New Second Generation in the United States, 1980 to 2005	To measure the socioeconomic progress across immigrant generations, most researchers have observed all generations at a single point in time. However, to measure true intergenerational mobility, the status of the first generation must be compared to their children, the second generation, when they reach a comparable age 25 to 30 years later. Hence, the first generation must be observed at a different point in history than the second generation.    In this paper, intergenerational mobility is addressed across educational attainment, occupational attainment, and poverty status for the five largest Asian foreign-born populations in 1980 (Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Asian Indian, and Vietnamese). Immigrant parents of the second generation and young immigrant children are observed in 1980 and then their children are observed again in 2005. Because of the substantial changes occurring in overall socioeconomic conditions between periods our analysis also controls for the status of an Asian third-generation reference group.	Julie	 Park
2008	63	Socioeconomic Attainment and Assimilation of Asian Americans	Do College-Educated, Native-Born Asian Americans Face a Glass Ceiling in Obtaining Managerial Authority?	Using data from the 2003 National Survey of College Graduates, this study investigates the managerial authority of native-born, college-educated racial/ethnic minorities. Managerial authority is measured in terms of the total number of people supervised directly or indirectly through subordinates. Controlling for socioeconomic origins, college type, college major, and labor market credentials, the results indicate that Asian American men supervise about 13% fewer employees than do non-Hispanic white men. Relative to the latter group, the effects for Hispanic white and Hispanic non-white men are not statistically significant. The effects for Asian American, Hispanic white, and Hispanic non-white women are also not statistically significant. Conversely, African American men and women are slightly advantaged in that they are somewhat more likely to supervise more employees than do non-Hispanic whites. Thus, college-educated, native-born Asian American men are distinctive as being the only major minority group that is disadvantaged in obtaining managerial authority.	Isao	 Takei	Arthur	 Sakamoto
2008	63	Socioeconomic Attainment and Assimilation of Asian Americans	Testing the Transnational Hypothesis: Continued Home Engagement among Asian American Immigrants	Sociological studies on assimilation have often shown that the adaptation of immigrants to American society increases with the duration of residence in the US. A logical corollary of assimilation research is that engagement with the country of origin will decline over time as immigrants become attached to the US. This view is challenged, however, by the literature on transnationalism, which posits that continued home involvement is a common pattern among immigrants. This study uses the Asian-American sample of the National Latino and Asian American Survey to test hypotheses on assimilation and transnationalism. The results indicate that 1) immigrants’ engagement with the country of origin is not at odds with their adaptation to American society, 2) coming to the US as a child significantly reduces the propensity of engaging in transnational activities net of immigrants’ resources and attachment to the US, and 3) the country of origin is a significant predictor of both financial and social transnationalism.	Emi	 Tamaki
2008	63	Socioeconomic Attainment and Assimilation of Asian Americans	English Acquisition and Japanese Language Maintenance Among Japanese-American Youth	Despite the growing number of Japanese speaking immigrants in the   U.S. and the pronounced linguistic dissimilarity between Japanese and   English, few studies have examined English proficiency levels or   Japanese language maintenance. We use 2000 data from the 5% IPUMS   file to examine English proficiency and language maintenance among   first-, second-, and third-generation Japanese immigrant youth in the   United States. Before presenting multivariate results for our   dependent variables, descriptive statistics are presented detailing   numerous significant differences within and across generations.   Furthermore, the second-generation is divided into subgroups based on   each parent's birthplace. This study also contrasts the results of   Japanese-Americans with those of Korean- Americans, speakers of   another language very distant from English, in an attempt to ground   the significance of our findings. Findings provide support for many   of the hypotheses advanced. They also reveal that our regression   models did a much better job explaining English acquisition than   language maintenance.	Sayaka	 Kawamura	Franklin	 Goza
2008	64	Housing and Population	Diverging Trajectories of Immigrant Residential Assimilation, 2000-2005: Homeownership Attainment and Household Formation	This paper studies the residential assimilation of Mexican, Asian Indian, and Chinese immigrants in the top 50 metropolitan areas, along with U.S.-born, non-Hispanic whites as a common reference group. The two indicators to be examined are homeownership attainment measured at the household level and household formation measured at the individual level. We focus on one arrival cohort who came in 1985-94 and analyze the pace of their assimilation from 2000 to 2005, a period of unprecedented run-up in housing price. The three immigrant groups have diverging trajectories of assimilation. The Chinese are the slowest in forming renter households, which leads to their largest increase in homeownership. Mexicans have the smallest homeownership advancement, while Asian Indians are the most likely to form independent households. The different trajectories of residential adjustment reflect the differences in their paths of immigration, economic status, and residential locations. Large differences remain after accounting for those factors.	Zhou	 Yu
2008	64	Housing and Population	Aging Baby Boomers and Future Home Sales: Foresight of a Generational Housing Bubble	The Baby Boom generation has dominated the housing market throughout its adult career, and its anticipated entry into elderly years could lead to epic change. The 67% increase in the ratio of seniors to working age population projected in the next two decades will give disproportionate weight to seniors who will be massive home sellers, leading to the notion of a generational housing bubble. Conventional analyses emphasize net changes in the number of homeowners. Instead, a method is proposed for estimating the average rates of entering and exiting homeownership by age group in the 50 states. Distinctive profiles emerge and these rates are applied to population projections for each state to estimate when an excess of home selling will appear in each state. These findings of gross sales are compared to the findings of net changes in number of homeowners, and conclusions are drawn about the generational bubble.	Dowell	 Myers	John	 Pitkin
2008	64	Housing and Population	Determinants of the Living Arrangement of the Elderly: The Role of Housing Market	The purpose of this article is to fill in some gaps in the way demographers and sociologist traditionally approached determinants of living arrangements of elderly persons by considering the effect of housing market on living arrangements decisions. Most studies investigating the determinants of the living arrangements of the elderly focus on the individuals and family characteristics. In general, housing costs are rarely considered in the analysis of the living arrangements, either in the developed countries or in developing countries. Using data from the Brazilian National Household Survey (PNAD) I find that housing cost and social security income are important variables in explaining the changes in the living arrangements of the elderly in Brazil during the period 1987-1998. In general, I find that independent living is preferred to coresidence, however the likelihood to living alone is constrained by the local housing market.	Yumiko	 Kamiya
2008	64	Housing and Population	Fertility Differences by Housing Type: An Effect of Housing Conditions or of Selective Moves?	This study examines fertility variation across housing types and childbearing patterns following housing changes. While the effect of family changes on housing choices has been studied in detail, little is known about childbearing patterns within various housing types. We use longitudinal register data from Finland and apply hazard regression. First, we observe a significant variation in the fertility levels across housing types – fertility is highest among couples living in single-family houses and lowest among those residing in apartments. Second, our results show elevated fertility levels after couples have changed dwellings, suggesting that much of the fertility variation across housing types is attributed to selective moves. Third, the study reveals a relatively high risk of third birth for couples in single-family houses several years after the move. This suggests that living in spacious housing and in a family-friendly environment for a relatively long time leads to higher fertility.	Hill	 Kulu	Andres	 Vikat
2008	66	Timing of Childbearing	Historical Change in Legitimation of Births: 1920-2002	This paper addresses the question of the legitimation of nonmarital pregnancies using data from a series of cross-sectional fertility surveys that allow for the examination of women’s marriage and fertility behaviors spanning eight decades, 1920-2002. We focus on factors, particularly education, that may explain differences in rates of legitimating births over time. This will enhance our understanding of the relationship between education and women’s family and fertility decisions across a time period where educational opportunities and the availability of effective contraception for women has changed significantly. In the absence of effective contraception, women’s education may play a very small role in determining premarital conception. Additionally, previous studies of legitimation tend to concentrate on first births whereas we have the ability to examine all births for each respondent, allowing us to compare the effects of education on the incidence of premarital conception compared to the timing of fertility within marriage.	Lynette	 Hoelter	Felicia	 LeClere	Pamela	J. Smock
2008	66	Timing of Childbearing	Childbearing After Separation : Do Second Unions Make up for Earlier Missing Births? Evidence from France	Linked to the increasing number of separations, more and more people repartner and have children in second unions. The aim of this article is to study fertility behaviour after the first union: is there a greater likelihood for individuals who experienced a separation to reach the same fertility level –or to overtake it– than for their fellows who did not? We particularly detail the determinants of having children after first union dissolution, notably conditional to repartnering, related to the form of the first relationship or the number of previous children. The data come from a survey linked to the French census called “Enquête sur les Histoires Familiales”. We perform a nested model on the probability of having children in a second union, conditional to repartnering. First results show that fertility level for separated people barely reaches the level of those who have not separated only if they repartner	Eva	 Beaujouan	Anne	 Solaz
2008	66	Timing of Childbearing	Impacts of Delayed First Birth Upon the Timing and Incidence of Second and Higher Order Births in Australia	To address the theoretical question of whether or not fertility intentions are maintained when age at first birth rises substantially, this paper examines the impact of delayed age at first birth upon the incidence and timing of second and higher order births for Australian birth cohorts from 1950 to 1976. As the age at first birth rises, does the interval to the second birth or higher order births fall, does it remain the same or does it get longer. Are second and higher order birth progressions contingent upon age or the interval since the previous birth, or both? Does the delay of the first birth inevitably lead to an age crunch where some intended births do not eventuate? The study employs a very detailed database of birth rates by age, parity and interval since the last birth to measure national trends and longitudinal panel survey data to examine differentials.	Peter	 McDonald	Rebecca	 Kippen
2008	66	Timing of Childbearing	The Relationship between Migration and Birth Spacing: Evidence from Nang Rong District, Buriram Province, Thailand	This study examines differences in birth spacing between migrants and non-migrants drawing on retrospective event history data and using the Prentice, Williams and Petersen, or PWP model, for repeated events. The results show that migrants are less likely to have a birth and to have longer birth spacing than non-migrants. There are negative effects on fertility for women who ever moved, are current migrants, or more frequent migrants. Given current low levels of fertility in Thailand, the impact on the interval between the second birth is of particular interest. This interval is longer for women who ever moved and for current migrants compared to non-migrants, controlling for age at marriage, years of marriage, education, occupation, household and community factors. This study confirms hypotheses of selectivity, disruption, and adaptation effects of migration on fertility. Education and occupation also have powerful effects on the timing of births.	Sukanya	 Chongthawonsatid	Barbara	 Entwisle	Aree	 Jampaklay	Pimonpan	 Isarabhakdi
2008	67	Social Inequality and Disasters	No Direction Home: The Inequality of Forced Displacement among Hurricane Katrina Survivors	The purpose of this paper is to examine the role of social inequality in the immediate evacuation context and emergency resettlement due to the pending landfall event and the longer term and more complex resettlement necessary in light of the wide spread infrastructure devastation. The data for this study were collected as a part of a two-stage survey conducted by the Gallup Organization in September/October 2005 and August 2006. Data collected one month after Hurricane Katrina is analyzed for patterns of inequality in the timing and support for the evacuation. Data collected one year after Hurricane Katrina is analyzed for the relationship between inequality and the longer-term aspects of displacement including number of times moved, distance moved, and expectations of return for those who have resettled away from their community of residence at the time of Hurricane Katrina.	Lisa	K. Zottarelli
2008	67	Social Inequality and Disasters	The Second Disaster: Demographic Transformation of  Disadvantaged Neighborhoods Following Major Hurricanes	In the United States, recovery from major disasters depends greatly on private resources and federal initiatives aimed at restoring businesses and property rather than local communities. Consequently, disadvantaged neighborhoods remain vulnerable not just to environmental hazards but to recovery processes that unfold in their wake—the so-called “second disaster.” However, prior research has provided little systematic analysis of neighborhood vulnerability and associated demographic change following major coastal disasters. We provide such an analysis by integrating biophysical and demographic data to study the transformation of socially unequal neighborhoods after major hurricanes during the early 1990s. Results from spatially lagged regression analyses indicate that disadvantaged neighborhoods become more disadvantaged and environmentally vulnerable during recovery from major hurricanes, laying the foundations for even more severe disasters in the region in the future. [More detailed results forthcoming.]	James	R. Elliott	Jeremy	 Pais
2008	67	Social Inequality and Disasters	The Katrina Effect: Was There a Bright Side to the Evacuation of Greater New Orleans?	This paper uses longitudinal data from Current Population Surveys conducted between 2004 and 2006 to estimate the net impact of Hurricane Katrina-related evacuation on various indicators of well-being. While evacuees who have returned to the affected region show evidence of returning to normalcy in terms of labor supply and earnings, those who persisted in other locations exhibit large and persistent gaps, even relative to the poor outcomes of New Orleans-area residents prior to the storm. Evacuee outcomes show few if any relationships with host community characteristics, including unemployment and growth rates. The impact of evacuation on total income was blunted to some extent by government transfer payments and by self-employment activities. Overall, there is little evidence to support the notion that poor underemployed residents of the New Orleans area were disadvantaged by their location in a relatively depressed region.	Jacob	L. Vigdor
2008	67	Social Inequality and Disasters	Hurricane Katrina as a Natural Experiment of 'Creative Destruction'	Hurricane Katrina was both a natural disaster and a natural experiment of Joseph Schumpeter’s ‘creative destruction.’ The water and winds destroyed existing geographically-anchored capital in the form of homes and businesses. However, the forces that are shaping the new Gulf Coast are governmental regulations and insurance policies. The newly available shore line is now transforming into an economically higher and better use in the form of McMansions, high rise condominiums and casino-hotels. Meanwhile the working class, who provide the labor to the hotel, casinos and condos, are being forced to occupy the interior hinterlands due to the newly revised economic cost of living on the Gulf Coast. The outcome is a measurable economic gradient from the Gulf Coast inland. This socioeconomic gradient will have fundamental implications for the demographic composition of communities, voting patterns, school enrollment, community involvement and transportation for decades to come.	Ronald	E. Cossman
2008	68	Social and Economic Consequences of Migration	The Effects of Cumulative Migration on Households’ Asset and Capital Accumulation in Rural Guatemala	Prior analyses have demonstrated the important role of international migration remittances in the purchase of household goods, housing, and investments in home improvement in less developed countries. Studies also indicate that the use of remittances for the acquisition of productive assets, such as agricultural land, is less prevalent and more closely tied to the local economic context. In this paper I examine the relationship between non-productive and productive asset ownership and migration experience, in the context of a sample of semi-urban and rural Guatemalan communities. I analyze whether asset ownership varies across the type of migration experience—international versus internal—and whether the relationship varies by ethnicity. I use data on migration and remittances collected by the Guatemala Migration Survey in 2000-2002. This analysis uses Ordinary Least Squares regression models to estimate the effects of internal and international migration experience on the accumulation of household assets and agricultural capital.	Gabriela	 Sanchez-Soto
2008	68	Social and Economic Consequences of Migration	The Effect of Community Migration on Women’s Marriage and Fertility in High Migrant Sending States in Mexico	Using the 2000 Mexican Census, we examined the effect of increasing levels of household migration on women’s marriage and fertility in municipalities from seven traditional sending states. We calculated age-specific fertility rates and the proportion of women living in conjugal unions by level of migration in the municipalities. At higher migration levels, we found lower fertility rates among reproductive-aged women. This was accounted for by a lower proportion of women living in conjugal unions as there were no differences in marital fertility. We then used a municipal-level fixed-effects model to assess how variation in the proportion of men was associated with women’s marital status. The absence of men was associated with a lower proportion of women living in union. Finally, we found that the residual fixed-effects were correlated with the level of migration, suggesting migration has an effect on women’s marriage beyond its demographic impact on the marriage market.	Kari	 White	Joseph	E. Potter
2008	68	Social and Economic Consequences of Migration	Migrant Remittances and Household Division: The Case of Nang Rong, Thailand	This work examines the effect of migrant remittances on household splits in Nang Rong, Thailand, an agrarian district of a developing country that has seen tremendous economic, demographic, and social transformations in recent decades. Remittances sent from migrants to their origin households are a form of income used to alleviate credit constraints, making it possible to foster household change. The evidence is consistent with a household allocation model, whereby a household head distributes remittance money to finance the movement of daughters into a new independent household following a stage of living with her husband in her family’s natal household. Remittances are a significant determinant of household nucleation, especially in the latter stages of the Thai household life-cycle.	Martin	 Piotrowski
2008	68	Social and Economic Consequences of Migration	Gender Impact of Male Migration	This paper examines the impact of husband’s migration on lives of women left behind. Using data from India Human Development Survey 2005, this paper examines the impact on two dimensions of women’s lives: (a) Women’s autonomy and control over their lives; (b) Women’s labor force participation. Results suggest that household structure forms the key mediating factor through which husband’s absence affects women. Women not residing in extended families are faced with both higher levels of responsibilities as well as greater autonomy, while women who live in extended households do not experience these demands or benefits.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Manjistha	 Banerji
2008	69	Socio-Economic Status and Adult Health/Mortality	The Income Gradient and Distribution-Sensitive Measures of Overweight in the U.S.	This paper uses quantile regression and alternate measures of overweight to examine the relationship between income and the body-mass index (BMI). The standard prevalence measure indicates that there has been no association between poverty and overweight during the last 30 years of the 20th century. The most recent data from 2004 indicate that the prevalence of overweight for poor people is more than 5 percentage points lower than for the nonpoor. The alternative measures indicate though that the BMI distribution of the poor has been much more positively skewed over this time period, indicating a more severe problem for the overweight poor. Quantile regression analysis indicates that the strongest relationship between income and BMI is observed at the tails of the (conditional) distribution. There is a strong negative income gradient in BMI at the obesity threshold and some evidence of a positive gradient at the underweight threshold.	Dean	 Jolliffe
2008	69	Socio-Economic Status and Adult Health/Mortality	Income Inequality and Later Life Health and Mortality: Estimating Life-Course Treatment Effects	Discussions of income inequality often assert that people suffer worse health if they live in societies with greater and persistent income inequality. The claims are typically founded on weak evidence. I investigate this claim with a broader the set of outcomes that includes mortality and specific health outcomes (e.g. hypertension). In contrast to much of the literature, I use longitudinal data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). With an algorithm developed elsewhere, I map to each individual, the income inequality (measured at the state level) that he experienced in each year of his whole life. The empirical analysis then investigates whether average income inequality (measured alternatively by the Gini coefficient or the 80/20 income ratio) predicts negative outcomes at some later age. Results show that when a person experiences income inequality in particular portions of life, he is more likely to die earlier and suffers worse health.	Dean	R. Lillard
2008	69	Socio-Economic Status and Adult Health/Mortality	Subjective Health and Income since 1972	Health disparities by income in the United States are well-documented. However, most contemporary research summarizes the relationship between income and health in a single number. In this paper, we provide a more detailed examination of the dynamics of the income-health relationship by considering change over time in how health extremes – poor health or excellent health – relate to family income. Using 1972-2006 data from the GSS and the NHIS, we find that the proportion of low-income adults who were in fair or poor health dropped from about 60 percent in 1972 to 45 percent by 1982 while the proportion of higher-income adults reporting poor health did not change. Since 1985, reports of excellent health have risen for the affluent and fallen for the poor. In attending to these and similar details, we contribute to understanding more about the dynamics of health disparities.	Michael	 Hout	Scott	M. Lynch
2008	69	Socio-Economic Status and Adult Health/Mortality	How Much Life Does a Good Education Buy?	Despite an enormous literature documenting education's association with mortality, information showing education's consequences for a population's mortality over a lifetime is sparse. Here, we use a lifetable modeling approach in evaluating this association. Based on the HRS (1992-2004), a good education buys 4.5 years of life for men and women aged 50 -- the gap separating those with 0-11 and 13+ years of education. The biggest benefit in men’s life expectancy stems from attending college. For women, the benefit comes from attaining a high school education. While we observed diminishing effects of education at advanced ages, it is a mistake to focus on the convergence of death rates. Differential survival by education denotes the lifetime benefits of education and is stark for men and women. Thus, while a good education might not buy a lot of life at age 90, it drastically increases the chances of surviving to that age.	Mark	D. Hayward	Mira	M. Hidajat	Dustin	 Brown
2008	70	Immigration and Child Development	Social Capital and Educational Outcomes of  Immigrant Youth	The academic achievement of children from immigrant families has constantly been a focus of social research. Yet little attention has been paid to peer social capital and its importance as a school context factor for academic success of immigrant youth. Using multilevel data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Waves 1 and 3), this article draws upon social capital theory and assimilation theory to examine the effects of peer social capital, school characteristics, family social capital, and immigrant generation status on the academic achievement of immigrant youth. I found that immigrant youths attending schools with greater density of networks have higher levels of academic achievement and attainment, even after such factors as school composition and family background were taken into account. Additionally, academic achievement of peer network was found to be a very significant predictor of individual academic achievement and attainment for immigrant as well as native youth.	Igor	 Ryabov
2008	70	Immigration and Child Development	Persistent Participation: Differences in Race, Ethnicity, and Nativity in Ongoing Involvement in Music and Athletics	This paper analyzes racial, ethnic, and nativity differences in children’s participation in extracurricular activities and their link to academic achievement. Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, I argue that there are clear differences by race, ethnicity and nativity in levels of ongoing participation in music and athletics as well as the benefits rewarded from being involved in these activities. Differing levels of participation are especially apparent in athletics such that compared to their native white counterparts, Black, Hispanic and Asian children have lower odds of participating in athletics across the first and third grades. These differing levels of participation in activities are important because findings show that ongoing participation in music and athletics are positively associated with academic performance.	Elizabeth	 Raleigh
2008	70	Immigration and Child Development	Accounting for the Difference in Violent Behavior between Immigrant and Native Youths	Children of immigrants consistently shower lower levels of violent behavior than native youths from comparable socioeconomic backgrounds. However, little is known about what factors explain the different rates of violent behavior in different populations. Drawing data from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN), this paper use multivariate probit and ordered probit regression analyses to assess the question. The results suggest that family environment and parental supervision account in part for the differences in violent behavior between immigrant and native youths. The remaining differences between these groups' violent behaviors are explained by children's peer relationships. Children of immigrants engage in lower rate of violence for having better family environment and fewer delinquent friends. Neighborhood characteristics do not have the power to explain the different rates of violent behaviors in different populations.	Jen-Hao	 Chen
2008	71	Adult Mortality Differences by Race/Ethnicity	Racial and Ethnic Variation in Health Inequalities in the U.S.	Using pooled data from the 2000-2006 National Health Interview Survey (N=147,039), we document how the relationship between education and a broad range of health measures varies by race/ethnicity and nativity. We find significant differences in the education ‘gradient’ by race/ethnicity across every outcome we consider. That is, education is a more powerful determinant of health behaviors and outcomes for some groups than for others. In addition, for all race/ethnic groups in our sample, the education differentials for the foreign-born groups are typically more modest than those for the corresponding native-born populations. We also illustrate how the education-health relationship varies across Hispanic and Asian subgroups. Our findings suggest that a complex set of mechanisms, involving the immigration process and assimilation of immigrants into U.S. society, are likely to give rise to these patterns.	Rachel	T. Kimbro	Sharon	 Bzostek	Germán	 Rodríguez
2008	71	Adult Mortality Differences by Race/Ethnicity	To Live and Die in the United States: Race, Place and Black/White Health Inequalities during The 1990s	Previous research suggests that race, poverty, and place interact to produce different distributions of mortality across geographically situated populations. In the United States, individuals residing in urban communities tend to be healthier than their rural counterparts. However, among high-poverty African-American communities, urban residents face a substantial mortality disadvantage. By employing a decidedly residential perspective and highlighting neighborhood factors, we calculate age- and sex-specific estimates of all-cause mortality, cause-specific mortality, life expectancy, and years of life lost for working age adults in 23 local areas and Blacks and Whites nationwide. Each local area encompasses the entire nonHispanic Black or nonHispanic White population within aggregates of census tracts in urban communities and counties in rural communities. Preliminary results indicate that the 1990s witnessed a continuation of the rural mortality advantage among high-poverty Black populations. However, the urban/rural discrepancy in mortality decreased, primarily as a function of declining death rates in urban areas.	Cynthia	G. Colen	Arline	 Geronimus	John	 Bound
2008	71	Adult Mortality Differences by Race/Ethnicity	Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Functional Health Trajectories and their Life Course Antecedents: Results from a Two-part Latent Growth Curve Model for Semi-Continuous Data	This paper examines racial and ethnic differentials functional health trajectories with the goal of better understanding racial/ethnic disparities in health as they unfold over the life course. Towards this aim it investigates the relative contribution made by childhood and adult health and socioeconomic factors towards explaining racial and ethnic differentials in functional health trajectories. This study takes advantage of ten-year longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and a two-part semi-continuous latent growth curve model to estimate racial and ethnic differences in trajectories of limitation onset and severity simultaneously, and the covariates of these trajectories. Preliminary results find that Non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics have significantly higher baseline probability of having any functional limitations and a higher number of limitations conditional on onset than Non-Hispanic whites. However, after controlling for childhood and adult health and socioeconomic factors these racial and ethnic disparities are no longer observed.	Steven	A. Haas	Leah	 Rohlfsen
2008	71	Adult Mortality Differences by Race/Ethnicity	Disability among Native-Born and Foreign-Born Black Residents in the United States: Evidence from the 2000 Census of Population and the National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS), 2000-2006	Utilizing data from the 2000 Census of Population, we examine differences in physical and personal care disability among native- and foreign-born blacks in the US. We distinguish among immigrants from the Caribbean/West Indies, Africa, and other regions, and examine disability by age at entry and duration of US residence. We compare the results based on the Census data to those based the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) data for 2000-2006. Overall, foreign-born blacks report less disability than native-born blacks. African-born blacks possess a more advantageous health status as compared with  Caribbean/West Indian-born blacks, but this difference is explained by the higher educational achievement of African-born blacks. Longer duration of US residence is associated with higher reported disability among foreign-born blacks, yet foreign-born blacks regardless of age at entry or year of entry report significantly less disability than native-born blacks.	Irma	T Elo	Neil	 Mehta	Cheng	 Huang
2008	72	Retirement and Labor Force Behavior of the Elderly: U.S. and International Comparative Analyses	An Analysis of Income Mobility of the Finnish Elderly after Retirement	Because of the increasing number of older people in all western societies, the relationship between low income, retirement and household characteristics is of interest for both policy and scientific reasons. The Finnish population too has become considerably older in the last century. Our analysis aims at studying, for the older Finnish population, if and how income changes in the years after retirement, distinguishing between marginal changes (i.e. statistically significant, but below a given threshold), transitory changes (change is substantial, but does not persist over time) and permanent changes, meaning both substantial and persistent. Changes in family composition are an important explanatory component of income mobility in old age. Namely, subgroups with little or no change in their living mainly have a linear income trajectory. In contrast, older individuals who experienced changes in household composition are more likely to follow ‘Zigzag’ equivalent income trajectories.	Irene	 Ferro	Gustavo	 De Santis	Pekka	 Martikainen
2008	72	Retirement and Labor Force Behavior of the Elderly: U.S. and International Comparative Analyses	Marital Status and Older Women’s Economic Well-Being: Income, Consumption, and Leisure before and after Retirement	This paper examines how older women fare before and after retirement by marital status. It demonstrates how different benchmarks on economic well-being can lead to different views on how older women fare, and the findings in the aggregate mask a more complex structure across different marital status groups. The paper concludes that although income drops substantially at retirement, older women are able to sustain consumption. The decline in money expenditure can be explained by a standard model of household consumption augmented with Becker home production. The differences in the changes of consumption expenditure and time spent on housework between the married and unmarried older women at retirement further support the power of time/expenditure substitution mechanism. Additionally, time use data indicates that time spent on leisure activities rises significantly. The evidence presented in this paper doesn’t support the claim of a decline in economic well-being with retirement status for older women.	Yanyuan	 Wu
2008	72	Retirement and Labor Force Behavior of the Elderly: U.S. and International Comparative Analyses	The Impacts of Social Security Changes on Rural Workers Labor Supply: A Regression Discontinuity Approach	The effects of public transfer systems on the labor supply are widely studied. There is a large literature on how social security systems around the world, both in developed and developing countries create incentives to early retirement (Gruber & Wise, 1999; Wise, 2004; Burtless & Quinn, 2001; Queiroz, 2005). Research on the impacts of other welfare programs in the United States and Europe are also common, and such studies also investigate negative impacts of the programs on the labor supply of the recipients. In recent years, negative effects on the labor supply of individuals justified policy changes on a series of welfare programs. The main objective of the paper is to study the impacts of the 1988 social security reform for rural workers on their labor supply decision. We investigate the period near the reform, around 1988, and again a few years later to check which impact the legislation change had.	Bernardo	L. Queiroz
2008	72	Retirement and Labor Force Behavior of the Elderly: U.S. and International Comparative Analyses	Retirement and Health in Europe	What is the impact of health on the retirement decisions of the elderly? Do institutions matter? This paper investigates the retirement decisions of older Europeans using the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). In particular, we analyze the role played by health factors and by social security and pension rules in shaping labor supply and retirement decisions. The preliminary results indicate that institutional differences in welfare systems clearly affect the distribution and the age pattern of participation to the labor market and of retirement. In addition, we find that there is potentially huge unused labor capacity in countries such as Austria, Italy and France where “healthy” individuals are not in the labor force.	Enrica	 Croda
2008	73	Adolescent Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Effects of Maternal Smoking while Pregnant on Child Outcomes in Adolescence: Results from a Prospective National Longitudinal Study	There is a large body of research on the effects of fetal and neonatal events on adolescent and adult outcomes. This paper uses data from a recent prospective and nationally representative longitudinal study in Canada NLSCY. Focusing on outcomes reported by ten to fourteen-year old children our results clearly demonstrate significant long-term effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy. Adolescents whose mothers had smoked while pregnant with them had worse scores on numerous self-report scales measuring both externalizing and internalizing disorders, including anxiety, self-image, general mood and various forms of aggression. These effects remain significant after controlling for birth weight, family structure and region but are attenuated when the socio-economic status of the child’s household is controlled through statistical adjustments. Further analysis demonstrates significant regional differences in maternal smoking during pregnancy as well as a secular trend towards a lesser incidence over the 1990s. Implications for provincial health policies are discussed.	Charles	 Jones
2008	73	Adolescent Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Health Trajectories and Their Determinants among the Children of Immigrants	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I examine trajectories of health behaviors and health conditions, particularly those associated with obesity, among the children of immigrants to the United States. Socially patterned health trajectories are well-documented among adult immigrants, but less is known about their children, many of whom are immigrants themselves. The behaviors and diseases associated with obesity provide a useful case study, given their high prevalence among the U.S. population, even at early ages. First, are the rapid decreases in healthy behaviors and increases in rates of obesity seen among foreign-born adults with increasing time in the U.S. also observed among the younger population? Or does the epidemiologic advantage that immigrants’ children exhibit at birth over their peers persist into adolescence and young adulthood? Secondly, what are the cultural and age-related factors associated with the observed trends?	Margot	I. Jackson
2008	73	Adolescent Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Parental Work Schedules and Adolescent Health Behaviors	Using a large contemporary data set, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child Supplement (NLSY-CS), this paper examines the relationship between parental work schedules and adolescent risky behaviors at age 13 or 14, paying particular attention to the mechanisms that may explain this relationship. Structural equation modeling suggests that parental work schedules were associated with adolescent risky behaviors. In particular, increased work at night by mothers was significantly associated with spending less time with children and lower quality of the home environment, and both of these mediators were significantly linked to adolescent risky behaviors. Subgroup analyses revealed that some groups of children (i.e., males, those ever living in single-mother families, and those in families with low incomes) may particularly be affected by mothers working at nights, due to spending less time together, having a lower degree of maternal closeness, and experiencing lower quality home environments. Implications and avenues for future research are discussed.	Wen-Jui	 Han	Daniel	P. Miller
2008	73	Adolescent Health and Wellbeing in Developed Countries	Stressful Life Events and Adolescent Weight Trajectories	We examine the association between the experience of stressful life events and subsequent changes in body weight during adolescence using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Drawing from hypotheses put forward by Dohrenwend and Dohrenwend (1981), we examine whether (1) stressful life events directly lead to weight gain or (2) being overweight predisposes people to experiencing stressful life events, leading to further weight gain. Multivariate regression results support the second hypothesis for females. First, adolescent girls who were heavier at Wave 1 were more likely to experience a stressful life event. Second, there is an interaction between weight at Wave 1 and the experience of stressful life events for adolescent girls: among girls who were underweight or normal weight, experiencing an external stressor is negatively correlated with weight gain. However, experiencing an external stressor is positively correlated with weight gain for adolescent girls who were overweight at Wave 1.	Kristina	L Zeiser	Molly	A. Martin	Claudia	L Nau
2008	74	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons	Poverty and Premarital Sex in Comparative Perspectives	This paper revisits the debate on the association between poverty and the transition to premarital sexual activity among female adolescents in Africa. The analysis is based on females aged 15-19 years interviewed during the Demographic and Health Surveys conducted in Kenya, Mali, and Zambia in 2001-2003. We found that 35 percent of respondents in Kenya, 40 percent in Mali and 50 percent in Zambia have had premarital sexual experience. However, the association between poverty and the initiation of premarital sexual intercourse was only significant in Zambia, not in Mali or Kenya. This differential pattern did not change even when current marital status and other control variables were included in the regression equations. Such findings show that female adolescents do not follow the same pathways to sexual activity. Therefore, we caution against generalizing the association between poverty and sexual behavior. The poorest is not always the most sexually permissive.	Yanyi	K Djamba	Sitawa	R Kimuna
2008	74	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons	Female Autonomy in Two African Capital Cities: The Cases of Dakar and Lome	The present research deals with the specific situation of unmarried women (i.e. single, divorced or widowed) who are tenant or home-owner in two African cities, Dakar in Senegal and Lomé in Togo. These women are defined as “autonomous”, given that they are independent at marital and residential levels. They live outside of the marriage bond, pay a rent, are home-owner or live with their employer. What is the frequency and duration of this situation in the two capital cities? What is the occupational profile of these women? The present article will address those issues. Our purpose is to describe an uncommon and relatively untypical status among women, as an expression of important structural changes under way in African families. The study is based on two biographical surveys carried out in Lomé (2000) and in Dakar (2001) among a sample respectively of 2,536 and 1,290 individuals.	Agnes	 Adjamagbo	Philippe	 Antoine
2008	74	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons	The Gendered Context of Conflict: Northern Irish Attitudes toward Women’s Employment and Family Roles before and after the Good Friday Agreement	Research into the relationship between gendered family roles and ethnic conflict has led to differing conclusions. On the one hand, nationalist sentiment during conflict has been linked to gender conservatism. On the other hand, social disorganization associated with conflict may lead to a redefinition of gendered roles that enhances women’s status. I investigate these competing hypotheses by examining attitudes toward women’s employment and gendered family roles in Northern Ireland. The analyses leverage change over time and comparisons with eight European countries to make inferences about the relationship between gender and conflict. Data come from the 1994 and 2002 waves of the International Social Survey Program. The findings offer little evidence that individuals in Northern Ireland increased their support for women’s non-domestic roles across this period. Further, although Catholics were more egalitarian than Protestants at both time points, Catholic support for egalitarian family roles decreased between 1994 and 2002.	Mick	 Cunningham
2008	74	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons	The Happy Homemaker?: Married Women’s Satisfaction in Cross-national Perspective	In response to the growing demographic interest in the distribution of happiness as an indicator of well-being, this paper asks how married women’s satisfaction with family, work, and life in general relates to their labor force participation. Theorizing on this question has identified a number of mechanisms (e.g., self fulfillment, time bind, gender role conflict) by which paid employment is argued to affect married women’s satisfaction, either positively or negatively. Besides individual-level factors such as labor force participation, there are reasons to expect that the characteristics of countries will also affect levels of satisfaction and even condition any association between satisfaction and paid employment. HLM models of micro- and macro-level factors are tested with 2002 ISSP data on 30 countries. Although several country-level characteristics figure in satisfaction, married women’s hours of paid employment are not significantly associated with their satisfaction with family, work or life in general.	Judith	 Treas	Tanja	 Van der Lippe
2008	75	Gender, Marriage and Mortality	Early Life Conditions, Marital Status, and Mortality	We empirically analyze the impact of economic conditions early in life on the rate of getting married as well as the extent to which the protective effect of marriage on mortality depends on conditions early in life. This sheds light on the use of marriage as a compensatory device in case of adverse early-life conditions. We use exogenous indicators of early-life conditions and we allow for selectivity on unobservables, using a semi-parametric approach. The data cover 1815-2000. Conditions around birth as well as around the school ages are important for marital status and mortality. The results strikingly differ by gender. Men on average enjoy a protective effect of marriage on mortality, and this effect increases with age. Women born in economic booms gain from marriage during childbearing ages, but women born in recessions suffer a substantial negative effect on life expectancy during these years.	Sumedha	 Gupta	Gerard	G.J. van den Berg
2008	75	Gender, Marriage and Mortality	Til Death Do Us Part: Marital Status and Mortality, 1986-2000	Although the meanings and prevalence of being married, divorced, separated, never-married, or widowed have changed significantly over the past several decades in the United States, we know very little about whether and how the association between marital status and mortality has changed over time. Analysis of data from the National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files 1986-2000 shows that mortality gap between the married and each of the unmarried groups—including the widowed, divorced, separated and never married widened across the 1986-2000 survey cohorts. Those trends toward widening morality gaps by marital status do not depend on gender or race. Implications for public policies on population health and marriage are discussed.	Hui	 Liu
2008	75	Gender, Marriage and Mortality	What Money Can and Cannot Buy: Divorce, Gender, and Health	In this paper, we apply two newly developed propensity score methods to examine the effects of divorce on health for divorced adults using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (that have not been analyzed before for this purpose). The first method is a hazard-model approach that addresses the issue that selection into divorce may not only be static but dynamic. The second method is a doubly-robust estimator that further ensures that our estimates will be resistant to potential model misspecification. Preliminary findings (based on the first method) suggest that divorce has a negative effect on mental health for both divorced men and women. Divorce also has a negative effect on divorced women's physical health and general health status, but no effect on divorced men's physical health and general health status.	Jui-Chung	A. Li	Nelson	 Lim
2008	75	Gender, Marriage and Mortality	How Does the Age Gap between Partners Affect their Survival?	A person’s survival chances are affected by the presence or absence of a spouse and by various spousal characteristics such as spouse’s education and smoking habits. A further factor that influences the survival of both partners is the age gap between them. Several authors found that having a younger spouse is beneficial, while having an older spouse is detrimental for ones own survival. The most common explanations refer to selection effects as well as some beneficial psychological and sociological effects of having a younger spouse. The present study extends earlier work by using longitudinal Danish register data which includes the entire history of key demographic events of the whole population from 1980 onwards. Controlling for confounding factors such as education and wealth, preliminary results suggest that having a younger spouse is beneficial for men but not for women.	Sven	 Drefahl
2008	76	Family Economic Relations	The Price of Fertility: Marriage Markets and Family Planning in Bangladesh	This paper considers the impact of family planning on dowry transfers. We construct a model of the marriage market in which prospective mates anticipate the outcome of intrahousehold bargaining over fertility. We show that as the price of contraception falls, brides must compensate men with higher dowries in order to attract them into marriage. We test the model using data from a successful 1970s family planning  experiment in Bangladesh, which lowered average fertility by 0.65 children. We find that the program increased bride-to-groom dowry transfer amounts by at least eighty  percent. The marriage market’s response to a family planning program may dampen the welfare benefits of family planning for women.	Raj	 Arunachalam	Suresh	 Naidu
2008	76	Family Economic Relations	Sex-Specific Lineage Networks and Resource Allocation: Effect of Kinship on Intrahousehold Gender Differences	A large number of studies of household behavior in developing countries demonstrate that more resources are allocated to children when mothers have more bargaining power relative to fathers. The most widely held interpretation of this finding is that women care more about the well-being of children than men.     In this paper, we demonstrate that these findings are consistent with household behavior in lineage systems where men care about an expanded set of children than women. Using a cooperative bargaining framework we derive testable implications and proceed to the test by taking advantage of differences in lineage systems in order to deal with unobserved heterogeneity.     We could not reject an hypothesis of equal parental income effects when fathers do not have siblings and find evidence for lower effect of men's income in the household when there are possibilities of joint rearing of children.	Olumide	O Taiwo
2008	76	Family Economic Relations	Investments, Time Preferences and Public Transfers Paid to Women	The literature suggests men and women may have different preferences. New data are used to investigate this issue by examining savings, investments and inter-temporal preferences. We use a random assignment social experiment in which women in treatment households were given a large public cash transfer (PROGRESA) and women in control households were given nothing. Income elasticities from PROGRESA are compared with income elasticities from all other income sources. Additional money in the hands of women is spent on small livestock (which are traditionally managed for by women), improved nutrition and on child goods (particularly clothing). Among single-headed households, PROGRESA income elasticities are the same as other income elasticities. Direct evidence on inter-temporal preferences gathered in the Mexican Family Live Survey indicates that women are more patient than men. Taken together, the results suggest that PROGRESA income results in a shift in the balance of power within households and women allocate more resources towards investments in the future.	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel	Duncan	 Thomas
2008	76	Family Economic Relations	Risk Aversion and Household Partition in Rural Mexico	Living arrangements may be an important component of economic relationships in extended families. One role which has been hypothesized relates the spatial distribution of agricultural families to their exposure to local productivity shocks like weather. Family members may have incentive to live in different locations in order to insure each other against the effects of these shocks. This paper further explores that potential role. I demonstrate formally that under plausible conditions, families would have incentive specifically to distribute their more risk averse members. Drawing on a unique dataset from rural Mexico which provides direct measures of tolerance for financial risk, I show that coresidence patterns are related to family members' risk preferences in a way which would be predicted by a model whereby they take account of their own and each other's comparative advantage as risk-sharing partners when making decisions regarding their living arrangements.	Amar	A. Hamoudi
2008	77	Cross-national Perspectives on Family and Fertility	Intergenerational Families in Developing Countries	We use newly-available census microdata from IPUMS-International to assess trends in intergenerational coresidence in 15 developing countries. We find no general decline in intergenerational coresidence over the past several decades. There have been, however, substantial changes in the configuration of intergenerational coresidence. Families in which the older generation is household head are becoming more common in most of the countries. Intergenerational families headed by the younger generation are on the decline in most of the countries. Multivariate analysis reveals that intergenerational families headed by the older generation are positively associated with measures of economic development. These findings are substantially at variance with widely-accepted social theory. We hypothesize that housing shortage, economic stress in the younger generation, and old-age pensions may contribute to the change. More broadly, in some developing countries rising incomes may have allowed more people to achieve their preferred family structure of intergenerational coresidence following traditional family forms.	Steven	 Ruggles	Misty	 Heggeness
2008	77	Cross-national Perspectives on Family and Fertility	Family Size of Children and Women during the Demographic Transition	In this paper we analyze the links between declines in fertility and declines in the family size of school-aged children during the demographic transition. We extend Preston’s (1976) model to analyze family size from the perspective of children of a given age rather than women of a given age. This complicates the analytical model, but we show that the key insights of Preston’s results still hold. The mean family size of school-aged children can be approximated by a simple function of the mean and coefficient of variation of fertility for women born 15-40 years earlier. We apply the framework to micro-census data from Brazil, Kenya, Mexico and Vietnam, and demonstrate that the model provides a good approximation to actual family size. Because there is often a compression of fertility coinciding with rapid decline in the mean, the mean family size experienced by school-aged children often falls faster than fertility.	David	 Lam	Leticia	J. Marteleto
2008	77	Cross-national Perspectives on Family and Fertility	Prudence and Pressure: Household Organization and Reproduction in Historical Eurasia	Reproduction in historical Eurasia was often compared by two contrasting systems, with a European system based individual rationality and prudence at one end, and a non-European system featured by collective irrationality and pressure at the other. Within such a dichotomy, household organization is seen as a primary mark of system differentiation, as well as a main source for reproductive differences. Using individual, household, and community data from historical population in five Eurasian populations (Belgium, China, Italy, Japan, and Sweden), this study examines the effects of household organizations on reproductive outcomes. Our focus is on the household strategies in each family system and on the ways that household hierarchies prevailed over individual decision-making in reproduction.	Feng	 Wang	Noriko	 Tsuya	Satomi	 Kurosu	Michel	 Oris
2008	77	Cross-national Perspectives on Family and Fertility	Remarriage, Gender, and Rural Households: A Comparative Analysis of Widows and Widowers in Europe and Asia	This paper investigates the patterns and covariates of remarriage in four rural societies in eighteenth and nineteenth century Europe and Asia. Although the family systems and marriage patterns varied, remarriage was quit frequent in all these societies. Remarriage had far-reaching effects, not only on individual life courses, but also in re-forming and reorganizing households. We apply event history analysis to longitudinal data drawn from Scania in southern Sweden, Casalguidi in central Italy, Liaoning and Shuangcheng in northeast China, and Shimomoriya and Niita in northeast Japan. We demonstrate that age and gender asymmetries were embedded in the intricate sociocultural context. Remarriage risks of widows and widowers were highly dependent on their necessities and availabilities of support shaped by their socioeconomic status and household context, and in relation to local economic conditions.	Satomi	 Kurosu	Christer	 Lundh	Marco	 Breschi
2008	78	Fathers and Children	Socioeconomic Consequences of Childbirth for Men	This study addresses how becoming a father affects men’s income, employment, and housework trajectories using thirty waves of data from the PSID (n=6,681). Results of group-based trajectory analyses reveal that how men’s trajectories are affected by having a child depends on both the age at which they become fathers and their socioeconomic status. Specifically, men who become fathers during early or middle adulthood increase their income trajectories following the birth of a child, while men who become fathers during adolescence do not increase their income trajectories following the birth of a child. On the other hand, adolescent fathers increase their time in housework following childbirth more than any other age group. Regarding differences by trajectory groups, men in the lowest income group increase their incomes the most in response to having a child. Similarly, the most disadvantaged employment group responds to childbirth with significant increases in time spent in employment.	Holly	 Schindler
2008	78	Fathers and Children	Co-Parenting among First Time Fathers of Infants: The Influence of Men's Pregnancy Intentions	This study uses a sample of 1,287 biological resident fathers from the Early Child Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) 9- and 24-month waves to examine the pathways through which pregnancy intentions influence varied co-parenting behaviors after the birth of a first child and whether these associations differ by child gender. Results of Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) indicate that having an unwanted or mistimed pregnancy is directly associated with poorer co-parental cooperation and that indirect associations between pregnancy intentions and co-parental cooperation, conflict, support, shared decision making, and communication operate through the quality of the mother-father relationship. Findings also indicate that pregnancy intentions work indirectly through the mother-father relationship to influence co-parental communication for men with first-born daughters but not sons. Findings represent a first look at several important family processes that influence men’s commitment to the co-parenting role and involvement with families during the transition to parenthood.	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Mindy	E. Scott	Allison	 Horowitz
2008	78	Fathers and Children	Fathers’ Involvement and Young Children’s Behavior 
in Fragile Families	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to examine how fathers’ involvement with children is associated with children’s behavioral problems (n=3,066). We focus separately on resident and non-resident fathers and examine fathers’ spending time with children, sharing responsibility for child-related tasks, and engaging in specific activities. We consider factors that may moderate the effects (such as father ‘quality’), and we examine whether there are reciprocal effects between father involvement and child behavior. Overall, we find strong and consistent evidence that fathers’ involvement at children’s age 3 is associated with behavioral scores at age 5 for fathers living with their children. For non-resident fathers, involvement does not appear to be salient for children’s behavior overall, but we find some evidence that the benefits of father involvement may be moderated by fathers’ anti-social behavior. We discuss the implications of our findings for research and public policy.	Marcia	J. Carlson	Sara	 McLanahan	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2008	78	Fathers and Children	The Role of Ethnicity in Father Absence and Children’s School Enrollment in Guatemala	Despite the historical prevalence and recent rise in female headship in Latin America, our knowledge of the magnitude and consequences of father absence as experienced by children has been extremely limited. Using a nationally representative sample from Guatemala, this study fills this gap first by providing descriptive statistics of father absence in children’s households and non-resident fathers’ lack of paternity establishment and child support payments. Subsequently, a series of multi-level logistic regressions establishes a stronger negative effect of father absence on school enrollment for indigenous children than for Ladino children. The increased poverty in father-absent households explains a smaller proportion of this adverse effect for indigenous children, suggesting that the fathers of indigenous children play a stronger social than economic role compared to the fathers of Ladino children. However, child support payments significantly attenuate the negative effects for both ethnic groups.	Kanako	 Ishida
2008	79	Sources of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation in Residential Space	Unraveling the Culprits of Residential Segregation: Race, Class, and Schooling in Pretoria, Johannesburg and Vereeniging	This paper accesses the mechanisms in which residential segregation impacts the lives of individuals living in the Pretoria, Johannesburg, and Vereeniging (PJV) area of South Africa. Using 1996 South African census data, the focus of this paper is to examine the relationship between residential segregation and schooling and income inequality among all racial groups. Recent analysis on post apartheid South Africa indicates that racial residential segregation at the magisterial district level remains very high among the African and Coloured populations and White and Coloured populations (McClinton and Zuberi, 2006). This paper utilizes two methodologies 1.measurement of segregation by socioeconomic status 2.indirect standardization using several household characteristics to redistributes the population in Pretoria, Johannesburg, and Vereeniging. Evidence in this paper suggest that racial disparities in income and schooling attainment remains and influences residential segregation patterns and are persistence in Pretoria, Johannesburg and Vereeniging.	Fareeda	 McClinton
2008	79	Sources of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation in Residential Space	Dynamics of Spatial Differentiation among Ethnic Groups in New Zealand	New Zealand has experienced a marked increase in immigration since the early 1990s, which has fostered greater ethnic diversity. However, studies have yet to fully explore the changing patterns of spatial differentiation among ethnic groups. Using the New Zealand Census data from 1991 to 2006, we first examine the patterns of ethnic residential segregation for the Asian, Maori, and Tagata Pasifika groups from the majority white, Pakeha, population. We then assess the effects of regional and group level socio-economic characteristics on the levels of segregation to understand the factors driving segregation. The results reveal that the levels of segregation have declined over time for all groups, while the factors influencing segregation differ by ethnic group.	Douglas	 Grbic	Hiromi	 Ishizawa	Charles	 Crothers
2008	79	Sources of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation in Residential Space	Racial and Ethnic Biases in Rental Housing: 
An Audit Study of Online Apartment Listings	In this study we use a novel audit methodology to measure racial and ethnic rental housing discrimination in Toronto. We sent 5,620 fictitious email inquiries to individuals offering apartments for rent on a popular internet listing service. Because deception is involved, we first secured approval for this research from the University of Toronto’s ethics review board. To manipulate perceived race/ethnicity, emails were randomly assigned names identified with five groups—Caucasian, Black, E/SE Asian, Arab/Muslim, and Jewish. Each landlord received a set of inquiries. Email text, send order and intervals were randomly varied. Property location, type, and responses were coded. Results show that inquiries by Muslim/Arab individuals are least likely to be replied to, followed by Black, E/SE Asian, Caucasian/White, and Jewish. Further analysis of the email text illustrates different forms of ‘opportunity denying’ and ‘opportunity diminishing’ treatment. Maps based on the address data visually illustrate the ecology of discrimination in Toronto.	Brent	 Berry	Bernie	 Hogan
2008	79	Sources of Racial and Ethnic Differentiation in Residential Space	The Sources of Differentiation in the Immigrant Housing Market: Insights from the Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Canada	This paper identifies some of the reasons behind differences in the homeownership levels of seven recently-arrived immigrant visible minority groups in Canada. It uses discrete-time event history analysis models, bootstrap sampling, and three waves of the Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Canada (LSIC) to model the homeownership status of the October 2000-September 2001 arrival cohort in their first four years after arrival to Canada. Given the richness of LSIC data, it is possible to determine if differentiation among recent arrivals in the housing market occurs because of 1) credit constraints (including entry wealth, interest rates, and perceptions of discrimination), 2) class of entry, 3) credential recognition, and/or 4) city choice. These factors are shown to be important factors for explaining differences between Arab, Black, Latin American, and White immigrants in their first four years. The implications of these results for both Canada and other countries are discussed.	Michael	 Haan
2008	80	Religion and Human Capital	Family Religious Context and Educational Aspirations of Youth	In this paper, we investigate how family religious context relates to educational aspirations and achievement in late adolescence. We theorize how parent religious affiliation and involvement work through adolescent religious involvement to shape aspirations and achievement and how these processes might vary by gender. Using longitudinal survey data from the National Study of Youth and Religion, we examine how parent and youth religious characteristics are related to aspirations for attending college, high school graduation, college enrollment, and prestige of secondary institution.	Lisa	D. Pearce	Jessica	H. Hardie
2008	80	Religion and Human Capital	The Relationship of Religion and College Major	Universities help to transmit various streams of thought within the culture to the next generation. Some of these streams of thought present challenges to religiosity, either explicitly or implicitly. This project examines the effect of college major on religiosity as a way of gauging the extent to which various streams of thought, as taught in college, affect religiosity. We use latent growth curve models to estimate the effects of college major on religiosity. Access to panel data on religiosity and college major in the Monitoring the Future survey makes this research design possible. Respondents majoring in the social sciences and humanities, as well as respondents who do not attend college, experience a decline in their church attendance. Conversely, education majors actually increase their attendance. Humanities, social science, natural science and math majors report a decrease in religious importance, while majoring in education increases religious importance.	Miles	 Kimball	Colter	 Mitchell	Arland	 Thornton	Linda	 Young-DeMarco
2008	80	Religion and Human Capital	Religion and Socioeconomic Attainment in the Context of Development	Substantial research has documented the association between religion and socioeconomic attainment but much of the work is based in Western nations. As Christianity has expanded in developing nations and the confrontation between Islam and the West has received growing attention, the role religion plays in socioeconomic inequality continues to be a critical issue. We use the Ghanaian Demographic and Health Survey for 2003 to test the relationship between religious affiliation and socioeconomic attainment. Religious differences in socioeconomic outcomes are substantial in Ghana. Mainline Protestants have a significant advantage in education and wealth. Catholics and other Christians have intermediate values on these socioeconomic outcomes. Muslims and those with out attachment to formal religious groups have a significant disadvantage. Educational differences are particularly important because they account for some of the differences in wealth, and because education differences are evident in rates of school enrollment, signaling that inequality will persist.	Tim	B. Heaton	Spencer	 James	Yaw	 Oheneba-Sakyi
2008	80	Religion and Human Capital	Religion and Human Capital in Ghana	This paper examines the religion-human capital link, examining a recent household survey for Ghana. Insights from the literature leads to a prediction of Islam being associated with lower human capital levels than Christianity, since that may be clustered within the group of orally based religions. While previous studies typically have only considered the main religions, thereby not allowing for heterogeneous associations in the links at the sub-group level, and also have not allowed religious affiliation to be endogenously determined, these possibilities are explored here. I find a strong association between individual religious affiliation and human capital as measured by years of schooling, with Christians as a group being more literate and having completed more years of schooling than both Muslims and Animists / Traditionalists. At the same time, there is substantial heterogeneity in the strength of this relationship within different types of Christianity. Directions for future research are also presented.	Niels-Hugo	 Blunch
2008	82	Neighborhood Effects in the Moving to Opportunity Experiment: An Exchange	Neighborhood Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency: A Reconsideration of the Moving To Opportunity Experiment		Susan	 Clampet-Lundquist	Douglas	S. Massey
2008	82	Neighborhood Effects in the Moving to Opportunity Experiment: An Exchange	What Can We Learn About Neighborhood Effects from The Moving To Opportunity Experiment?		Jens	 Ludwig	Jeffrey	B. Liebman	Jeffrey	R. Kling	Greg	J. Duncan	Lawrence	F. Katz	Ronald	C. Kessler	Lisa	 Sanbonmatsu
2008	82	Neighborhood Effects in the Moving to Opportunity Experiment: An Exchange	Neighborhood Effects and the Social Structure of Inequality		Robert	J. Sampson
2008	83	Fertility, Reproductive Health And Economic Change	Hurricanes, Hoarding and Replacement: Estimating the Causal Effect of Mortality on Fertility	Despite a long-standing interest in the causal effect of child mortality on fertility there is relatively little empirical work because of two main problems. First, child mortality and fertility are affected by the same (unobservable) household variables. Second, having many children in response to mortality can itself lead to an increase in the risk of child mortality. A possible solution is to use instrumental variables estimation, but there has so far been little agreement on valid instruments. This paper uses data on the risk and occurrence of hurricanes in Guatemala to overcome this problem. While fertility is affected by the risk of hurricanes the actual shock of an hurricane is shown not to change fertility. Both hurricane shock and risk affect child mortality; the first directly and the second through changes in desired fertility. Hence, as long as information on risk is included the actual shocks are valid instruments.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2008	83	Fertility, Reproductive Health And Economic Change	The Impact of Credit and Family Planning Programs on Fertility and Contraceptive Use in Ethiopia: Results From a Randomized Experiment	Knowledge and availability of contraceptive methods as well as factors such as female empowerment and earning capacity are important determinants of fertility decisions. We present results of an experimental design-based evaluation of a micro-credit and family planning program in rural Ethiopia. Administrative areas in the Amhara and Oromia regions were randomly allocated to either one of three intervention groups (introduction of micro-finance, or  community-based family planning services, or both) or to a fourth control group. Overall, we find that the introduction of micro-finance increased borrowing and women's access to credit but none of the interventions led to significant increases in contraceptive use relative to control areas. One possible explanation for the lack of impact of the family planning program is that it did not facilitate access to injectables, which appear to be the preferred contraceptive method in the area.	Jaikishan	 Desai	Alessandro	 Tarozzi
2008	83	Fertility, Reproductive Health And Economic Change	Post-Soviet Economic Crisis and Fertility Decline: Parity-Specific Trends in Tajikistan	The post-Soviet republics of Central Asia have been neglected in the fertility literature. Least of all is known about fertility change in Tajikistan, which experienced the most acute economic downturn in the post-socialist world. Here, given the inadequate nature of official registration data, survey birth history data are used to establish the temporal pattern in total fertility since independence in 1991. The paper finds evidence for a significant decline in fertility. Until the mid-1990s, total fertility decline was effected through a decline in higher order births. The scale and timing of this decline strongly indicates that, as in other ex-Soviet countries, the economic crisis discouraged childbearing in the early post-independence years. After the mid-1990s, fertility decline in Tajikistan was mostly effected through a reduction in the first birth rate. This may reflect a reduction in marriage rates stemming from large-scale male labour migration, itself a response to the economic crisis.	David	 Clifford
2008	83	Fertility, Reproductive Health And Economic Change	Reevaluating the Causes of the Baby Boom: Understanding the Effects of Electrification in the United States, 1925 to 1960	A half century after its peak, the ultimate causes of the baby boom remain a matter of debate among demographers and economists. In a highly influential article Greenwood, Seshadri, and Vandenbrouke (2005) argue that improvements in household production technologies effectively lowered the cost of raising children, which, in turn, caused to the baby boom. This paper provides a comprehensive empirical examination of this model. Using newly-compiled (1) county-level data on electrification, appliance ownership and family size and (2) annual, state-level data on the diffusion of electricity and completed childbearing, neither timeseries nor multivariate regression analysis reveals evidence of a positive impact of household appliances on childbearing decisions. Moreover, we document that the Amish experienced a rise in mid-century fertility, although they did not use electricity or modern appliances. Taken together, our results provide no support for the claim that appliance diffusion caused fertility to rise during the baby boom era.	William	J. Collins
2008	84	Gender Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Gender Differences in Measures of Health in a UK Population Based Survey of Older People:  A Latent Variable Modeling Approach	We employed a latent variable model and decomposed six health indicators, three objective (measured by a nurse) and three self-reported, into three components: 1)valid health; 2)method and 3) random error variance using data from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. Among the indicators used, functional limitations appeared the best indicator of health i.e. contaminated less by method and error variance than all other indicators. Analysis using the three latent factors confirmed the gender gap in health, with women having poorer health than men when external bias in the form of method variance and random error was controlled. However, men appear prone to ‘overeporting’ of health problems when self report measures are used. Age was also associated with worse health and self report method variance. Older participants’ responses to self report health indicators appear to be influenced by external factors to a larger extent than those of their younger counterparts.	George	B Ploubidis
2008	84	Gender Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Gender Differences in Trajectories of Health Limitations in Germany between 1995 and 2001. A Study Based on the German Socio Economic Panel (SOEP)	Our study analyzes for the first time disability trajectories in Germany over a seven-year period. Our objectives are (1) to identify different course types of disability, (2) to assess their relative frequency in a representative sample of the German population, and (3) to analyze their association with subsequent deaths in the period from 2002 to 2005. By exploring gender differences in health trajectories we try to improve our knowledge why women live longer but experience worse health. A cluster analysis identified eleven trajectories, which we group into three categories according to their average level of disability. We find significant gender differences in the distribution of trajectories in the youngest and in the oldest age group (50-59 and 80+). As expected we find higher mortality but lower disability for men. Women have lower mortality and this gender difference does not depend on the disability level before death.	Rasmus	 Hoffmann
2008	84	Gender Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	Economic Transition, Male Competition, and Sex Differences in Mortality Rates	Sex differences in mortality rates result from a complex set of causes which are best understood in an integrative evolutionary framework. We predicted that the transition from centrally planned to market economies in Eastern Europe increased sex differences in mortality rates, because increasing variation in social status and resources would increase risky male behavior and the physiological impact of stress. The sex difference in mortality rates increased considerably across 14 Eastern European countries from 1985-1989 to 1990-1994, most prominently during early adulthood. For nearly all nations, the increase was considerably higher than that for Western Europe. The effect across countries varies considerably and likely reflects conditions particular to each country. These findings illustrate how traits shaped by natural selection interact with environmental conditions to influence mortality patterns.	Daniel	J Kruger	Randolph	M Nesse
2008	84	Gender Differences in Adult Health and Mortality	The Male-Female Health-Survival Paradox: A Survey and Register Study of the Impact of Sex-Specific Selection and Information Bias	The present study examined whether a remarkable discrepancy between the health and survival of men versus women could partially be due to selection and information bias in surveys. The study is based on the linkage of three population-based surveys of 45 to 102 years old Danes with health registers covering the total Danish population regarding hospitalizations and prescription medicine. Men had higher participation rates than women at all ages. Non-hospitalized men had higher participation rates than hospitalized men, whereas no consistent pattern was observed among women. Women taking medications had higher participation rates than female non-users, while no such pattern was seen in men. Men used fewer medications than women, but they under-reported medication use to a similar degree as did women. The present study suggests that selection bias in surveys may contribute to the explanation of the health–survival paradox, though its contribution is likely to be small.	Anna	 Oksuzyan	Inge	 Petersen	Henrik	 Stovring	Matt	 McGue	Paul	 Bingley	Kaare	 Christensen
2008	85	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Family Structure and Early Cognitive Outcomes: The Moderating Influence of Paternal Education	Children raised with married biological parents have better average cognitive outcomes than those of cohabiting biological or single parents, however, it is unknown whether these associations hold when family types have similar socioeconomic characteristics. Data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (N = 2331) are used to address this question by comparing children’s age three PPVT-III scores across Stably Married, Stably Cohabiting, Unstable and Single Mother families separately at High (= some college), Medium (= high school degree/GED only), and Low (= no high school degree/GED) levels of fathers’ education. Results indicate children’s PPVT scores differ by family type only when fathers have High education levels. Differences in economic resources and investments in learning materials across family types are also larger and more strongly associated with PPVT scores in the High education group, although these differences do not fully explain variation in scores by family type.	Rebecca	M. Ryan
2008	85	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	The Impact of Parental Marital Disruption on Children’s Performance in School	Although it is well-documented that children from divorced or single-parent families perform more poorly in school than children from stable, two-parent families, less is known about how the timing of divorce is linked to declines in school performance. In this paper, we examine the temporal link between parents’ marital dissolution and the odds that a child is retained a grade in school using the Baltimore Parenthood Study, a thirty-year longitudinal study that has tracked the lives of inner-city families. Using logistic regression and hazard analysis, we show that the odds that a child is held back in school increase dramatically around the time of marital termination, including the pre-separation turmoil period and the post-separation crisis period.	Christopher	C. Weiss	Deirdre	 Bloome	Kathleen	 Foley
2008	85	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Consequences of Family Disruption on Children's Educational Outcomes in Norway	Using high quality data from Norwegian population registers, we examine the relationship between family disruption and children’s educational outcomes. We distinguish between disruptions caused by parental divorce and paternal death and, using a simultaneous equation model, pay particular attention to selection bias in the effect of divorce. We also allow for the possibility that disruption may have different effects at different stages of a child’s educational career. Our results suggest that selection on time-invariant maternal characteristics is important and works to overstate the effects of divorce on a child’s chances of continuing in education. Nevertheless, we find that the experience of marital breakdown during childhood is associated with lower levels of education, and that the effect weakens with the child’s age at disruption. The effects of divorce are most pronounced for the transitions during or just beyond the high school level.	Wendy	 Sigle-Rushton	Fiona	 Steele	Oystein	 Kravdal
2008	85	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Educational Achievement Gap between Single and Two-Parent Household Children: An International Comparison	Research in the U.S. has shown that children growing up in a two-parent household do better that those in single-parent household on a number of outcomes, educational in particular. In this paper, we use a cross-national study of educational achievement to test whether this finding applies to all countries. We find an almost universal, significant difference in favor of children from two-parent households, but the educational gap appears largest in the U.S. These gaps are typically reduced in half when controlling for family characteristics, in particular income which we predict from another set of international surveys. In two-level models where we include national indicators that may affect school performance, we find a number of significant factors, but the effects are typically small compared to household-level effects.	Patrick	 Heuveline	Hongxing	 Yang	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake	Matthew	 Weinshenker
2008	86	Urbanization Processes	The Patterns of Indonesia's Urbanization, 1980-2007	This paper examines continuity and change in Indonesia's urbanization patterns over the period 1980-2007, using data mainly from the National Population Censuses 1980-2000 and from the Village Potential (PODES) 2006. Urbanization in Indonesia is still characterized by a heavy concentration of the urban population in a few big cities, most notably the Jakarta Metropolitan Region (Jabodetabek) and Greater Surabaya (Gerbangkertasusila). Urban spatial development in Java is shaping a corridor, which connect many of the large cities. The population on the fringes of large cities is growing rapidly, while in the inner cities it is increasing at a very low rate of growth. The small towns and intermediate cities on the outer islands, including Sumatera, Kalimantan Sulawesi and Papua, have a relatively higher population growth rate compared with those in Java, which might indicate that those towns and cities playing a more significant role in regional development.	Tommy	 Firman
2008	86	Urbanization Processes	Trends and Patterns of India’s Urbanisation: A Demographic Assessment	As India has embarked upon economic reforms during the 1990s, the recently published 2001 census data provides an opportunity to study the urbanisation with reference to regional inequality and the contribution of the components of urban growth namely: natural increase, emergence of new towns and net contribution of rural to urban migration. India has about 5000 cities/towns which comprise 28 per cent of 1028 million population in 2001. However, about two-fifth of urban population live in only 35 metropolitan cities. On the other hand, the rate of urbanisation has slowed down recently despite higher growth in GDP(above 6 per cent). Further, the 1990s shows increased rate of rural to urban migration, but significant decline in urban natural increase. However, the picture is varied at the provincial level. The strategy of new economic policy of loosening the government control and encouraging private investment seem to have benefited the better off provinces selectively.	Ram	B. Bhagat	Soumya	 Mohanty
2008	86	Urbanization Processes	The Evolution of In Situ Urbanization and the Status of Quasi-Urban Populations and their Planning and Environmental Implications in China: Case Studies from Fujian Province	The emergence and development of in situ urbanization has been one of the major characteristics of China's recent urbanization process. Based on case studies from Fujian Province using GIS technology and census and statistical data, this paper examines the evolution of in situ urbanization and its planning and environmental implications. The results show that as a result of in situ urbanization, quasi-urban areas and populations are so well developed that they have become major components of rural-urban transition process, posing great challenges to conventional rural-urban dichotomous approach in urban and regional planning. Analysis on the temporal trend of these quasi-urban areas and populations shows that they are still in the process of spatial expansion, and their examination in an international context suggests that they are part of the recent changes in human settlement system, calling for a new theoretical and planning framework to deal with this new form of urbanization.	Yu	 Zhu
2008	86	Urbanization Processes	Migration, Urbanization and Spatial Dispersion in China	This paper aims to study the impacts of internal migration on urbanization and spatial inequality in China. Using the micro-data of 0.95% sample of the China 2000 Census and adopting a multinomial statistical model, we study the main characteristics of non-migrants, temporary and permanent migrants, and their origin and destination in major metropolitan areas, other cities, small towns and rural areas. Based on the results of statistical analysis, we simulate the major migrating patterns by human capital of the migrants across areas by urbanization categories. Our study will help to answer three main questions: (1) how did the Chinese population redistribute across territory with respect to urbanization categories? (2) How did migration affect urban demographic structure? (3) Has migration contributed to the changes in regional disparities (by skill level) in the past and is it likely to cause further spatial inequality in the future?	Leiwen	 Jiang
2008	87	Population and Environment: Making Use of Secondary Data Sources	The Impact of Demographic Dynamics on Natural Resources. A Discussion within the Framework of Input-Output Models	The paper is an attempt to discuss the role of demographic dynamics on natural resources and environmental disruption within the framework of economic input-output models. In the first part of the paper, we discuss an approach based on input-output models and we present it as a generalization of the IPAT equation. We then develop an analysis of the impact of changes in mortality and fertility levels on natural resource requirements, within the context of the stable population theory and a standard model of economic growth. In the second part of the paper, we develop a methodology to estimate consumption profiles by age, given data on household consumption. We then make use of the estimated consumption profiles by age, for the United States, to get some insights on the effect of demographic dynamics, such as aging, on energy requirements and emissions of greenhouse gases.	Emilio	 Zagheni
2008	87	Population and Environment: Making Use of Secondary Data Sources	Debt Service, Structural Adjustment Lending, and Deforestation: Reconsidering the Cross-National Evidence	We present cross-national models that examine the determinants of deforestation from 1990 to 2005. We test dependency theory hypotheses that both debt service and structural adjustment affect forests. Accordingly, we find substantial support for this theoretical perspective becasue the results suggest both factors increase deforestation. We also find support for world polity theory that international non-governmental organizations decrease deforestation. We conclude with a brief discussion of the findings, policy implications, and possible directions for future research.	John	 Shandra	Bruce	 London
2008	87	Population and Environment: Making Use of Secondary Data Sources	Urbanization and the Global Network of Protected Areas	The goal of this research is to explore the vulnerability of conservation areas to both the direct threat of urban encroachment and the indirect effects of proximity to urbanized areas. A geographic information system analysis of the global distribution of urban land and conservation areas has revealed that today, 25 percent of protected areas (3.9 million sq. km) lie within 60 km of urban land, and 12 percent lie within 30 km of urban land. In order to estimate the conservation threat posed by future urban expansion, the aim is build a rough estimate of urban areas in 2030 by combining non-spatial, country-level urbanization estimates from the United Nations with recent urban population density observations and a composite of contemporary global urban maps. Initial findings indicate that urbanization has as important a role to play in setting global conservation priorities as do other components of global change.	David	 Potere
2008	87	Population and Environment: Making Use of Secondary Data Sources	An Interdisciplinary Spatiotemporal Population Model	Population change has been studied in several fields including demography, human ecology, population geography, environmental sociology, transportation planning, and regional economics. However, little systematic work has been undertaken to synthesize their different approaches to and views on population change. In this study, we examine population change holistically in an attempt to shed light on the mechanism of population change. We first systematize population change’s driving forces and spatial and temporal dimensions from an interdisciplinary perspective. The driving forces are organized and developed into five indices – demographics, livability, accessibility, desirability, and developability. We then test our approach by examining population change from 1970-2000 in Wisconsin at the municipal level. The findings suggest that such an approach helps systematically understand driving factors’ effects on population change, minimize the multicollinearity, reduce heteroskedasticity, eliminate spatial error and lag dependence, and integrate the two seemingly unmixable approaches of environmental modeling and demographic modeling together.	Guangqing	 Chi	Stephen	J Ventura
2008	88	Beyond Cohabitation: Living Together and Living Apart	Cohabiting on the Edge: Living Together Apart	Though it may have many meanings, cohabitation is generally believed to involve a serious, interdependent relationship. However, just as those who do not cohabit may be engaged in serious relationships, those who cohabit are not necessarily likewise engaged. Among low-income couples, a combination of need and obligation, often accompanied by shared parenting and a previous committed relationship, can create cohabiting relationships in which the cohabitors do not view themselves as a couple. Such couples share living space and may share financial, household, or parenting responsibilities even though they no longer feel any attachment to each other. We term such relationships living together apart, or LTA. These relationships emphasize the bonds that shared parenting creates and may explain some disparate accounts of cohabitation status.	Caitlin	 Cross-Barnet	Andrew	J. Cherlin
2008	88	Beyond Cohabitation: Living Together and Living Apart	Neither Single, Nor in a Couple: A Study of Living Apart Together in France	Over the past twenty years, sociologists and demographers have been observing the trends in Living Apart Together (LAT) relationships. Is this a distinct form of partnership or a transitory phase prior to cohabitation with a partner? The 2005 French GGS tracked the development of the phenomenon, distinguished the characteristics of persons living in LAT relationships, studied their reasons for living separately, the frequency with which they saw their partner and whether or not they intended to cohabit at a later date.   	LAT does not appear to be a homogeneous form of cohabitation, but takes a variety of forms. After establishing the principal characteristics of LAT in France, we suggest a four-group LAT typology based on a multiple correspondence analysis (MCA). Young people without a conjugal past contrast with older individuals with children in terms of their reasons for not cohabiting, their ways of life and their future projects.	Arnaud	 Régnier-Loilier	Catherine	 Villeneuve-Gokalp	Eva	 Beaujouan
2008	88	Beyond Cohabitation: Living Together and Living Apart	Who Doesn't Cohabit?: Cohort Changes in Pre-Marital Behavior	In just a few decades, cohabitation has gone from being a selective practice to normative behavior for young Americans. This paper uses data from the NSFH Waves 1 and 3 to examine changes in marriage patterns between the late 1980’s and 2001. Smaller shares of young adults were married at Wave 3, but substantially more who were first lived with their spouse. Gender and race differentials in the shares marrying without cohabiting decreased, as did variation by educational attainment. Accounting for cohort change reveals that at Wave 3 Blacks were significantly less likely to wed without first cohabiting, as were those growing up in single-parent families. Respondents with college degrees were nearly twice as likely to wed without cohabiting as their high school educated counterparts who married. Notwithstanding increases across the board in cohabitation, our results suggest growing social class disparities in who does not cohabit prior to marriage.	Amanda	J. Miller	Sharon	 Sassler	Fenaba	 Addo
2008	88	Beyond Cohabitation: Living Together and Living Apart	Initial Marriage Plans and Current Cohabitors’ Expectations of Marriage	Using a new dataset that includes both measures of initial marriage plans and current expectations of marriage, this paper examines what factors influence whether a cohabitation begins with an engagement or definite plans to marry and how initial plans are related to expectations of marriage. Those who began cohabiting with initial marriage plans are much more optimistic about their chances of marrying than those without such plans, and among those with initial marriage plans, virtually no socioeconomic or past family formation characteristics affect their expectations of marriage. Among those without initial marriage plans, however, prior union experiences and the presence of both shared children and children from a prior union influence expectations of marriage. The results suggest that the expectations of marriage among couples with stronger commitments at the start of cohabiting are less influenced by potential barriers to marriage than those who did not have a strong commitment.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2008	89	Race and Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment	Is Parental Love Colorblind? Allocation of Resources within Mixed Families	Studies have shown that differences in wage-determinant skills between blacks and whites emerge during a child’s infancy, highlighting the roles of parental characteristics and investment decisions. Exploring the genetics of skin-color and models of intrahousehold allocations, I present evidence that, controlling for observed and unobserved parental characteristics, light-skinned children are more likely to receive investments in formal education than their dark-skinned siblings. Even though not denying the importance of borrowing constraints (or other ancestry effects), this suggests that parental expectations regarding differences in the return to human capital investments may play an independent role on the persistence of earnings differentials.	Marcos	A. Rangel
2008	89	Race and Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment	To Punish or not to Punish?: Parental Responses to Inadequate Achievement	Despite numerous studies on parental involvement in children’s academic schooling, there is a dearth of knowledge on how parents respond specifically to inadequate academic performance. In this study we assess the degree of racial variation in (1) parents’ likely response to inadequate academic achievement and (2) the effect of parents’ responses on children’s achievement. Using data from the Child Development Supplement (N=1041) to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we find that White and Black parents differ markedly in the ways they are likely to respond to inadequate academic performance. Our findings are provocative and reveal that parents whose children are most in need of academic improvement respond to inadequate achievement in ways that exacerbate the problem.	Keith	D. Robinson	Angel	L Harris
2008	89	Race and Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment	The Effects of Affirmative Action Policies in University Admissions on Human Capital Development of Minority Children: A Test of the Expectations Hypothesis	It is well documented that minority children leave primary school with lower levels of acquired skill than do their white counterparts. The causes of this “skill gap”, however, are not well understood. This paper attempts to analyze one possible cause: the impact of a perceived lack of future opportunities on the human capital development of minority children. Using the CNLSY79 data, I take advantage of recent changes in affirmative action laws regarding university admissions in California and Texas as a natural experiment. I employ both difference-in-difference-in-difference and individual fixed effects methodologies to test for changes in achievement test scores among minority children between the ages of 7 and 14. The results show a significant drop in test scores among thirteen and fourteen year old African-Americans in the affected states relative to whites. These results suggest that negative expectations may play a role in the human capital development of African-American children.	Ronald	C Caldwell
2008	89	Race and Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment	Gender Gaps in Educational Attainment in Less Developed Countries	Conventional wisdom is that gender gaps in schooling discriminating against females in developing countries generally are large, though probably declining. In this paper we re-examine recent gender gaps in schooling in the developing world and come to a more nuanced characterization of their nature, which suggests that the developing countries are becoming more like the developed countries, with gender gaps that increasingly favor, rather than discriminate against, females. Using data from 34 countries with multiple Demographic and Health Surveys, we examine how the gender gaps in current school enrollment and grade completion emerge across the education life course from age 6 to 18. Furthermore, we also examine how these age-specific measures have changed over time, comparing the periods 1990-1999 and 2000-2005. Our initial analyses indicate that among children who have ever attended school, girls have significantly better schooling progress than boys in most regions of the developing world.	Monica	J. Grant	Jere	 Behrman
2008	90	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Regional Differences in the Estimation of Influenza Burden in the Elderly: Does Choice of  Population Denominator Matter?	Proper estimation of a population denominator is critical to many longitudinal epidemiological studies, though many researchers often overlook this. The objective of this study is to determine the sensitivity of age-specific influenza-related hospitalization rates in the elderly to the choice of four population denominators: decennial census, linearly interpolated from decennial censuses, intercensal estimates, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). We abstracted 14 million hospitalization claims from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for the period 1992-2004 by age and influenza season and applied each of the three denominators to the total hospitalizations by census region, state, and race. We found large discrepancies in the rates using the difference denominators, especially comparing Census 2000 to intercensal estimates. These discrepancies differed by region. Our findings underscore the need to account for population dynamics that may play a role in spatiotemporal disease distribution in longitudinal studies.	Steven	A. Cohen	Imran	 Oomer	Elena	 Naumova
2008	90	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Content Analysis of Questions Regarding Disabilities in the 65 Years and Older Population in the Census 2000, the Puerto Rico Community Survey 2006 and the Puerto Rican Elderly Health Conditions 2003	This investigation analyzes discrepancies in results from 2000 U.S. Census, 2006 Puerto Rico Community Survey, and 2003 PREHCO concerning disability with regard to sex, poverty level and education in the 65 years and older population of Puerto Rico. This research is of a descriptive nature. In completing this task, the public use microdata sample “PUMS” from the 2000 U.S. Census and 2006 PRCS was used, as well as the PREHCO projects’ data base. Census 2000 indicates that 44% of the 65 years and older population were under the poverty level and 59% has at least one disability. According to the PRCS 43.1% of the population of the 65 years or more, were under the poverty level. PREHCO data reveals that 37.5% had at least one disability and 52.4% lived under the poverty level. Differences are expected to be found across surveys. A content analysis should help in clarifying discrepancies observed.	Miguel	A Cortés-Santiago	Roberto	R Marrero-Cases	Jonathan	Jorge  Morales-Gonzalez	Ana	Luisa  Davila	Marta	 Bustillo
2008	90	Case Studies in Applied Demography	U.S. Immigration in the  Rear View Mirror	Due to the poor quality of available statistics on immigration to the United States since at least 1990, estimates of the net immigration component of annual population change during the 1990s are inconsistent with those estimates made for later years which reflect the higher than anticipated levels of immigration found in the 2000 census. This paper exploits census and American Community Survey data on year of entry of the foreign-born population and the emigration rates estimates by Van Hook et. al. (2006) to estimate annual net immigration flows from 1970 to 2002 through a reverse projection method. The resulting estimates are consistent with 2000 census and later population counts. The quality and consistency of data on year of entry are assessed and adjustments are implemented to compensate for apparent bias in the responses.	John	 Pitkin
2008	90	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Spatial and Multinomial Analysis of Later-Life Migration into Florida	This paper briefly highlights Florida’s demographics from 1950 to present before examining retiree in-migration patterns from 1980-2005 using IPUMS. The analysis is conducted at two levels: (1) spatial analysis examining in-migration from all states, in-migration from just the top five states into the top ten MSAs, and detailed in-migration from each of the top five states into all MSAs for 2005 followed by (2) multinomial analysis examining in-migration with disability as the main independent variable. Results indicate patterns of migration have held steady for nearly two decades, but are slowly changing due to economic/housing constraints. Nevertheless, migration into Florida mostly occurs among Whites. Interestingly, all states show a distinct pattern and this lends evidence for Migration/Network Flows Theory. Please note: This work in progress also models migration into Florida using both a Multinomial (individual level) and Conditional Logit (both individual and state level) framework.	Andy	 Sharma
2008	91	Family Dynamics, Race/Ethnicity, and Early Child Wellbeing	The Effects of Single Parenthood on Child Development: Does Maternal Education Matter?	Nonmarital childbearing has increased dramatically in recent decades. A great deal of attention has been paid to this increase, in part because of concerns that having a single mother negatively affects children’s well-being. The effect of single parenthood on child outcomes may vary systematically by the educational attainment of the mother. Research suggests that single parenthood may be a different phenomenon among highly educated women than among less educated women. Specifically, educated women become single parents significantly later in life than less educated women, which may improve both investments in prenatal care, as well as the quality of available resources. In this project, we use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort to answer several important questions. First, do the effects of single motherhood on investments in prenatal care and birth outcomes vary by the mother’s educational attainment? Second, to what extent are these differences correlated with differences in economic resources, maternal behaviors, and pregnancy intention?	Alison	 Jacknowitz	Lucie	 Schmidt
2008	91	Family Dynamics, Race/Ethnicity, and Early Child Wellbeing	Family Instability, Selection, and Child Well-Being in Middle Childhood	The structure of American families has undergone dramatic change over the past 60 years. These changes have translated into more dynamic romantic relationship histories for adults and more complex living arrangements for their children. An emerging literature has documented this instability and identified a link between family structure instability and child well-being. What remains less clear is why this linkage exists. Is it the actual experience of family instability, characteristics of the mother that select children into these family structures, or a combination of both? Moreover, what mechanisms explain why family instability and selection contribute to compromised child well-being? This paper addresses these questions using a sample drawn from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development (SECCYD), a large-scale prospective study that follows children from birth to early adolescence and has incomparable data on children and their parents, including at least twice yearly reports on household composition.	Shannon	E. Cavanagh
2008	91	Family Dynamics, Race/Ethnicity, and Early Child Wellbeing	Understanding the Sources of Racial and Gender Disparities in Early Childhood Aggression	This investigation uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to identify the pattern of aggression by sex and race among young black and white children and uses hierarchical linear models to explore whether child gender moderates the influences of neighborhood characteristics, family structure or parenting practices on aggression. Two key findings emerge. First, at ages 3 and 5, black boys are more aggressive than their peers. Second, child gender moderates a number of influences on aggression. Among blacks, having a biological or social father move into the household by age 3 and mothers’ victimization by violence associate with higher initial aggression in boys than girls. In the case of a partner moving in, the gender gap lessens with age. Among whites, having a partner move out and mothers’ use of nonviolent discipline associate with higher initial aggression in boys than girls. Neither gap lessens with age.	Emily	 Moiduddin
2008	91	Family Dynamics, Race/Ethnicity, and Early Child Wellbeing	Class, Race, and Gender Disparities in Behavior Problems at 24 Months of Age: Population-Based Estimates	We used a nationally representative sample of children to estimate the effects of socioeconomic status (SES), race/ethnicity, gender, additional socio-demographics, gestational and birth factors, and parenting on children’s risk for learning-related behavior problems (e.g., inattention, a lack of task persistence, non-cooperation, or frustration), at 24 months of age. Results indicated that boys are about twice as likely as girls to display learning-related behavior problems. Children from lower SES households are about twice as likely as those from high SES households to display behavior problems. Statistically controlling for these factors, we found consistently significant patterns of elevated behavior problems for some Asian and Native American children, but not for African-American or Latino children. Only small portions of these effects are explained by variation in the children’s gestational or birth characteristics. A significant portion, but less than half of the socio-demographic effects are attributable to measured features of parenting received by children.	Paul	 Morgan	George	 Farkas	Marianne	M. Hillemeier	Steven	 Maczuga
2008	92	Family Context and Health Outcomes for Parents and Children	Family Structure and Child Health Outcomes in Fragile Families	Dramatic changes in family demography in the United States have led to increasing numbers of children living in “non-traditional” households. A large body of literature documents the association between living in a non-traditional family structure/familial instability and children’s cognitive and behavioral outcomes. In contrast, relatively little research has focused on the relationship between family structure and instability and children’s physical health outcomes, despite the fact that there is good theoretical reason to expect that family structure and instability might be associated with children’s physical health. The current study uses longitudinal data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to assess whether family structure and familial instability are associated with a variety of children’s physical health outcomes. The paper pays particular attention to potential mediating mechanisms, and utilizes fixed effects models to address problems of selection bias.	Sharon	 Bzostek
2008	92	Family Context and Health Outcomes for Parents and Children	The Health Consequences of “Good Breadwinner” and “Good Parent” Work-Family Strategies for Three Cohorts of Men and Women	We investigate whether four work-family strategies affect the physical health of adult men and women; and explore the extent to which these patterns vary for three cohorts: Silent Generation (born 1931-1943); Baby Boom (born 1944-1959); and Baby Bust (born 1960-1970). We consider three strategies that are consistent with the “good parent” ideal (stopping work, reducing work hours, or taking a flexible job to have more time with children) and one strategy that is consistent with the “good breadwinner” ideal (working longer hours to provide for children). Analyses are based on data from the 1995 and 2005 waves of the Midlife Development in the United States (MIDUS) survey. Baby Bust men who make sacrifices consistent with the “involved parent” ideal have an elevated risk of high blood pressure. This finding likely reflects their life course stage, where young men are currently grappling with the competing demands of work and family.	Kristen	W. Springer	Deborah	 Carr
2008	92	Family Context and Health Outcomes for Parents and Children	The Effect of Incarceration on Fathers' Health	This paper utilizes the nationally representative Fragile Families and Child Well-Being longitudinal data to examine the impact of incarceration on fathers’ health. Fathers with poor health are more likely to have labor market difficulties, excessive expenses and may be forced to make trade-offs between medications and other goods. Research confirms that fathers who have been incarcerated face markedly more barriers in terms of labor market opportunities and family formation (Geller, Garfinkel & Western, 2006; Western, Lopoo & McLanahan, 2004; Curtis, 2006). Multivariate regression is used to examine the impact of incarceration on the health of fathers controlling for substance use, previous health/mental health status, impulsivity, education, race/ethnicity, marital status and age. If, however, incarceration and health are jointly determined by observed or unobserved factors, standard regression estimates will be biased. Thus, an instrumental variables approach will also be tested.	Marah	A. Curtis
2008	92	Family Context and Health Outcomes for Parents and Children	Parental Investments and Child Endowments: Do Parents Compensate or Reinforce Birth Weight Differences among Siblings?	Studies identify both short and long-term consequences of being born low birth weight (LBW). But are the processes that link early childhood conditions to adult outcomes biological or sociological in nature? Do parents compensate or reinforce birth endowment differences among their offspring? I use birth weight and time diary data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics-Child Development Supplement to analyze 538 sibling pairs. Preliminary findings suggest that mothers spend more time with LBW children during early childhood, a time when the health risks associated with being born low birth weight are the greatest. By the time children enter school and achievement based differences become either more noticeable or relevant, investment patterns reverse; normal weight children receive more maternal time than their LBW siblings. These findings suggest that the adult disadvantages faced by LBW children are not simply due to biological destiny but also to family dynamics that both compensate and reinforce early health conditions.	Amy	 Hsin
2008	93	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Grandparents and Grandchildren	Understanding Race Differences in the Role of Grandparents in Single-Mother Families	Our previous work (Dunifon and Kowaleski-Jones, 2007) examined whether children living with single mothers benefit when they also live with a grandparent, finding benefits for white, but not black, children. The goal of this study is to “unpack” these race differences by examining whether they are due to differences in grandparent characteristics such as education, health or age. Using data from the 1979 to 2004 waves of the NLSY mother-child file, we first examine a wide set of child outcomes (test scores, behavior, delinquency, and attitudes) to document where there are race differences in the influence of grandparent co-residence on children. We then seek to explain these race differences, using an extensive set of grandparent characteristics that could themselves differ by race. The goal is to better understand the role grandparents play in single-mother families and how and why this dynamic may differ by race.	Rachel	 Dunifon	David	R. Harris	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2008	93	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Grandparents and Grandchildren	Picking up where Public Support Leaves Off:
Grandparents’ Money, Time, and Space Contributions to Children and their Families	In 1984, Sam Preston focused our attention on the divergence in public support for elders and children, highlighting the vulnerability of children in many families that struggle to make ends meet. In this paper, we examine the ways in which grandparents may fill the gaps where parents and public programs fall short. We use rich intergenerational data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its 1997 Child Development Supplement, to study patterns of assistance from grandparents to their adult children and grandchildren. Specifically, we model the likelihood of three types of transfers: gifts of money, spending time together and living together. The analysis focuses on the impact of the “needs” of children and their parents, as well as the “abilities” of grandparents to help. Overall, we find that the needs of children’s immediate caregivers and families matter most for transfers from grandparents.	Diana	B. Elliott	Joan	R. Kahn
2008	93	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Grandparents and Grandchildren	Differential Treatment of Orphaned Children in Lesotho	In Southern Africa, adult HIV prevalence rates of between 19 and 33 percent are fueling concern about the welfare of the increasing number of children losing parents to the epidemic. Emerging evidence suggests that parental death is negatively associated with a range of child outcomes. Explanations for orphans’ differential disadvantage have clustered around three themes to date: biological affinity, household resource constraint, and investment in children with greater “endowments.” Drawing on over 120 in-depth interviews with caregivers, children, and key informants in Lesotho, I look for evidence consistent with these explanations as well as new understandings of the mechanisms underlying orphan differential treatment. Preliminary analyses support biological affinity and resource constraint as mechanisms, and provide additional nuance on the way they work and interact. Though there is little evidence of the “endowments” mechanism, the interviews suggest that “character” matters, as do community expectations regarding the fair treatment of children.	Rachel	E. Goldberg
2008	93	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Grandparents and Grandchildren	Children’s Living Arrangements and Gender Differences in Parental Support in Rural Malawi	Child fostering is a common practice throughout sub-Saharan Africa that has long preceded the AIDS epidemic. However, little is known about the context of non-orphan child fostering in the areas most afflicted by HIV/AIDS. In this paper, we examine the patterns and circumstances of child fostering in rural Malawi using unique household data from the 2006 round of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project, supplemented with data from in-depth interviews. These data provide a rare opportunity to examine children’s living arrangements and their association with parental and household characteristics, including HIV status. Our research is guided by three hypotheses: (1) fostering out of non-orphans is widespread in Malawi; (2) fostering and parental support are gendered and will vary by patterns of descent; and (3) HIV/AIDS and its consequences for families are influencing the extent and nature of this type of fostering.	Sara	 Yeatman
2008	94	Contemporary Topics in Mexican Demography	Change in the Transition to Adulthood in Mexico?		Elizabeth	 Fussell
2008	94	Contemporary Topics in Mexican Demography	New Paths in Marital Trajectories: Marriage Formation and Dissolution in Mexico		Patricio	 Solís
2008	94	Contemporary Topics in Mexican Demography	Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Mexico		Edith	 Pacheco
2008	94	Contemporary Topics in Mexican Demography	Migration and Marriage: Union Formation and Dissolution among Mexican and Mexican-American Women	In this study we examine the impact of U.S. migration on union formation and dissolution among Mexican and Mexican-American women. We use retrospective data for non-migrant and U.S. return migrant women in Mexico from the 1998 National Retrospective Demographic Survey, and data for Mexican born and Mexican-American women resident in the United States from the 1995 and 2002 NSFG, to construct a pooled sample of union status histories. The pooled sample provides a unique nationally representative sample of Mexican born women resident in Mexico and in the United States and Mexican-American women. We use multi-state hazard regression models to identify the impact of migration experience and the effects of migrant selectivity on union formation and marital stability net of the effects of education, cohort, period, family background, and children.	David	P Lindstrom	Gabriela	 Sanchez-Soto
2008	95	Biodemographic Perspectives on Early Life Influences on Later Life Health	Early Childhood Disease Patterns and Metabolic Function in Early Adulthood	This paper examines the mechanisms by which early life conditions affect the aging process. Specifically, we investigate the effects of early childhood disease on the incidence of metabolic syndrome and its components in early adulthood. We use ordered probit and logistic regression models to predict the extent to which childhood conditions influence risk factors for chronic disease in early adulthood, controlling for attained socioeconomic status and adult health behaviors. We also compare estimates of directly measured childhood disease and nutrition with adult height, the conventional proxy measure of childhood conditions. The INCAP Longitudinal Study offers a unique opportunity to address these research questions because of the rich data on child morbidity, input and output measures of nutritional status, various anthropometric measures of growth, and adult health outcomes.	Rachel	 Margolis
2008	95	Biodemographic Perspectives on Early Life Influences on Later Life Health	Early Origins of Inflammation: A Life Course Perspective on the  Predictors of C-reactive Protein in Young Adults in the Philippines	Inflammation may be an important mechanism linking early environments with subsequent patterns of aging and mortality, although few studies have considered biomarkers of inflammation from a life course perspective. We address this issue in an ongoing cohort study in the Philippines, with over 20 years of prospective data. Concentrations of high sensitivity C-reactive protein were determined in 1,609 individuals, and evaluated in relation to the following: prenatal undernutrition; growth, frequency of infectious disease, pathogen exposure, and patterns of breastfeeding in the first two years of life; and concurrent measures of health behaviors and anthropometric measures of nutritional status, assessed at the time of blood collection. Logistic regression models indicate that prenatal undernutrition and pathogen exposure in infancy are relatively strong predictors of the likelihood of elevated CRP in young adulthood, independent of concurrent measures of adiposity and health behaviors.	Thomas	W McDade	Christopher	 Kuzawa	Linda	 Adair
2008	95	Biodemographic Perspectives on Early Life Influences on Later Life Health	Stressors Over the Life Course and Physiological Dysregulation in Costa Rica	Allostatic load (AL) theory purports that stress experienced over the entire life course exacts a cumulative, physiological toll on the body which eventually contributes to poor health. Although mounting evidence indicates that elevated levels of AL is a risk factor for poor health, it is not yet clear whether those same elevated levels are due to stressor exposure. Thus, in order to better understand the connection between stressor exposure and AL levels, the paper here, using a new, nationally representative study conducted in Costa Rica, explores the link between a number of different potentially important life stressors and neuroendocrine system function. The main finding of this paper is that there is little association between the life stress indicators and risky levels of the neuroendocrine biomarkers. This result is consistent with a growing literature that suggests that neuroendocrine system dysregulation stems from sources other than stressor exposure.	Omer	 Gersten	William	H. Dow
2008	95	Biodemographic Perspectives on Early Life Influences on Later Life Health	Long-Run Effects on Longevity of a  Nutritional Shock in Early Life: The Dutch Potato Famine of 1846-1847	This paper investigates whether nutritional shocks in early life negatively affect longevity at older ages, using unique individual data and exploiting the exogenous variation implied by natural experiments. In particular, early nutritional conditions are instrumented by exposure to the severe Dutch potato famine of 1846-47. The individual data are from the Historical Sample of the Netherlands and are augmented by food price data and macro-economic data. We compare non-parametrically (residual) lifetimes of men and women, exposed and not exposed to the famine. We also estimate survival models in which we control for other individual characteristics and additional (early life) determinants of mortality. Men exposed to severe famine during pregnancy (at least four months) and directly after birth have a significant lower residual life expectancy at age 50 than others, but not at earlier ages. We could not demonstrate any long-run effects for men exposed at ages 0-2 and for women.	France	 Portrait	Maarten	M. Lindeboom	Gerard	G.J. van den Berg
2008	96	New Approaches in Demographic Estimation and Modeling	Neighborhoods and Individual Preferences: A Markovian Model	Demographers have a longstanding interest in the relationship between individual behavior and collective outcomes. Schelling’s (1971; 1978) seminal work shows that even relatively tolerant individuals may collectively produce segregated neighborhoods. More recently, Bruch and Mare (2006) use an agent-based (microsimulation) model to examine the implications of different assumptions about how individuals evaluate neighborhoods (based on their race/ethnic composition) for spatial inequality. Their model yields useful insights but is complex. Here we illuminate many aspects of their (and related) work using a simplified Markov model of individual choice. We obtain an exact condition for the minimum strength that individual preferences must have in order to yield stable segregation patterns. Thus we can relate observed preferences to observed macrolevel patterns of differentiation. We also show that under Schelling-type rules, segregation is the only stable equilibrium. We argue that formal models are useful in studying the relationship between individual choices and population-level outcomes.	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar	Elizabeth	E. Bruch	Robert	D. Mare
2008	96	New Approaches in Demographic Estimation and Modeling	A Simple Model to Understand Gender Discrepancies in Sexual Behavior Reports	This paper formalizes the intuition that in closed, heterosexual populations without misreporting or sampling bias, average number of sex partners reported by men and women should balance. With some simple examples and key parameter values for the fraction of sex workers and number of sex worker clients, we use a simple model to demonstrate that sampling bias could account for the range of gender gaps in reported number of partners. To understand a second stylized fact – that men report condom use more often than women do – we present a related model which depends on additional parameters. We show that a gender gap in condom use persists when (a) some individuals have multiple partners, (b) some individuals have most recent sex with a non-regular partner and (c) condom use differs across partner types. Our simple model highlights a new explanation for observed gender differences in reports of condom use.	Taryn	 Dinkelman	David	 Lam
2008	96	New Approaches in Demographic Estimation and Modeling	Sources of Error and Bias in Methods of Fertility Estimation Contingent on the P/F Ratio in a Time of Declining Fertility and Rising Mortality	The most commonly used indirect fertility estimation methods rely on the use of the P/F ratio, first proposed by Brass. In essence, the ratio compares cumulated cohort fertility with cumulated period fertility on the basis of three, fairly strong, assumptions. First, that fertility rates have been constant over time. Second, that the age distribution of fertility has been constant; and third, that the fertility of women who do not survive to report their numbers of children borne does not differ from those who do survive. The intention of this paper is to interrogate what happens to the results produced by the P/F ratio method as each of these three assumptions is violated, first independently, and then concurrently. These investigations are important given the generally poor quality of census data collected in developing countries, particularly sub-Saharan Africa, and the particular demographic dynamics associated with a generalised HIV/AIDS epidemic in the region.	Tom	A. Moultrie
2008	96	New Approaches in Demographic Estimation and Modeling	Identifying Poverty Groups in Nairobi's Slum Settlements: A Latent Class Analysis Approach	This paper aims to contribute to knowledge on conceptualizing and measuring urban poverty by categorizing households according to their socio-economic status.   We identify groups with similar profiles of socio-economic status using Latent Class Analysis (LCA). In LCA an unobserved, latent variable (poverty) explains the association between observed variables (indicators of socio-economic status). Compared to other methods for measuring poverty (such as Principal Component Analysis), in LCA the number and size of the poverty groups is determined by the data. This study uses data from the longitudinal Nairobi Urban Health Demographic Surveillance System to identify poverty groups in two slums in Nairobi; Korogocho and Viwandani. In Korogocho we identify three groups, the poorest group accounting for 19% of all households. In Viwandani we identify four groups, with 27% of the households in the poorest group.	Leontine	 Alkema	Ousmane	 Faye	Michael	 Mutua
2008	98	Neighborhood Processes	Neighborhood Structural Inequality, Collective Efficacy, 
and Sexual Risk Behavior among Urban Youth	We draw on collective efficacy theory to extend a contextual model of early adolescent sexual behavior. We hypothesize that neighborhood poverty, residential instability, and aspects of immigrant concentration decrease collective efficacy—or the community-level capacity to provide informal social control of youth. In turn, we expect diminished collective efficacy to influence adolescent sexual partnering. Findings from multinomial logistic regression models of the number of sexual partners among youth from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods reveal evidence of neighborhood effects on adolescent sexual activity. Poverty is positively associated with the number of sexual partners during adolescence. Collective efficacy is negatively associated with having two or more sexual partners and mediates a nontrivial proportion of the effects of poverty. Neighborhood characteristics account for more than half of the positive effect of African American race on sexual partnership reports versus European Americans and render the racial difference insignificant.	Christopher	 Browning	Tama	 Leventhal
2008	98	Neighborhood Processes	Network Effects and Risky Teen Behaviors in the L.A.FANS	This paper uses a dataset of families in Los Angeles to examine whether there is evidence of network effects in teen behaviors including smoking, drinking, drug use, teen pregnancy, and gang membership. This paper adds to the literature on network effects in four ways. First, we use a dataset rich in information about attitudes and behaviors of parents and children and combine it with census data about the neighborhoods in Los Angeles. This allows us to disentangle the issues of causality in the measurement of peer effects. Second, we test if network effects remain relevant in explaining teen behavior after controlling for sibling effects. Third, we exploit the demographic changes in Los Angeles since the 1970s to obtain a measure of network strength less subject to omitted variable bias. Finally, we examine if networks are operating through information sharing or social norms using information about adults' attitudes towards risky behaviors.	Alvaro	 Mezza	Emily	 Wiemers
2008	98	Neighborhood Processes	Neighborhood Context and Romantic Relationships: 
Competing Models of Adolescent Relationships in Disadvantaged Communities	Qualitative research on sexual and romantic relationships among adolescents from poor neighborhoods presents two conflicting accounts of typical adolescent relationships and how they lead to teenage pregnancy. Anderson’s “Mating Game” model (presented most recently in Code of the Street [Anderson 1999]) describes adolescent romantic and sexual behavior as a game between boys and girls. Edin and Kefalas’ (2005) “poverty of relationships” model emphasizes the meaning of parenthood for young men and women in poor neighborhoods. This paper identifies key points of disagreement in these two models, and uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to adjudicate between them. Preliminary analyses find some support for aspects of both models but suggest that the poverty of relationships model provides the most accurate account. More broadly, our results suggest the importance of romantic relationships for understanding neighborhood differences in early childbearing.	David	 Harding	Rebecca	 Karb
2008	98	Neighborhood Processes	Overweight Children: Assessing the Contribution of the Built Environment	Using the second wave of the Child Development Supplement (CDS-II) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this paper examines the relationship between the built environment and overweight status in children. A number of built environment characteristics were examined: population density, alpha index of connectivity, urban design, pedestrian fatality from motor vehicle crashes, neighborhood physical disorder, restaurant density, and grocery store and convenience store densities. We find that higher convenience store density, presence of physical disorder in the neighborhood, and living in a newer neighborhood is associated with a higher probability of being overweight for children and adolescents. We also find evidence suggesting that residential mobility may play a role in determining children’s exposure to neighborhoods of different types. However, we did not find evidence suggesting that the probability of moving or the type of neighborhood moved into varied between overweight and non-overweight children.	Irina	 Grafova
2008	99	Race, Ethnicity, Ancestry, and Caste in Demographic Measurement	Ancestry versus Ethnicity: The Complexity and Selectivity of 
Mexican Identification in the United States	Using 2000 Census data, we analyze the responses of Mexican Americans to questions eliciting their ethnicity (or Hispanic origin) and their ancestry. We investigate whether different patterns of responses to these questions reflect varying degrees of ethnic attachment. For example, those identified as Mexican in both the Hispanic origin and the ancestry questions might have stronger levels of ethnic attachment than those identified as Mexican only in the ancestry question. How U.S.-born Mexicans report their ethnicity/ancestry is strongly associated with indicators of socioeconomic status. In particular, educational attainment, English proficiency, and earnings are especially high for men and women who claim a Mexican ancestry but report their ethnicity as not Hispanic. Further, intermarriage and the Mexican identification of children are also strongly related to how U.S.-born Mexican adults report their ethnicity/ancestry, revealing a possible link between the intergenerational transmission of Mexican identification and economic status.	Stephen	 Trejo	Brian	 Duncan
2008	99	Race, Ethnicity, Ancestry, and Caste in Demographic Measurement	The Racial Identification of Puerto Ricans in the U.S.	This paper investigates whether and how racial identification of Puerto Ricans in the U.S. is affected by their increasing spatial dispersion across the U.S. While the system of racial identity in Puerto Rico is more flexible than that of the U.S., it is not known whether and how living in different racial contexts in the U.S. affects how Puerto Ricans choose to identify themselves racially. In the 2000 Census, 49% of Puerto Ricans identified their race as white, 8.2% as black, and 42.8% as “other race.” Using data from the 2000 5% PUMS to which metropolitan characteristics have been appended, we use multinomial logit models to examine the racial choices of Puerto Ricans. Preliminary results suggest that Puerto Ricans’ choice of race is indeed affected by the proportion of Puerto Ricans and other Hispanics in the area, as well as the overall racial diversity of the population.	Nancy	A. Denton	Jacqueline	 Villarrubia
2008	99	Race, Ethnicity, Ancestry, and Caste in Demographic Measurement	Response to Change: Census Racial Classification and Biracial Children’s Racial Options	To classify race, Americans must mark one racial category only in the 1990 Census, but are able to mark one or more in the 2000 Census. How did interracially married couples respond to changes in racial classification with their children’s race? Using data from the 5% PUMS of the 1990 and 2000 U.S. Censuses, I examine racial classification of children among African American-White, Asian American-White, and American Indian-White couples. In 1990, black-white couples are least likely to classify their children white while Asian-white couples are most likely. In 2000, black-white and Asian-white couples tend to classify their children biracially, but among those who identify their children with one race, the 1990 pattern remains. Further, I apply cohort approach to examine how children aged 0 to 5 in 1990 and aged 10-15 in 2000 were racially classified. This approach helps understand why some intermarried couples do not classify their children biracially.	Zhenchao	 Qian
2008	99	Race, Ethnicity, Ancestry, and Caste in Demographic Measurement	Does Multiracial Matter?: A Case Study of Racial Health Disparities	How do self-identified multiracial adults fit into documented patterns of racial health disparities? We assess whether the health status of adults who view themselves as multiracial is distinctive from that of adults who maintain a single race identity. Using a six-year (2001-2006) pooled sample of the nationally representative Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), we explore racial differences in self rated health between Whites and several mono- and multi-race adults with ordered logistic and binary logistic regression analyses. Our findings reveal that the health of many multi-race groups is essentially indistinguishable from Whites -- with the great exception of White-American Indians and Black-American Indians, whose self-rated health is lower than either component racial group. We also find that placing multi-race groups into a preferred single race category likely obscures the pattern of health disparities, as many multi-race adults identify with a group whose health experience they do not share.	Jenifer	 Bratter	Bridget	K. Gorman
2008	100	Fertility Regulation Through The Life Course	New Estimates of U.S. Unintended Pregnancy: Taking Timing into Account	One common criticism of the traditional measure of pregnancy intention is that it provides only general information about relative timing — whether or not the pregnancy occurred too soon —without distinguishing the specific amount of mistiming. A pregnancy that is too soon by a few months may not be unintended in the same way as a pregnancy that occurred five years too soon. We draw on previous work arguing that the most important dividing line is two years. We create a revised four-category measure of pregnancy intendedness: intended, mistimed by less than two years, mistimed by two or more years, and unwanted. In this paper, we use a range of government and specialized data sources to estimate unintended pregnancy rates in these four categories for 2001. We stratify our estimates by age and union status, allowing us to consider the role of the life course factors in determining pregnancy intentions.	Lawrence	B. Finer	Laura	 Lindberg	Cecily	 Stokes-Prindle
2008	100	Fertility Regulation Through The Life Course	Age and Relationship Status-Specific Trends in Unwanted Fertility in the United States, 1995-2002	Levels of unwanted fertility in the United States are high and growing - more than 10% of births between 1997 and 2001 were unwanted, a 40% increase from 1990-94, according to the NSFG. Unwanted fertility is a policy concern due to the negative outcomes of unintended births for both mothers and children. This analysis documents recent increases in unwanted fertility and assesses the contribution of compositional changes to these trends. We use demographic decomposition techniques to decompose increases in the proportion of births that are unwanted into changes in age- and relationship status-specific wanted and unwanted birth rates and changes in the distribution of women by age and relationship status. Results show that rates of unwanted births have increased for all groups, and that the increase in unwanted births is due to this widespread growth and not to expansion of non-marital fertility or changes in the age profile of fertility.	Sarah	R. Hayford	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith	Karen	B. Guzzo
2008	100	Fertility Regulation Through The Life Course	I Don't Want Any Children... Ever: Gender Differences in Voluntary Childlessness in The U.S., 2002	The voluntarily childless population has been slowly increasing over the past decades. While empirical research is abundant for women, there has been little in-depth study in males who choose to remain childless. This paper uses the National Survey of Family Growth (Cycle 6) to compare various characteristics of the voluntarily childless and the postponing/involuntarily childless populations to those individuals with children. Multinomial logistic regression analysis shows that the major difference between the male and female populations is the effect of education and work status. Additional differences also exist between the voluntarily and postponing/involuntarily childless groups, where education has a stronger effect of the postponing/ involuntarily childless than the voluntarily childless. With relatively similar characteristics, the gender difference of the childless population still remains unexplained.	DeAnna	L. Gore	Carolyn	 Sawtell
2008	100	Fertility Regulation Through The Life Course	Contraceptive Use over the Reproductive Life Course	This paper examines the contraceptive use of women in reproductive ages (18–44) using HILDA, a representative Australian survey. Previous research on contraceptive practice typically applies age as a proxy for reproductive history. We extend this research by examining parity and birth intentions.  The most commonly used methods are the oral contraceptive pill (25%), condom (19%) and sterilisation (8% for female methods and 9% for male methods). Multivariate models are used to investigate the use of the three main contraceptive methods by parity and age controlling for socio-demographic factors. We also investigate how method practice varies by birth-timing intentions. Method use varies substantially by reproductive life course stage: women use more effective methods when they have completed their family. We argue that while age and other socio-demographic factors are useful for understanding contraceptive use, investigations should also consider parity and birth-timing intentions as measures of reproductive life course stage.	Edith	E. Gray	Peter	 McDonald
2008	101	Advances in Fertility Metrics and Models	A Model for Cohort Fertility Schedules in Low and Moderate Fertility Populations	I re-introduce the Gompertz model of age-specific fertility. This model was rejected by past authors as sometimes fitting poorly _period_ rates. However, I find the model fits very well to recent medium and low fertility _cohort_ schedules in France, Denmark, and Japan. A distinct advantage of the Gompertz model its simple behavioral interpretation as the social diffusion of fertility behavior in a cohort competing with the fertility-depressing effects of older age.    The Gompertz model, and further refinements, offer a means for forecasting future fertility and assessing the fertility-limiting effects of older entry into motherhood.       I estimate the completed cohort fertility of French and Japanese cohorts born in 1965 as 2.0 and 1.6, respectively. For France, this represents only minor decline from earlier cohorts, but for Japan the decline is marked.	Joshua	R. Goldstein
2008	101	Advances in Fertility Metrics and Models	Assessing Uncertainty in Fertility Estimates and Projections	The United Nations Population Division produces estimates and projections of the total fertility rate for all countries in the world every two years. For countries with  fertility above replacement level, future levels are projected based on a parametric function. We develop a Bayesian hierarchical model for producing probabilistic projections of fertility. Differences in data quality for observations within a country are assessed by relating a standardized weighting scheme to the empirical variance of the measurement errors. We quantify the country-specific uncertainty in future fertility, as well as in the estimates of past levels of fertility, and we give results for a number of Asian and African countries.	Leontine	 Alkema	Adrian	 Raftery	Patrick	 Gerland	Samuel	J. Clark	François	 Pelletier
2008	101	Advances in Fertility Metrics and Models	Why Kids Today?: Evidence on the Old-Age Security Motive from the Italian Pension Reform	Evidence of motives for childbearing in contemporary societies is not abundant. This is particularly true for old-age security motives. In this paper we build a stylized economic framework to distinguish consumption vs. investment motives for childbearing. We then exploit the unique opportunity of a discontinuity in expected pensions introduced by an Italian pension reform to show quasi-experimental evidence of old-age security fertility motives.	Francesco	C. Billari	Vincenzo	 Galasso
2008	101	Advances in Fertility Metrics and Models	Should the Total Fertility Rate Still Be Used in Policy Discussions?: Assessing the Appropriateness of the TFR when Studying the Presumed Need for and Effectiveness of Birth Enhancing Policies in Europe	In Europe discussions about fertility policies almost exclusively refer to the total fertility rate (TFR), which may lead to serious mistakes in argumentation about the presumed effects of family-related policies on fertility. We discuss two examples: (1) A main justification for birth-enhancing policies of the governments lies in filling the presumed gap between ideal family size and actual family size with the latter measured by the TFR. When using tempo-adjusted fertility measures or cohort measures this gap shrinks markedly or disappears. (2) Spain is celebrating a reversal of the declining fertility trend because the TFR recently increased from below 1.2 to 1.4. This in fact mostly reflects an end of the tempo effect (the mean age at childbearing stopped increasing) with a surprisingly limited recovery. We discuss a more appropriate approach for policy-relevant monitoring – an indicator based on parity and duration-specific life tables, termed Period Average Parity (PAP).	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Tomas	 Sobotka
2008	102	Public Policy and  Family Forms	Estimating the Impact of Child Support and Welfare Policies on Fathers’ Involvement	This paper examines the impact of state-level child support enforcement and welfare polices on fathers’ involvement with their young children controlling for fathers’ individual-level characteristics. Fathers' involvement is operationalized as accessibility, responsibility, and engagement. This paper analyzes two time points in a child’s life to examine the short- and long-run impact of public policies. This paper finds that while the role of policies in shaping fathers’ involvement is muted by their individual characteristics and circumstances, public policies do influence fathers’ involvement with their children. However, policies may be operating in conflicting ways to both increase and decrease fathers’ involvement with their children. For example, policies such as the child support collection rate, positively impacts one type of fathers’ involvement (responsibility) while the same policy may also negatively impacts another type of fathers’ involvement (accessibility).	Kelly	S. Mikelson
2008	102	Public Policy and  Family Forms	Multiple-Father Families, Child Support Enforcement, and Welfare	We explore the connection between multiple-partner fertility, child support enforcement, and welfare benefits. Unlike past studies of public policy and family structure, which focus on a mother’s marital status or the absence of a male partner, we examine the biological relationships among the children in the household. We examine the pre-TANF era, using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) for 1985 through 1996. The information in SIPP’s rarely used household relationship matrix lets us ascertain the biological relationships between a woman and every child in her household, together with the precise relationships among those children. This enables us to determine the number of men who are biological fathers of a mother’s resident children. We find no evidence of a relationship between child support enforcement and multiple-father fertility, and only weak evidence that higher benefits encourage multiple-father fertility.	Eirik	 Evenhouse	Siobhan	 Reilly
2008	102	Public Policy and  Family Forms	Can Marriage Destroy Marriage?: Lessons from the Netherlands	One of the most important arguments in the same-sex marriage debate is the claim that the legalization of same-sex marriage would weaken or even destroy the institution of marriage. This claim has been cited as one of the reasons for the enactment in various states of legislation preventing same-sex marriage, and has spurred an intense debate in the public and in the media. There is surprisingly little evidence, however, even anecdotal, that confirms or refutes this end-of-marriage argument. In this paper, I examine what happened to different-sex marriage in the Netherlands after it legalized same-sex marriage in 2001 and an alternative institution for all couples--registered partnership--, in 1998. Using individual-level data matched with official vital records for the period 1995--2005, I find evidence that the 1998 law did not seem to affect marriage, but the same-sex marriage law did.	Mircea	 Trandafir
2008	102	Public Policy and  Family Forms	Work-Family Policy and Negative Work-Family Spillover in Ten Countries	This paper addresses the relationship between a country’s family-friendly policies and individual negative work-family spillover. Coupling the Gornick, Meyers and Ross (1997) family-policy cluster typology for ten nations with individual-level data from the 2002 International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), we analyze the extent to which countries with more supportive policy regimes produce lower spillover between work and family for men and women. Using a hierarchical model to simultaneously address country- and individual-level effects, we find men in moderate policy environments report less spillover than men in weak policy environments. Women in moderate family-friendly policy environments report the least spillover, women in weak report the most, and women in strong environments fall in between these two. We find three significant interaction effects explain the gender difference in spillover: women who work more, women who are divorced and women who are dissatisfied with their home lives, report greater spillover.	Leah	 Ruppanner	Joy	 Pixley
2008	103	Race, Ethnicity, and Education	Trends in Educational Attainment by Sex, Race/Ethnicity, and Nativity in the United States, 1989-2005	Trends in education are particularly significant because they affect individual life choices and chances. Yet surprisingly few studies have examined differences in educational attainment by detailed demographic subpopulations in recent years. This research documents trends in education by age, sex, race/ethnicity, and nativity between 1989 and 2005 to gain a better understanding of how disparities in education have changed over time. We employ the 1989-2005 National Health Interview Surveys (n=1,054,062). We find that among individuals aged 25-44 in 2005, foreign-born Mexican American   men obtained just 9.5 years of education whereas comparable women had 9.8 years, and foreign- born Cuban American men had 13.2 years of education whereas comparable women had 13.7 years. We also show increases in education for all race/ethnic groups over time, with the most substantial gains among Hispanic subpopulations. Our results provide insight into trends in education and highlight the value of   disaggregating educational attainment levels by demographic subpopulations.	Bethany	 Everett	Richard	G. Rogers
2008	103	Race, Ethnicity, and Education	The Discount Rate of Foreign Education: A Differences-in- Differences Approach	Census data demonstrate that Asian Americans have the highest median income among all racial groups in the United States (US Census Bureau 2004). Because of such promising statistics, a common perception is that Asian Americans have “made it” in American society. However, the “success” of Asian Americans is not uniform within the population. Past studies of the stratification of Asian Americans have focused on immigration status, nativity, length of stay, and ethnicity to account for the differences. A recent study stresses place of education as a crucial dimension in the stratification of Asian Americans. Once place of education is included in statistical models, race and nativity are no longer consequential. This study is an extension of the earnings’ disadvantages that arise from place of education. Specifically, we seek to determine the causal effect of US education through a counterfactual framework by using the differences-in-differences strategy.	Lulu	 Chen
2008	103	Race, Ethnicity, and Education	Racial/Ethnic Differences in Transfer among Community College Students	Most students who enter community college with the goal of transferring to a four-year school do not realize this goal. African American and Latino students transfer at rates significantly below those of whites and Asians. This study examines the relationships between both the environment and quality of students’ high schools and their initial academic behavior and performance and their odds of transferring within six years. High school environments varied significantly across race/ethnicity; whites attended more advantaged schools than others. White and Asian community college students also differed from African American and Latino students in their early academic behavior and performance. Students’ early college academic behavior and performance predict their likelihood of transferring. High school attributes are also significantly associated with their odds of transferring to a four-year college. When both sets of factors are held constant, the gaps between whites and blacks and Latinos were narrowed significantly.	Anne	K. Driscoll
2008	103	Race, Ethnicity, and Education	Neither Colorblind nor Oppositional: Perceived Minority Status and Trajectories of Academic Adjustment among Latinos in Elite Higher Education	Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Freshmen, we examine how differing psychosocial orientations influence Latino students’ academic and social adjustment at college. We find that accommodators—who felt ethnically distinctive from Whites but maintained optimism toward the U.S. opportunity structure—performed significantly better in their academic work over the course of their four years than assimilators—who felt the least ethnically distinct from Whites. The group of Latinos who most strongly questioned the openness of the opportunity structure to ethnic minorities—resisters—reported similar grades and time spent studying to both accommodators and assimilators. Although resisters did not look different from assimilators or accommodators in their academic trajectories, they did become significantly more involved in extracurricular activities between sophomore and junior years. Our findings suggest that these three psychological orientations toward minority status all provide effective paths toward the academic integration of Latino students on primarily White campuses.	Margarita	A. Mooney	Deborah	 Rivas-Drake
2008	104	Redistribution, Poverty and Inequality Across and Within Populations	The Distributional Profile of Taxes on Income, Wealth and
 Consumption in Advanced Economies	This paper examines the distributional profile of taxes on income, wealth and consumption in selected countries using data from the Luxembourg Wealth Study. Special attention is paid to the distribution of the tax burdens across demographic groups, comparing the incidence of different taxes on the same  households. The results provide information on the degree and patterns of progressivity and regressivity of different forms of taxation, how the tax burden varies across demographic groups.	Markus	 Jantti
2008	104	Redistribution, Poverty and Inequality Across and Within Populations	Using Census and Survey Data to Estimate Poverty and Inequality for Small Areas	Recent years have seen a widespread use of small-area poverty maps based on census data enriched by relationships estimated from household surveys that predict variables not covered by the census. These methods are used  to estimate putatively precise estimates of poverty and inequality for areas as small as 20,000 households. In this paper we argue that to usefully match survey and census data in this way requires a degree of spatial homogeneity for which the method provides no basis, and which is unlikely to be satisfied in practice. Error variances calculated on the assumption of homogeneity will underestimate mean squared errors and overestimate the coverage of calculated confidence intervals. We use data from the 2000 census of Mexico to construct synthetic household surveys and to simulate the poverty mapping process using a robust method of estimation; our simulations show that while the poverty maps contain useful information, their nominal confidence intervals give a misleading idea of precision.	Alessandro	 Tarozzi	Angus	 Deaton
2008	104	Redistribution, Poverty and Inequality Across and Within Populations	The Minimum Living Standard Assistance and Family Expenditures in Urban China	The Minimum Living Standard Assistance (MLSA) policy has been established in urban China since 1999 to serve as a last-resort safety net for poor families, especially those with laid-off members. The eligibility rules, benefit generosity, and administrative procedures vary substantially according to city socioeconomic development and financial capacity. Using data from the China Household Income Project 2002 urban sample, we examine how MLSA has affected family expenditures—an important but understudied aspect of family economic well-being. We study family expenditures in ten major categories – housing and utilities; food; alcohol and tobacco; clothing; health; transportation; education; leisure; personal care; and miscellaneous. We further investigate whether MLSA increases family members’ working efforts by examining some work-related expenses such as expenditures on food away from home, adults’ clothing, and transportation. Instrumental variable models and propensity score matching methods are used to examine the effects of MLSA generosity and participation on family expenditures.	Qin	 Gao	Fuhua	 Zhai
2008	104	Redistribution, Poverty and Inequality Across and Within Populations	Changes in Standard of Living Among Population Groups in South Africa: 1998-2006	We examine changes in standard of living in South Africa 1998-2006. Aspects of standard of living are combined to define four standard of living groups. The data sources are large nationally representative surveys. The percent of urban African households in the top standard of living group increased from 14% to 22% between 1998 and 2006, indicating emergence of an urban African middle class. About 43% of Coloured households and about 80% of White or Asian households were in the top group throughout the period. The percent of rural Africans in the worst group declined from 10% to 6%. In addition, the percent of the population and of rural Africans in the worst category of each of the standard of living indicators declined between 1998 and 2006, showing substantial poverty alleviation. There is no evidence of deterioration in the standard of living of White or Asian households.	Barbara	A. Anderson	Mosidi	 Nhlapo
2008	105	Understanding Health and Mortality Using Biomarkers	A Comparison of Biomarkers in Two Populations: The U.S. and Japan	Japan has the longest life expectancy in the world, while the U.S. only ranks in the top 30. One of the earliest signs in a population of deteriorating health with age is the onset of biological risk factors. We compare biological risk in Japan (Japanese Nutrition Survey Report 2004) with that in the U.S. (NHANES 1999-2004) to understand possible paths to long life expectancy in the Japanese and relatively short life expectancy among Americans. Across age groups, Japan exhibited lower lipid levels including triglycerides, total cholesterol and risk levels of high-density lipoproteins. Americans also had higher risk levels of albumin and glycosylated hemoglobin, and they were more likely to take medication for both hypertension and cholesterol than the Japanese. On the other hand, the Japanese had higher systolic and diastolic blood pressure. This study indicates that the levels of biological risk are not always more favorable among the Japanese.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Yasuhiko	 Saito	Jung	Ki  Kim	Sarinnapha	 Vasunilashorn
2008	105	Understanding Health and Mortality Using Biomarkers	Dynamics of Health and Mortality: Biomarkers, Self-assessments and Socio-Demographic Characteristics	Using longitudinal survey data from the Indonesia Family Survey (IFLS), we examine the evolution of health over the life course during adulthood and later life. We contrast the contributions of both biomarker and self-assessed health indicators in predicting subsequent mortality as well as health of those alive. Body mass index and elevated blood pressure are powerful predictors of death and poor health. Self-assessments are also predictive of mortality and health but the associations tend to be weak and significant only in the short term. In an effort to delve more deeply into these relationships, we explore the extent to which they are mediated by socio-economic, demographic and family characteristics paying special attention to the roles of information, resources and family-specific heterogeneity. We use four waves of the IFLS, an on-going population-based survey of over 30,000 respondents, which spans 1993 through 2007. Biomarker information includes body mass index, blood pressure, hemoglobin, lung capacity and timed chair stands.	Duncan	 Thomas	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg
2008	105	Understanding Health and Mortality Using Biomarkers	Maternal Exposure to Violence over the Life Course and Fetal IGE  Level	This paper uses a life course perspective to examine the relationship between maternal experiences of violence and fetal cord blood IgE levels. Specifically, the study asks three questions: are offspring’s cord blood IgE levels significantly higher among physically or psychologically abused women, compared to their non-abused counterparts? Does the co-occurrence of multiple forms of violence increase the risk of elevated IgE beyond those related to experiencing only one? Does a mother’s exposure to violence in her childhood influence fetal IgE levels, even when controlling for her exposure to violence during pregnancy? Data from ACCESS, a prospective pregnancy cohort study, are used to regress IgE level on multiple violence measures (including mother’s experience of psychological and physical abuse during pregnancy; and her experiences of psychological and/or physical violence during her childhood), controlling for potentially confounding maternal, child, and household characteristics. The paper’s hypothesized results and contributions to existing literature are discussed.	Michelle	 Sternthal	Rosalind	 Wright
2008	105	Understanding Health and Mortality Using Biomarkers	Do Physicians Measure the Biomarkers that Matter for Survival?	We use data from a nationally-representative sample of older adults in Taiwan to determine whether three clusters of biomarkers are significant predictors of mortality at the older ages: (1) standard cardiovascular and metabolic risk factors; (2) markers of disease progression; and (3) non-clinical (neuroendocrine and immune) markers. We also evaluate the extent to which these biomarkers account for the female advantage in survival. Preliminary results suggest that both the non-clinical markers and the markers of disease progression significantly improve six‑year survival predictions in the presence of controls for cardiovascular and metabolic measures. Whereas smoking status explains about one-half of the excess male mortality at these ages, the biomarkers account for little of the sex difference in mortality. Nevertheless, measures of the predictive power of the models underscore the importance of including bioindicators in demographic models and of expanding epidemiological models to encompass a broader range of indicators of physiological function.	Noreen	 Goldman	Dana	A. Glei	Yu-Hsuan	 Lin	Maxine	 Weinstein
2008	106	Sub-National Population Estimates and Projections 	Two Sets of County Population Estimates: How and Why Do they Differ?	The Population Estimates Program of the U.S. Census Bureau is evaluating different methods to produce the official estimates. This research will examine two sets of population estimates for states and counties developed for the post-2000 period; one set developed using the current administrative records method and an alternative set developed using a housing unit approach. Since each method has its unique set of weaknesses and biases, large difference in results often occur.    The research will draw upon earlier research that examined the accuracy and differences in two sets of county population estimates prepared for 2000. The current research will examine the differences in the results for the post-2000 period. The difference in estimate results for the post-2000 period will be compared to differences observed in prior research. The research will also explore county typologies that may be related to the differences in estimate results.	Signe	I. Wetrogan
2008	106	Sub-National Population Estimates and Projections 	Changes to the  Housing Stock: Loss of Housing Units	We present a procedure to estimate loss of housing units using a model developed with data from the American Housing Survey in combination with annual estimates from the American Community Survey. The Census Bureau estimates the number of housing units for local governments based on three components: new housing units that are not mobile homes; new mobile homes; and loss of housing units. Estimating housing loss has been a serious stumbling block for years, since the Bureau does not collect data on permits for demolition of existing buildings. In order to estimate the loss of housing units the Census Bureau uses data from the American Housing Survey’s national sample to create rates based on age and type of housing unit. We develop a more complete model of housing unit loss that takes into account not only age of housing unit but also tenure, type of unit, and regional market conditions.	Warren	A. Brown	Jan	 Vink	Joseph	 Salvo	Peter	 Lobo
2008	106	Sub-National Population Estimates and Projections 	Applications of the Cohort-Component Model for Structuring Housing-Unit Based Total Population Estimates into Categories of Age and Sex: A Pilot Test in New Mexico	Housing unit-based estimates are popular, but lack a technique for estimating age/sex structure of a population. This paper evaluates the use of short-term component projections for allocating these estimates to categories of age/sex. The method is piloted for 2005 in Bernalillo County, New Mexico. The results suggest that the method will perform well where (1) population age/sex dynamics and construction trends may be assumed to be unrelated, (2) age-specific migration is well-measured, or (3) the magnitude of migration is very small. Here, the method produced estimates of population age/sex structure that matched closely with those produced by the Census Bureau using administrative records. This finding is promising because it is clear that Bernalillo County has recently experienced both significant housing unit growth as well as changes in age/sex structure. These results are discussed in light of their potential application to areas for which these conditions may not be met.	Jack	 Baker	Aldemar	 Alcantara	Xiaomin	 Ruan
2008	106	Sub-National Population Estimates and Projections 	Investigating the Use of Holt-Winters Time Series Model for Forecasting Population at the State and Sub-State Levels	Much of the research concerning the evaluation of time series models for population forecasting has been focused on using ARIMA models, but few have evaluated the accuracy of the Holt-Winters model for population forecasting. In this study, we evaluate the accuracy of the Holt-Winters model at the state as well as the sub-state level for Virginia. Our research shows that time series forecasts for larger areas are not necessarily more accurate than forecasts for smaller areas. In addition, we found that the overall accuracy of the Holt-Winters model is comparable to trend extrapolation techniques and the cohort component method for short-term projections. Therefore, based on the results of this study, we believe that the Holt-Winters model demonstrates desirable accuracy for state and sub-state projections 5 to 10 years into the future.	Amanda	 Walters	Qian	 Cai
2008	107	Family Background and Inequality in Higher Education	Do Credit Constraints Prevent College Enrollment?	Low levels of college enrollment among low-income youths may be due to credit constraints or to lower returns to college education. Distinguishing these explanations is difficult because most data sets lack measures of academic skill. Using data on the college intentions and test scores of all 2003 and 2004 Massachusetts high school graduates, I find that controlling for skill and school district greatly reduces the college enrollment gap due to low-income status, largely because low-income students have dramatically lower skill. The highest and lowest skilled low-income students enroll in college at the same rates as their higher income peers, though low-income students in the middle range of ability are significantly less likely to enroll. My results suggest that any increased financial aid should target lower income students in the middle of the skill distribution, but that funds might better be spent remedying the wide skill gaps present by high school.	Joshua	S Goodman
2008	107	Family Background and Inequality in Higher Education	What Does Early Decision Buy: Higher Acceptance and Lower Money?	While an increasing number of students apply early decision (ED) to college, some prestigious institutions like Harvard and the University of Virginia are dropping their ED policies. This dichotomy reflects proponents’ arguments that ED reduces uncertainty in the process and critics’ suggestions that ED policies give preference to students with higher ability-to-pay. Evidence from elite schools shows that students with higher ability-to-pay are more likely to apply ED and colleges lower their standards for ED applicants (see Avery et al. 2003). We confirm this using data from selective liberal art schools, which have many close substitutes. Although this finding is consistent with a concern that applying ED lowers financial aid awards, conditional on being accepted, we find no evidence that ED applicants receive lower financial aid awards. However, ED applicants with higher financial aid awards, and therefore lower ability-to-pay, are less likely to enroll and thereby break the ED contract.	Stacy	 Dickert-Conlin	Gabrielle	 Chapman
2008	107	Family Background and Inequality in Higher Education	Moving on: The Transition out of High School for Children of Immigrants and Immigrant Children	Higher levels of educational attainment are becoming increasingly important for long term occupational success. While many studies of immigrant and second and third generation youth examine high school drop out rates, far fewer examine the transition out of high school. I use data from the NLSY 97 to analyze the impacts of family, school, and community context, as well as generation and citizenship status, on the likelihood of pursuing a job, higher education, or both. Additionally, the data will allow me to test if the students are transitioning onto 2 yr or 4 yr institutions, and in what types of employment they work. The results of this study will greatly contribute to the understanding of the school-to-work transition for 1st, 2nd and 3rd generation immigrant youth. Additionally, it will add valuable knowledge about the various factors impeding or facilitating the advancement of immigrant youth as they transition out of high school.	Alexis	 Silver
2008	107	Family Background and Inequality in Higher Education	Who Benefits Most from College?: Negative Selection in Heterogeneous Economic Returns to Higher Education	We consider how the economic return to a college education varies across members in the U.S. population. Based on principles of comparative advantage, positive selection is commonly presumed, i.e., that individuals who are most likely to select into college benefit most from college. We conjecture that individuals who are least likely to obtain a college education benefit most from college. We call this theory the negative selection hypothesis. To adjudicate between the two hypotheses, we study the effects of completing college on earnings by propensity score strata using longitudinal data from three sources representing three different cohorts. For both men and women, for every observed life course stage, and for all three data sources, we find evidence for negative selection. We discuss patterns across propensity score strata by gender, cohort, and life course. Results from auxiliary analyses demonstrate differential selection mechanisms and counterfactual expectations offering potential explanations for negative selection.	Jennie	E. Brand	Yu	 Xie
2008	108	Spatial Segregation and Locational Choice	An Examination of the Spatial Distribution of Immigrant Residential Segregation	Previous studies on immigrant residential segregation have focused on the understanding of residential patterns at different levels of geographic units. However, there are few studies looking at the spatial distribution of such patterns across space. With the utilization of the techniques of exploratory spatial data analysis and spatial regression models, the current study intends to examine whether immigrant neighborhoods randomly distributed across space and whether the predictors of individual residential segregations also predict the non-randomly spatial arrangement of the residential clustering. Based on the census 2000 data, this study reveals several findings. First, the statistics of the county-level segregation measure exhibit moderate positive spatial autocorrelation, which indicates the non-randomness of the distribution. Second, distinctive regional differences in presenting local clusters are observed and statistically tested. It suggests future studies on spatial distribution of segregation should consider spatial heterogeneity across large regions.	Weiwei	 Zhang
2008	108	Spatial Segregation and Locational Choice	On the Location Choice of Newly Arrived Immigrants in Germany	The aging and the shrinkage of the population in Germany will come along with (regional) shortages in the labor force. Since immigration might mitigate the decline of the labor supply I study the initial location choice of newly arrived foreign-born using micro data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (1991-2004) as well as macro data from official statistics. As a main result, I find that migration networks in Western Germany have a significant impact on the probability of incoming foreign-born originating in the same source country to move to these ethnic clusters. In contrast, in Eastern Germany only concrete social ties between former and newly arrived foreign-born positively influence the probability of incoming immigrants to locate in the same region.	Carsten	 Pohl
2008	108	Spatial Segregation and Locational Choice	Schelling's Segregation Model: Parameters, Scaling, and Aggregation	Thomas Schelling proposed a simple spatial model to illustrate how, even with relatively mild assumptions on each individual's nearest neighbor preferences, an integrated city would likely unravel to a segregated city, even if all individuals prefer integration. His model has become quite influential amongst social scientists, demographers, and economists. Many authors assumed that the global aggregation which Schelling observed in simulations on very small ``cities persists for larger, realistic size cities. In this paper, we devise new measures to quantify the aggregation and we unlock its dependence on city size, disparate neighbor comfortability threshold, and population density. We identify distinct scales of global aggregation, and we show that the striking global aggregation Schelling observed is strictly a small city phenomenon. We also discover several remarkable scaling laws for disparate aggregation measures as functions of population density.	Abhinav	 Singh	Howard	 Weiss	Dmitri	 Vainchtein
2008	108	Spatial Segregation and Locational Choice	Bridging Simulation and Inference Methods in the Study of Residential Segregation: A Case Study	In this paper we conduct a two-stage analysis of the Yuma, AZ, metropolitan area. First, we simulate a scenario with covariates from Census data, where we vary the parameter values to analyze the impact of various effects on segregation patterns, and obtain a range of possible Yuma residential configurations. Second, we estimate the relative contribution of effects such as homophily, xenophobia or push-pull between rent and income levels in determining the observed distribution of households across tracts. Exploring the range of alternate residential pattern configurations as well as the observed configuration allows us to understand how even slight changes in some parameters could affect the overall assignment of households to tracts and therefore segregation levels in this area. This combination of simulation and inference gives us a powerful tool for understanding residential segregation processes, while at the same time suggesting implications for public policy aimed at reducing segregation.	Miruna	 Petrescu-Prahova
2008	109	The Demography of Crime and Punishment	The War on Drugs and Mass Incarceration: The Rockefeller Drug Laws as a Case Study	Recent research on the rise of the current incarceration regime in the United States has examined the effects of political realignments and changes in sentencing policies. In this analysis, we extend this research by examining the differential impact of what we label “higher order” policies, such as the creation of sentencing laws, with the implementation of such policies at the grass roots level. Using the implementation of New York State’s Rockefeller Drug Laws as a case study, we examine how the development and implementation of these laws contributed to a rise in the incarcerated population. Our preliminary analysis indicates that while the passage of the Rockefeller Laws was a necessary condition for a rise in the incarcerated population, it was not sufficient. Moreover, our preliminary analysis also shows evidence of the importance of predicate or second felony offender laws on the growth of the prison population.	David	 Weiman	Christopher	C. Weiss
2008	109	The Demography of Crime and Punishment	The Race of a Criminal Record: How Incarceration Colors Racial Perception	This study examines the effect of incarceration on racial classification. In the U.S., racial disparities in incarceration are widely discussed and debated. We extend this conversation by exploring whether incarceration also functions as a social cue when observers classify someone's race. We find that there is a contextual effect of incarceration on the perception of one's race, using longitudinal data with repeated measures of how respondents were racially classified by interviewers. Interviewers are less likely to perceive currently incarcerated respondents as white even if they were classified as white in the previous year. Respondents who were classified as black in the previous year are more likely to remain so if currently incarcerated. Further, these effects are relatively persistent; for example, ever-incarcerated respondents who were classified as black have more stable racial classifications than the never incarcerated. The implications of these findings for research on race and inequality are discussed.	Andrew	 Penner	Aliya	 Saperstein
2008	109	The Demography of Crime and Punishment	Parental Incarceration and Children's Aggressive Behaviors: Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study	Incarceration diminishes the life-chances of adults, but little is known about how paternal incarceration affects children. Effects on early childhood aggression are especially significant because of their potential to increase children's later criminality. Using Fragile Families data, this paper considers the effects of paternal incarceration on children's aggressive behaviors at age 5. Results show strong effects of paternal incarceration on aggressive behaviors for boys but not girls. Results also show that effects are concentrated among boys living with a father at the time of his incarceration. The use of various modeling strategies and alternate independent and dependent variables demonstrates robustness. By increasing boy's aggression, paternal incarceration may promote the intergenerational transmission of crime and incarceration. In so doing, paternal incarceration could not only compromise public safety but also provide the groundwork for a permanently disadvantaged class for whom contact with the criminal justice system is normal.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2008	109	The Demography of Crime and Punishment	Employment Discontinuities and Wage Declines: Race Differences in the Cumulative Effects of Incarceration	A growing body of work implicates the prison system in contemporary accounts of racial inequality across a host of social, economic, and political domains. However, comparatively little work has examined the impact of incarceration on racial inequality over the life course. Using a unique data set drawn from state administrative records, this study examines how spending time in prison affects accumulated work experience and wage trajectories over a 14-year period in Washington State. We explore how racial differences in both the likelihood of imprisonment and the effects of spending time in prison inform our understanding of widening racial inequality in employment, earnings, and exposure to poverty through adulthood. Our data enable us to isolate the impact of spending time in prison while controlling for other relevant determinants of labor market outcomes, including educational attainment, GED test scores, previous work history, conditions of confinement, and prior criminal history.	Christopher	J Lyons	Becky	 Pettit
2008	110	Family Structure Transitions and Child Well-Being	Family Stability and Child Well-Being during Early Childhood	Using data from the first two waves of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), I examine the linkages between family stability and child outcomes for very young children. Although most 9 month-olds reside in either two biological married parent (65%) or single-mother (20%) families, roughly 14% live in two biological cohabiting parent families (the remaining 1% are in stepfamilies). Two biological cohabiting parent families are less stable than two biological married parent families. Nearly 30% of children in two biological cohabiting parent families experience a change in family structure between the 9-month and 24-month interviews versus fewer than 2% of children in two biological married parent families. Transitions out of a cohabiting family do not appear to be detrimental to mental and motor development. In fact, moving from a cohabiting to a single-mother family is associated with larger gains in mental development than remaining in a stable cohabiting family.	Susan	L. Brown
2008	110	Family Structure Transitions and Child Well-Being	Family Structure and Mothers' Parenting	We use data from the Fragile Families Study (N=3872) to examine the relationship between changes in family structure and the observed maternal parenting behaviors experienced by children between birth and age 5. In an improvement on previous studies, we consider the impact of exiting, entering, and undergoing a series of relationship transitions, as well as the level of formality of the relationship, including nonresident and coresident relationships. Using path analysis, we focus on whether early transitions have a persistent direct effect on parenting and/or whether these transitions have an indirect effect on later parenting via their effects on earlier parenting behavior. Preliminary analyses suggest that there are both direct and indirect effects of family change on parenting, the direction of these effects differs by a number of transition characteristics.	Audrey	N. Beck
2008	110	Family Structure Transitions and Child Well-Being	The Relative Effects of Family Instability and Mother/Partner Conflict on Children’s Externalizing Behavior	We investigate whether repeated exposure to mother/partner conflict mediates the association between family structure instability and children’s externalizing behavior. We use data from the first three waves of the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study to compare the relative effects of average mother/partner conflict and multiple changes in family structure on mother-reported assessments of children’s externalizing behavior when the children are age 3. Our sample includes children whose parents were married or cohabiting at the child’s birth. Our measures of mother/partner conflict include conflict with the child’s biological father and with the mother’s new partner, if any, at each wave. Preliminary results indicate that higher exposure to mother/partner conflict mediates the association between the number of transitions a child has experienced and is independently associated with children’s behavior problems at age 3.	Paula	 Fomby
2008	110	Family Structure Transitions and Child Well-Being	Family Instability and Children’s Socio-Emotional and Cognitive Development at School Entry	To better understand the gap in children's readiness for Kindergarten, we use data from 4 waves of the Fragile Families Study to examine the association between maternal partnership instability and children’s behavioral problems at school entry (age 5). We use more detailed measures of partnership changes than have been used in prior studies to determine whether any change, the number of changes, or the type of partnership change that a child is exposed to between birth and age 5 has a stronger effect on child behavior. In addition, we use OLS and fixed-effects methods to examine the extent to which co-occurring changes in maternal stress, mothering, health and health behaviors, and economic resources mediate the association between partnership instability and child behavioral problems. Finally, we explore whether the effect of partnership instability is similar across all socioeconomic groups, defined by family structure at child’s birth, race/ethnicity, and maternal education level.	Carey	E Cooper	Cynthia	A. Osborne	Sara	 McLanahan
2008	111	Modeling Demographic Processes	Insights from a Sequential Hazard Model of Sexual Initiation and Premarital First Births	Since Davis and Blake (1956), demographers have acknowledged that sexual activity is an important component of fertility, but this insight is typically ignored in formal and empirical models of fertility. In this paper, we investigate one fertility outcome---a premarital first birth---by modeling a woman's entry into sexual activity and her subsequent risk of a premarital first birth. These models yield substantive insights not evident from conventional models analyzing women's age at a premarital first birth. In particular, we find that U.S. women contracept ineffectively following onset of sexual activity, but appear to improve their contraceptive efficacy, not with age, but with duration following sexual initiation. We also find substantial unobserved heterogeneity, correlated with age at sexual onset. For this submission, we provide technical and empirical details (Wu and Martin 2007) but will, as indicated above, emphasize the substantive implications of these models in our PAA paper and presentation.	Lawrence	L. Wu	Steven	P. Martin
2008	111	Modeling Demographic Processes	Heterogeneity in the Strehler-Mildvan General Theory of Mortality and Aging	This study intends to examine and further develop the Strehler-Mildvan general theory of mortality and aging. We tested three predictions from the SM theory by examining the age dependence mortality patterns for 46 countries over the period of 1955-2003. By using descriptive analyses and semiparametric group-based trajectory models, this study finds that: (1) the SM correlation exists but is not constant; (2) within the SM framework, the implied upper bounds on the human life span appear to be variable over time; (3) longevity trajectories are not homogeneous among the countries. Moreover, an inverse relationship between the national environment parameter D and the rate of physiological decline parameter B is found, that is, when the national environment becomes worse, the more B decreases, which suggests the “survival trade off” theory may be correct. These findings indicate that the Strehler-Mildvan theory needs to be generalized to incorporate heterogeneity among human populations.	Hui	 Zheng	Kenneth	C. Land
2008	111	Modeling Demographic Processes	Model of Hidden Heterogeneity in Longitudinal Data	Variables measured in longitudinal studies of aging and longevity do not exhaust the list of all factors affecting health and mortality transitions. Unobserved factors generate hidden variability in susceptibility to diseases and death in populations and in age trajectories of longitudinally measured indices. Effects of such heterogeneity can be manifested not only in observed hazard rates but also in average trajectories of measured indices. Although effects of hidden heterogeneity on observed mortality rates are widely discussed, their role in forming age patterns of other aging-related characteristics (average trajectories of physiological state, stress resistance, etc.) is less clear. We propose a model of hidden heterogeneity to analyze its effects in longitudinal data. The approach takes the presence of hidden heterogeneity into account and incorporates several major concepts currently developing in aging research (allostatic load, aging-associated decline in adaptive capacity and stress-resistance, age-dependent physiological norms). Simulation experiments confirm identifiability of model’s parameters.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Igor	 Akushevich	Lucy	 Akushevich
2008	112	Voluntary and Involuntary Childlessness: Gender Issues	The Problem of Infertility in High Fertility Populations: Meanings, Consequences and Coping Mechanisms in Two Nigerian Communities	The paper examines local meanings of infertility as they are shaped by the larger social and cultural context; the impact of the prevalence of infertility on these meanings and how the above affect community responses, life experiences and infertility treatment seeking behaviors in two African communities. The interdisciplinary research was conducted among the Ijo and Yakurr people of southern Nigeria. The methodology included a survey of approximately 100 infertile and a matching sample of 100 fertile women as well as in-depth ethnographic interviews with infertile and fertile in two communities.  The overall findings indicate that while there are variations in the extent to which infertility is considered problematic, due to a number of factors, including the level and the history of infertility in a particular location, the descent structure and the symbolic meaning attributed to infertility, the necessity for a woman to have a child remains basic in sub-Saharan Africa.	Marida	 Hollos	Ulla	M Larsen	Oka	 Obono	Bruce	 Whitehouse
2008	112	Voluntary and Involuntary Childlessness: Gender Issues	Partnered Decisions: Seeking Help in the Case of Infertility	The following paper uses data on couples from the National Study of Fertility Barriers to examine how fertility preferences and intentions and the value of parenthood relate to infertility help-seeking behavior. Because the experience of infertility is referred to as a “dyadic process,” help-seeking cannot be understood solely by one partner’s characteristics. Focusing on couples who have met certain prerequisites of help-seeking (e.g. couples who are married and have health insurance) and framing infertility help-seeking as a fertility decision made within couples is one avenue suggested to focus more closely on the couple dynamics that may be important to the dyadic process of the experience of infertility and subsequent help-seeking behavior.	Katherine	M Johnson	David	 Johnson
2008	112	Voluntary and Involuntary Childlessness: Gender Issues	Fertility Difficulties : A Widespread Feeling, Especially among Women.  Results from the French Generations and Gender Survey	Using data from the French version of the Generations and Gender Survey (GGS), we focus on infertility feeling as it is expressed by men and women in France.  Previous surveys pointed out that a growing proportion of women report an infertility feeling in the more recent cohorts in France.  The aim of this paper is to analyze the recent evolution of infertility feeling among women, extending the results to men, and measuring infertility on a subjective way (infertility feeling with no use of infertility treatment) and objective way (infertility feeling and use of medical treatment).  Then, we compare family values as they are expressed in general population, or among people who reported fertility difficulties.	Magali	 Mazuy	Elise	 de La Rochebrochard
2008	112	Voluntary and Involuntary Childlessness: Gender Issues	Characteristics of Voluntarily Childless Men	In this paper I use new data from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) to investigate the characteristics of voluntarily childless men. Little attention has been paid to the fertility patterns of voluntarily childless men as prior research has focused on women or couples. I compare voluntarily childless men to voluntarily childless women in an effort to highlight the distinctions between these two groups. Arguably, voluntarily childless men and women should be quite different due to the timing of the decision to remain childless. I argue that delayed fertility is a different process for men than it is for women. For many women, delayed fertility is a decision which must be addressed by middle age. Men are not biologically bound by this limitation and will arrive at the decision to remain childless without regard to age.	Warren	 Waren
2008	114	Mental Health Consequences of Hurricane Katrina on Affected Populations	The Population Burden of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Mississippi During the First Two Years after Hurricane Katrina	Hurricane Katrina was, in death toll and economic impact, the most devastating natural disaster to hit the United States in the past 75 years. Extant estimates of psychopathology after this event may underestimate the true population burden of disease. Between February and July 2007, we conducted interviews of 810 persons who were representative of adults living in the 23 southernmost counties of Mississippi before Hurricane Katrina to assess the prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), its correlates, and course during the first two years after Hurricane Katrina. The prevalence of PTSD after Hurricane Katrina was high (24.3% using symptom and duration criteria; 17.0% using all criteria, including functional impairment) and associated principally with hurricane-related stressful events. Absent effective measures to prevent natural disasters affecting populations, postdisaster interventions that aim to improve manipulable stressors after these events may influence the onset and course of PTSD.	Sandro	 Galea	Melissa	 Tracy	Fran	 Norris	Scott	 Coffey
2008	114	Mental Health Consequences of Hurricane Katrina on Affected Populations	Prevalence of and Disparities in Serious Mental Illness Among Displaced New Orleans Residents	Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans, Louisiana, on the morning of August 29, 2005. The devastation, disruption, and despair caused by the hurricane was expected to have a significant effect on serious mental illness among the population, and results to date suggest that this is indeed the case. This paper extends previous research on this topic by examining disparities in serious mental illness among pre-Katrina New Orleans residents. We examine differences in prevalence of serious mental illness by race and ethnicity, education, and socioeconomic status and the individual, family, and contextual factors underlying these differences. We also examine disparities by the extent of damage to the individual’s home in New Orleans, their evacuation experience, and place of residence one-year after the hurricane. Finally, we place our results in context by comparing our estimated prevalence rates of serious mental illness among this population with rates based on national data.	Narayan	 Sastry
2008	114	Mental Health Consequences of Hurricane Katrina on Affected Populations	The Impact of Hurricane Katrina on Socioeconomic Disparities in Alcohol Use	Hurricane Katrina was, in terms of death toll and economic impact, the single most important natural disaster to hit the United States in the past 75 years. In this study, we will investigate (1) socioeconomic differences in alcohol consumption in the Gulf Coast area before and after Hurricane Katrina, (2) explanations for differences in the socioeconomic gradients of alcohol consumption before and after Hurricane Katrina, including differential exposure to the disaster and its consequences. We will use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) collected in Mississippi, Louisiana and Alabama (n=555), including: 1) PSID data from 1968-2007 to measure socioeconomic trajectories; 2) PSID data from 1999-2007 on alcohol use trajectories; and 3) data from a supplemental PSID module used in 2007 to measure exposure to the Hurricane. This study presents a critical opportunity to examine how experiences of disaster events can exacerbate social and economic disparities in health.	Magdalena	 Cerda	Jennifer	 Dowd	Melissa	 Tracy	Emily	 Goldmann	Katherine	 McGonagle	Frank	 Stafford	Sandro	 Galea
2008	114	Mental Health Consequences of Hurricane Katrina on Affected Populations	Assessing the Serious Mental Illness of Katrina Affected Parishes in Louisiana: Results from the K6 Scale as Applied in the 2006 Louisiana Health and Population Survey	In 2005, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita dramatically impacted mental health in Louisiana. The Louisiana Health and Population Survey shows that behavioral health service needs exceeded system capacity in 2006. Weighted survey data from 1633 adult respondents was analyzed for the prevalence of serious mental illness (SMI) in six parishes. SMI was higher in Orleans (18.8%), Jefferson (6.3%), Plaquemines (9.5%), Saint Bernard (19.1%), Cameron (16.7%), and Calcasieu (7.2%) Parishes compared to the nation (3.0%) and Gulf Coast (6.1%). Age, parish, and employment status were associated with SMI by multiple regression. Adults with SMI were less likely to access any form of care post-storm [OR = 7.063 (95% CI = 2.706-18.435)]. Solutions for behavioral health needs in the greater New Orleans region include a coalition of behavioral health stakeholders in a patient-centered network of primary care clinics and behavioral health services. These services integrate referral and health information systems with disease registries.	Susan	 Bergson	Maria	 Sirois	Lisanne	 Brown	Sarah	 Hoffpauir	Greg	 Stone	Erin	 Bertschy	Clayton	 Williams
2008	115	The Relationship between Fertility and Family Planning	The Stalled Fertility Transition in Bangladesh: The Effects of Gender and Number Preferences	Over a decade ago, Preston, Muhuri and Menken found child survival was higher for the first two boys and first girl in a family. The latter two suggested there may be “a deep-rooted set of preferences …that contradicted notions of desire for large numbers – of either sons or daughters” that contributed to decline in fertility in the late 20th century. Today it is reasonable to ask whether preference for two boys and a girl is related to the plateau in fertility. Using the 1996 Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey, ICDDR,B Health and Demographic Surveillance System birth records, and the 1994-2004 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveys, we examine parity progression for maternal cohorts according to number and gender of their children. For younger women in more recent years, parity progression is related to gender composition of siblings. Complex gender preference may well contribute to stalled fertility in Bangladesh and other countries.	Jane	 Menken	Nizam	 Khan	Abdur	 Razzaque
2008	115	The Relationship between Fertility and Family Planning	Fertility, Child Underreporting, and Sex Ratios in China: A Closer Look at the New Consensus	We compare child counts in China’s 2005 sample census to counts projected to that year based on the 1990 census and official fertility statistics. Implied age patterns of underreporting in 2005 suggest that official statistics overstate China’s true fertility in the late 1990s, a conclusion shared by a “new consensus” of China demographers. Yet key assumptions proposed by the new consensus are themselves flawed, and child underreporting issues are again key to understanding these flaws. The new consensus could be cited and promoted for policy intervention – the lower China’s fertility is believed to be, the more likely its authorities would conclude that family planning restrictions are no longer needed. We conduct a similar analysis of sex ratios of children and births from 1982 to 2005 – such ratios are now the world’s highest, although due to excess underreporting of daughters, our estimated ratios are lower than the reported ratios often quoted.	Daniel	M. Goodkind
2008	115	The Relationship between Fertility and Family Planning	Reasons Behind the Unmet Need for Contraception in Developing Countries	Unmet need has been adopted as an indicator of progress toward the UN MDGs. Little is known about reasons for nonuse among women with unmet need. We examine these reasons and factors associated with them in 39 developing countries. We also explore factors associated with women’s willingness to use contraception in the future. The two most common reasons for nonuse are concerns about the health risks or side effects of methods and the perception of not being at risk of getting pregnant. Few women were unaware of contraception. Women over 25 and women who used contraception in the past were especially likely to cite concerns about methods. The intention to use a method is particularly low among women who are concerned about health and side effects. Programs have successfully raised women’s awareness about contraception, but they must work to resolve growing concerns about unacceptable health risks and side effects.	Gilda	 Sedgh	Rubina	 Hussain	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Susheela	D. Singh
2008	115	The Relationship between Fertility and Family Planning	Momma's Got the Pill: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped U.S. Childbearing	The 1960s ushered in a new era in U.S. demographic history characterized by sharp reductions in family size. To estimate the importance of oral contraception in this transition, this paper develops a new empirical strategy based upon idiosyncratic variation in the language of “Comstock” laws. This methodological approach allows the separation of the impact of the birth control pill from other important changes during the 1960s. The central results suggest that the birth control pill accelerated the reduction in the fertility rate in the early 1960s and facilitated the transition to the two-child household. The implications of these results reach beyond the 1960s, as reduced fertility has had a lasting impact on the American family and economy.	Martha	 Bailey
2008	116	Poverty, Hardship and Mobility Amongst Women and Children in the USA	Minimum Wages and Poverty: Evidence on Single Mothers in the Post-Welfare Reform Era	Following the passage of state and federal welfare reforms in the 1990s, many policymakers argued that increases in the minimum wage were necessary to prevent single mothers from falling into poverty. Using pooled cross-sectional data from the 1992 to 2005 March Current Population Survey (CPS), this study provides estimates of the effect of minimum wage increases on less-educated single mothers. The evidence shows that minimum wage increases failed to reduce poverty among this vulnerable population because of the offsetting effects of minimum wage increases on wages and on employment and hours. A 10 percent increase in the minimum wage was associated with 9.9 percent increase in wages, but an 8.8 percent reduction in employment and an 11.8 percent reduction in annual hours worked. A more effective and better targeted pro-work, anti-poverty strategy for single mothers would be to expand the federal Earned Income Tax Credit or state supplements to it.	Joseph	J. Sabia
2008	116	Poverty, Hardship and Mobility Amongst Women and Children in the USA	State Variation in Material Hardship Among Households with Children	Researchers are becoming increasingly interested in alternative measures of well-being such as indicators of food insufficiency, housing upkeep problems, difficulty paying bills and unmet medical needs. Yet little is known about how individual reports of these measures vary by the context in which the individual is embedded. Important contextual characteristics may include the economic conditions, economic policy, climate, and social policy environment and these characteristics may vary by both state and time. This paper will combine Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data from five different panels to model state-level predictors of material hardship among households with children using hierarchical models. Results will reveal how reports of material hardship vary across time and space and to what extent differences can be explained by demographic characteristics and by contextual differences.	Colleen	M Heflin
2008	116	Poverty, Hardship and Mobility Amongst Women and Children in the USA	State Investments in Successful Transitions to Adulthood	In this analysis we examine the relationship between state-level political and educational contexts as these alter the process of transitions to adulthood for youth in the NLSY 79 and 97 cohorts. Our hypotheses suggest that state and local economic and educational policies alter the prospects for successful transitions to adulthood and affect the ways that race and immigration status affect those transitions. Our analysis examines, specifically, the ability of young people to find a full-time, full-year job with wages at twice the poverty line for their state with health insurance benefits. The analysis uses discrete hazard modeling and hierarchical generalized linear modeling to build a general model of transitions to adulthood, examining the role of state educational and economic development contexts in promoting or hindering transitions to economic independence. Our results are relevant for researchers interested in the role of growing spatial inequalities in affecting young adults’ life chances.	Kevin	 Leicht	Dennis	 Hogan	Elisabeta	 Minca
2008	116	Poverty, Hardship and Mobility Amongst Women and Children in the USA	Poverty Among the Poorest Poor in the  United States: Trends for Never-Married Women and their Children	In this paper, we document levels and trends in poverty for never-married mothers and their children in the United States. Because roughly one-third of births between 1995 and 2000 were to unmarried mothers, our estimates are relevant to the poverty experience of a substantial proportion of recent cohorts of children, who will, in turn, constitute a substantial fraction of the future U.S. adult population. Our results contribute to the large body of research on poverty in single female households by distinguishing between two distinct groups of single mothers---those who have been previously-married and those who have never married. In analyses of the 1974-2006 March Current Population Surveys, we find substantially higher levels of poverty among never-married mothers and their children. We conclude that for the last quarter of the twentieth century, never-married mothers and their children have constituted the poorest of the poor among demographic subgroups in the United States.	Lawrence	L. Wu	Miodrag	 Stojnic
2008	117	Health over the Life Course and across Generations	Familial Longevity and Multi-Morbidities among the Elderly:
A Study Using Multi-generational Pedigrees Linked to Medicare Diagnoses Files	The purpose of this study is to test the association between the familial patterns of excess longevity (FEL) and resistance to age-related chronic diseases among those over age 65. We use individual-level data on 121,964 members from the Utah Population Database to examine whether 17 serious age-related medical conditions, as determined from Medicare claims data (1992-2002), are less prevalent among members of long-lived pedigrees in relation to others in the population without a family history of longevity. Using logistic regressions that control for gender, areal socioeconomic status , age and years in the cohort, we estimated the odds ratios of being in the top 25% (upper quartile of familial longevity) and middle 50% (middle two quartiles of familial longevity) of the FEL distribution in relation to being the bottom 25%. We find that FEL is protective for nearly all major forms of morbidity. Results have implications for understanding longevity-morbidity linkages.	Ken	R. Smith	Heidi	 Hanson	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Richard	 Kerber
2008	117	Health over the Life Course and across Generations	Cohort Differences in Health: Does the Pattern Vary by Education?	In a recent paper, Soldo et al. (2007) find that the self-reported health of successive cohorts of 51-56 year olds has declined. The authors use cross-sections of successive cohorts of Health and Retirement Study (HRS) respondents who were first interviewed at these ages in 1992, 1998 and 2004. Over this period, they find declines in a number of dimensions of self-assessed health, even after adjusting for cohort differences in socioeconomic origins and childhood health, tobacco and alcohol use, region of residence, and other covariates. We extend this research using the same cohorts in the HRS data by examining whether the pattern of cohort change in health varies by education. We find that health declined across all education groups but the greatest decline occurred among those with least education. As a result, educational differences in the self-reported health of persons 51-56 are greater in 2004 than in 1994.	Beth	J. Soldo	John	C. Henretta
2008	117	Health over the Life Course and across Generations	Stress and Trajectories of Change in Body Mass: A Life Course Perspective	Sociologists and demographers have not considered how psychosocial stress affects weight change in the general population and how this linkage might vary over the life course or across social groups. We analyze growth curve models (using data from four waves of a national survey) to consider the effects of childhood stress and adult stress burden on trajectories of change in body mass across the life course. Our results suggest that both childhood stress and adult stress burden contribute to weight gain among younger respondents (under age 55) and to weight loss among older respondents (age 55 and older) but this pattern holds only for women. Increases in adult stress burden are associated with accelerated weight gain among African Americans, regardless of age.	Debra	J. Umberson	Hui	 Liu	Corinne	 Reczek
2008	117	Health over the Life Course and across Generations	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Mental Health Trajectories: A Longitudinal Analysis Exploring the Contributions of Early Life, School, and Adult Characteristics	Although research investigating ethnic differences in mental health has increased in recent years, we know relatively little about how mental health trajectories vary across ethnic groups. Do these differences occur at certain developmental stages, but not others? We investigate ethnic variations in trajectories of depressive symptoms, and examine the extent to which disadvantage in childhood, schooling, and adulthood explain these differences. Employing random-coefficient modeling using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, we find that blacks and Hispanics experience higher symptom levels in early adulthood in comparison to whites, but equivalent levels by middle-age. Ethnic differences remained in early adulthood after including all covariates, but were eliminated by middle-age for Hispanics after controlling for demographics only and for blacks after accounting for the age-varying relationship between income and depressive symptoms. These results highlight the importance of integrating a life-course perspective when investigating ethnic variations in mental health.	Katrina	M. Walsemann	Gilbert	C Gee	Arline	 Geronimus
2008	118	Transatlantic comparisons of children of immigrants in schools	The Impact of School Composition on the  Educational
Trajectories of  Second Generation Immigrants: A US/UK Comparison		Vikki	 Boliver
2008	118	Transatlantic comparisons of children of immigrants in schools	The Relative Importance of Family and School Characteristics for Educational Tracks of Children of Immigrants in The Netherlands And the US		Helga	A.G. de Valk
2008	118	Transatlantic comparisons of children of immigrants in schools	From Educational Aspirations to Educational Attainment: The School Careers of the Children Of Immigrants in France and the US		Yael	 Brinbaum
2008	118	Transatlantic comparisons of children of immigrants in schools	The Transition from School to Work among Children of
Immigrants in the United States and France		Amy	 Lutz
2008	119	Migration and Gender	Gender Ratios in Global Migrations, 1850-2000	Scholars in many disciplines have observed that historically men far outnumbered women among international movers. In recent decades, researchers have begun to point towards a remarkable shift in migrant gender ratios. In the United States, for instance, women constituted less than one-third of all international migrants in 1900, whereas women made up more than one-half of all international migrants in the 1970s. Using nearly a billion individual-level person records from censuses covering all of the major world regions, we propose to map trends in migrant gender ratios among internal and international movers over the past 150 years. We will speak to three key questions: (1) has there in fact been a global shift from male-dominated to gender-balanced migrations? (2) have internal migrants followed different patterns than international migrants? (3) have the patterns for short-distance migrants differed from those for long-distance migrants?	Trent	 Alexander	Katharine	M. Donato	Donna	R. Gabaccia
2008	119	Migration and Gender	Redefining Migration: Gender and Temporary Labor Migration in South Africa	We use data from the Agincourt Demographic and Health Surveillance System in rural South Africa to investigate sex differences in temporary labor migration from 1992-2006. Using a gendered lens we first redefine temporary labor migration to allow for sex differences in labor and residency patterns. Changing the definition of temporary labor migration increases the incidence of temporary labor migration and clarifies sex differences in the recent circular migration trends in South Africa. We then examine sex differences in migration transitions and find that adult women have a much higher transition rate than adult men. This finding suggests that women’s temporary migrations are more tenuous than men’s and may be differentially related to household livelihood strategies.	Jill	 Williams	Gayatri	 Singh	Benjamin	D Clark	Mark	 Collinson
2008	119	Migration and Gender	Gender and Racial Inequality among Immigrant and Non-Immigrant American Married Couples: The Case of Household Labor	This paper examines how gender and race influence the distribution of domestic labor in immigrant and non-immigrant married households. Previous sociological research has focused on the distribution of housework among American married couples, showing persistent gender inequality, favoring husbands. Much of this research makes no distinction between immigrant and non-immigrant individuals or couples. Thus, we are less certain about gender inequality between immigrant spouses, and how it compares to non-immigrant spouses. This paper explores the impact of gender and race on housework contribution in immigrant households compared to non-immigrant households, using the American Time Use Survey. Statistical results show that gender, race and immigrant status were important factors in determining housework time for wives. Gender was an influential factor for husbands, but race and immigrant status were not. The unequal distribution of housework time was more burdensome for immigrant wives. The results confirm the “production of gender” in married couples.	Vincent	 Louis
2008	119	Migration and Gender	How Gender Shapes the Mexican American Immigrant Health Paradox	This paper uses data from the 1998-2006 waves of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) to examine whether the well-established relationship between acculturation and health varies by gender. We construct a multi-dimensional measure of acculturation that draws on four pieces of information (nativity, duration of US residence, citizenship status, and language use), and examine its relationship to the total number, and type, of diagnosed medical conditions (e.g., hypertension, heart disease, diabetes). We also consider whether the mechanisms through which acculturation influences health (e.g., family structure, SES, access to and utilization of medical care, health behaviors, psychological well-being) varies by gender. Overall, we find that while the least acculturated men and women are significantly less likely to report a medical condition, this relationship is stronger for men. Initial models also show that while some explanatory mechanisms operate differently for men and women (e.g., education), most operate in a similar manner.	Bridget	K. Gorman	Jen'nan	G. Read
2008	120	Child Health and Well-Being in Developing Countries	Is there Complete, Partial or no Recovery from Childhood Malnutrition? - Empirical Evidence from Indonesia	The paper captures the extent to which children are able to recover from some of the long-term deficits in health outcomes caused by childhood malnutrition. A dynamic conditional health demand function is estimated, where the coefficient on the one-period lagged health status captures the extent of recovery, if any, from childhood malnourishment. The OLS parameter estimate on lagged health status is 0.53 and it reduces to 0.23 using a first-difference GMM approach, indicating an upward bias in the OLS parameter estimate. A coefficient of 0.23 indicates that poor nutrition at young ages, will cause some, but not severe, retardation in the growth of future height indicating partial catch-up effects. The first-difference GMM strategy used here is especially attractive in this context as it relies on much weaker stochastic assumptions than earlier papers and addresses both omitted variables bias and measurement error bias in data.	Subha	 Mani
2008	120	Child Health and Well-Being in Developing Countries	Mortality Risks, Health Endowments, and Parental Investments in Infancy: Evidence from Rural India	This paper examines whether increased background mortality risks induce households to make differential health investments in their high- versus low-endowment children. We argue that increases in background mortality risks may disproportionately affect the survival of the low-endowment sibling, consequently increasing the mortality gap between the high- and low-endowment siblings. This increase in mortality gap may induce households to invest more in their high-endowment children. We test this hypothesis using nationally representative data from rural India. We use birth size as a measure of initial health endowment, immunization & breastfeeding as measures of childhood investments, and infant mortality rate in the child’s village as a measure of mortality risks. We find that in villages with high mortality risks, small-at-birth children in a family are 6 – 17 percent less likely to be breastfed or immunized compared to their large-at-birth siblings. In contrast, we find no significant within family differences in investments in villages with low mortality risks.	Ashlesha	 Datar	Arkadipta	 Ghosh	Neeraj	 Sood
2008	120	Child Health and Well-Being in Developing Countries	The Long Term Effects of Being Born in a Drought: Evidence from South Africa	This paper uses a difference-in-differences identification strategy to estimate the effects of negative early life environmental conditions on later life health and human capital outcomes. I use longitudinal data collected from young adults in the Cape Area Panel Study to provide more evidence that being born during a drought is detrimental for adult height and human capital. This adds to a growing empirical literature documenting these negative relationships across several countries. I also use detailed school calendar data to investigate whether these negative weather events operate to delay entry into school, slow down grade progression or result in more grade repetition. Preliminary work suggests that youth born during a drought accumulate fewer years of education and under-perform on tests of cognitive ability. They are also less 8-9% points less likely to be enrolled in school at the age of 6.	Taryn	 Dinkelman
2008	121	Family and Health over the Life Course	Family Structure and Fathers' Well-Being: Trajectories of Mental and Physical Health	A vast literature has assessed the relationship between marital status and health, but very little has tracked changes in health trajectories following family structure transitions, especially among unmarried fathers. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study this paper examines trajectories of paternal mental and physical health, specifically focusing on transitions into and out of residential relationships with the child’s biological mother during the first five years after a new birth (N = 4,331). Continuously married fathers are in better mental and physical health than unmarried fathers one year after birth, but the disparity does not increase over time, providing little support for the marital resource model during these years. Timing of family structure change likewise has little impact on the transition’s association with health trajectory slopes. The implications of these findings for the marital resource model, as well as selection and causation arguments, are also discussed.	Sarah	O. Meadows
2008	121	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Status and History: Implications for Health in Older Adulthood	Although the variation in health outcomes by current marital status is well-documented, the life-course of marital events that resulted in that status is not well understood. This accumulated history may be an important determinant of the quality of life during older adulthood. This research asks, what are the effects of life-cycle marriage events on health at older ages and what are the behavioral, emotional, and financial mechanisms that might explain these effects? Using panel data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we find that the intersection between current marital status at older ages and previous marital history is particularly important for understanding health in older adulthood. Given the dramatic changes in family composition over the past 25 years, understanding the mechanisms underlying this relationship may be especially relevant as a growing number of individuals will be entering their later years with a diverse history of marital experiences.	Amy	 Rauer	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Benjamin	 Karney
2008	121	Family and Health over the Life Course	Relationships between Marriage and Women’s Health in Japan	Using eight waves of data from the Japanese Panel of Survey of Consumers (1996-2002, N = 4,145), we estimate relationships between women’s health and marital status (and transitions therein), net of baseline health. By constructing multiple measures of mental and physical health, we are able to evaluate the extent to which the impact of marriage depends on the dimension of health considered. Preliminary results from random effects regression models indicate that marriage is associated with lower levels of psychological distress and better physical health among Japanese women. At the same time, however, married women have significantly lower levels of positive affect (motivation, optimism and self-confidence) relative to their never-married counterparts. In subsequent analyses, we will reestimate these relationships using growth-curve modeling techniques and evaluate our results in comparative perspective and in the context of theoretical frameworks for understanding the benefits of marriage.	So-jung	 Lim	James	 Raymo	Larry	 Bumpass
2008	121	Family and Health over the Life Course	Unhealthy Behavior and Marriage	The gains on health for the married people have long been documented in social sciences. Nevertheless, the precise mechanisms through which marriage improves health are rarely explored. This study examines how marriage influences health by shunning unhealthy behaviors—reductions in excessive drinking. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), we are able to control for a large number of baseline variables. Additionally, we calculated propensity scores and used them in the frameworks of regression analysis and matching. We performed diagnostics to assess the validity of propensity scores and adopted a simple control function approach for robustness tests. After procedures to account for selection, results suggest that married people are less likely to engage in hazardous drinking. The types of marriage matter: formal marriage has stronger effects than cohabitation. Union history also matters: people with more cohabitation union experiences are more likely to drink excessively.	Muh-Chung	 Lin
2008	122	Neighborhoods and Health	Racial Disparities in Asthma: Does Place Matter?	Asthma disproportionately burdens black, Latino and poor individuals. Individual-level risk factors do not fully account for the observed differences. Health risks resources appear to be spatially and socially distributed across neighborhoods, with asthma-inducing factors concentrated in poor, segregated neighborhoods. Ecological studies often do not control for correlated individual factors. The Chicago Community Adult Health Study did face-to-face interviews with a representative probability sample of 3105 adults in Chicago. Multilevel models are utilized to simultaneously examine individual and neighborhood-level variation in asthma and to analyze how racial disparities in asthma are related to the areas in which they live. Measured neighborhood characteristics include concentrated disadvantage, neighborhood affluence, racial/ethnic composition, pollution and traffic, physical decay, neighborhood infestation, perceived violence, and safety. We hypothesize that residential contexts potentially play a large role in accounting for racial-ethnic disparities in asthma prevalence.	Michelle	 Sternthal
2008	122	Neighborhoods and Health	A Longitudinal Analysis of Body Mass Index by Individual and Neighborhood Level Race and SES Characteristics	This investigation examines changes in body mass index (BMI) over time in a sample of US adults, and also explain inter-individual changes in BMI over time as a function of individual-level race and SES and neighborhood-level race and SES. We use the Americans Changing Lives longitudinal study (1986-2002) merged with census data to estimate growth curve models that examine BMI trajectories over time, separately for men and women. Preliminary results show that BMI increases over a 16-year span, and that the differences in BMI increase between individuals over time for both men and women. There are no racial differences in BMI at baseline or over time for men. For women, blacks have a greater average BMI at baseline, but follow BMI trajectories that are not significantly different than whites. Individual level SES is a strong predictor of baseline BMI and growth in BMI for men, but less so for women.	Erin	 Ruel	Eric	N Reither	Stephanie	A. Robert	Paula	 Lantz
2008	122	Neighborhoods and Health	Long-term Effects of Neighborhood Poverty and Crime on Negative Self-Feelings	This paper analyzes the long-term effects of neighborhood poverty and crime on young adults’ negative self-feelings. First, we establish a longitudinal link between neighborhood context in adolescence and adult negative self-feelings (NSF). Second, we demonstrate the importance of the incongruence between neighborhood and individual characteristics for the development of NSF. Third, we analyze how the effect of neighborhood crime on adult NSF depends on the neighborhood economic conditions. We employ longitudinal study of Young Adults following a generation of young people mainly in Houston area. We measure neighborhood contexts during the adolescence and in young adulthood both through respondents’ self-perception and by using US Census data. Preliminary results show the highest NSF for those respondents who are from lower social class but live in an affluent neighborhood. Also, the effect of crime in neighborhood on NSF is stronger in an affluent neighborhood than in neighborhoods with economic problems.	Heili	 Pals	Howard	B. Kaplan
2008	122	Neighborhoods and Health	Subjective and Objective Neighborhood Characteristics and Adult Health	This study examines objective and subjective assessments of neighborhood conditions, exploring the overlap between different sources of information on neighborhoods and the relative strength of their association with adult self-rated health. Data on perceived neighborhood quality from Wave IV (2001/2002) of the nationally representative Americans Changing Lives (ACL) panel study are merged with neighborhood-level census tract data to measure theoretically-derived subjective and objective neighborhood constructs. Structural equation models indicate that each of the subjective and objective constructs is related to health. However, perceived neighborhood quality is most strongly associated with health and mediates associations between health and the two objective constructs (neighborhood disadvantage and affluence). Additionally, individual characteristics play an important role in shaping the contribution of neighborhood conditions through selection and mediation. Our results highlight the separate contributions of both objective and perceived neighborhood quality on health, and the particularly strong contribution of perceived neighborhood quality.	Margaret	M. Weden	Richard	M. Carpiano	Stephanie	A. Robert
2008	123	Education: Causes and Effects	Higher Education, Expectations and Family Outcomes	In this paper, we use longitudinal data from the US to analyze the evolution of fertility expectations and birth outcomes of young adults over the period 1979-2004. We show that actual family sizes achieved lie significantly below the initially desired and expected levels, and that this difference is particularly pronounced for females with higher education. With show that this gap can be decomposed into three distinct channels: first, female college graduates underestimate their age of marriage; second, female college graduates systematically underestimate the difficulties in combining career and motherhood; last, female college graduates are overoptimistic with respect to the time needed to achieve a given family goal.	Guenther	 Fink
2008	123	Education: Causes and Effects	Are There Sex Differences in the Utilization of Educational Capital among College-Educated Workers?	This paper introduces the concept of educational utilization as an overlooked part of the education-to-work transition and a potential mechanism by which occupational sex segregation is generated among the college-educated labor force. The paper begins with a critical discussion of the operationalization approaches that have been used in prior research that implicitly measures educational utilization. Multiple empirical measure of the concept are then developed using data from the O*NET and the National Surveys of College Graduates. Each is then used to assess sex differences in educational utilization using data from the 1993 and 2003 National Surveys of College Graduates for cohorts of college graduates who earned their bachelor’s, master’s or doctorate degrees and entered the labor market in the years 1985 to 1993 and 1995 to 2003.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2008	123	Education: Causes and Effects	A Dynamic View of Childhood Sibship Size Effects on Education	This paper provides a life course view of the effects of the number of co-resident siblings (“sibship size”) on individuals’ education during childhood. Using panel data from the Philippines, I estimate the effects of number of younger and older siblings, and their movement into and out of the household, on childhood education through longitudinal models that control for time-invariant unobserved differences among children. The findings highlight both negative and positive effects of sibship size, with important distinctions between the effects of number of older and younger siblings, as well as additive effects of gaining and losing siblings. I also find important differences in the effects of level and change in sibship size across stages of childhood. The results suggest the need to consider sibship size at multiple points in childhood, the residential mobility of siblings, and the issue of timing when assessing the effects of childhood sibship size on individual well-being.	Kammi	 Schmeer
2008	123	Education: Causes and Effects	Contemporary Context and the Timing of Births: Effects of Education on the Second Birth Interval in Kenya	That the spacing of births in contemporary sub-Saharan Africa is contingent on women’s often fragile bodily capacity and the uncertain socio-economic environment - and not always on the classical notion of parity specific fertility control and fixed family size - is a conclusion from studies conducted in a number of countries in West Africa. In Kenya, an East African country with similarities and contrasts, the idea remains to be tested. Using the 2003 Kenya DHS, this issue is examined by observing first births that took place within 12 years before the survey until the event (second birth) or censoring occurs. Survival analysis (the Cox regression model) is used to determine the effects of the different levels of education, and of varying socio-economic periods, on the transition to the second conception. Conclusions and policy recommendations relating to women’s productive and reproductive careers are made.	David	 Ojakaa
2008	124	Family Background, Cohabitation, and Marriage	How Does Premarital Cohabitation Affect Trajectories of Marital Quality?	Given that the modal marriage experience today starts with premarital cohabitation, we explore the consequences of this pathway into marriage for subsequent marital quality and stability. We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to test whether the trajectories of marital quality are significantly different for premarital cohabitors and non-cohabitors, as well as what impact marital quality trajectories have on marital stability across the two groups. We also examine whether cohabitors' distinct marital experiences are driven by having a premarital birth, rather than cohabitation. Our study improves upon existing work by examining changes in marital quality within couples over time and by controlling for time invariant, unobserved differences between premarital cohabitors and those who enter marriage directly.	Sarah	 Halpern-Meekin	Laura	M. Tach
2008	124	Family Background, Cohabitation, and Marriage	Cohabitation: Parents Following in their Children's Footsteps?	It has been theorized that socialization can be reciprocal; from children to parents, however this theory has not been tested much in the literature. As cohabitation has risen dramatically in the past few decades among adults of all ages, it is possible that middle and older-aged parents are learning cohabitation from their young adult children. Prior work has shown that parents are likely to view cohabitation more positively after their young adult child cohabits but no one has taken this a step further to determine if parents will then be more likely to cohabit themselves following the start of a young adult child's cohabitation. Utilizing all three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households to conduct an event history analysis, I plan to test whether there is support of this argument.	Lauren	 Rinelli
2008	124	Family Background, Cohabitation, and Marriage	The Effects of Family Background on the Union Formation Process of Young Adults	Using the detailed union histories of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), this paper examines whether childhood family structure influences the formation of romantic unions among young adults. I pose four questions: 1) Do parents’ marital transitions and parents’ education have strong, predictive power in selecting young adults’ into cohabitation or marriage as a first union? 2) Taking family background into account, how do college degree attainment, college enrollment and work history influence union formation among young adults? 3) Do the effects of family background and school/work experiences on the decision to cohabit among young adults vary by gender? 4) To what extent are attitudes toward cohabitation influenced by parents’ marital history, child’s gender and age? The results of this study confirm children’s union formation decisions are strongly influenced by the union transitions of their parents.	Casey	E Copen
2008	124	Family Background, Cohabitation, and Marriage	Transitions, Trajectories or Timing? Untangling the Effects of Family Structure on Young Adults’ Attitudes toward Marriage	Children of divorce experience divergent pathways from adolescence to adulthood. While some youths who experience family structure instability are at increased risk of early marriage others tend to delay or forgo marriage altogether. Most prior studies on the relationship between family instability in childhood and marriage attitudes and behaviors focus on family status at a single point in time. However, contemporary families are increasingly complex and a single snapshot of family status is insufficient to capture the heterogeneity of experiences. Therefore, in this paper we draw on a life course perspective to examine the link between young adults’ family structure history and their attitudes toward marriage, employing measures that differentiate between transitions, pathways and the timing of family structure changes. Using Addhealth data, we conclude that including varied measures of family structure history gives a more accurate understanding of the ways that family disruption in childhood affects attitudes about marriage.	Kathryn	 Henderson	David	F. Warner	Glen	H. Elder, Jr.
2008	125	International Insights about Health and Mortality	Sleeping Pattern and Its Associations with Health Conditions among the Chinese Elderly	Up to 50% of the elders worldwide suffer from sleeping problems with different degrees. Significant associations between sleeping quality and health outcomes among the elders are well-documented in West. However, little research on this topic is from developing countries. Using a nationwide survey in China in 2005 with 15,638 elderly interviewees aged 65 and over, we assess patterns of sleeping quality and quantity and their associations with various health conditions. The results show that average hours of sleeping is 7.5; 55% of subjects have the normal hours of sleep (7-9 hours daily), while 65% have good quality of sleep; men, urban elders, higher SES, and healthy practice are positively associated with better sleeping or normal sleeping hours; regional difference is noticeable. Our analyses further show that poor quality of sleeping and less- or excessive-hour sleeping are linked with poor ADL functioning, impaired cognition, and poor overall health condition.	Danan	 Gu
2008	125	International Insights about Health and Mortality	Denmark: The Lowest Excess Mortality during the Influenza Pandemic Of 1918	The influenza of 1918 (H1N1 virus) had an unusual strong effect on young adults, ages 15 to 50. This excess adult mortality also occurred in Denmark. However, the adult mortality levels were lower in this country than in other region of the world. These low levels of adult mortality are also observed in Denmark in the years before and after the pandemic. An in-depth examination of the mortality data for Scandinavian countries who share a lot of similarities brings some insights to the reasons why Denmark had such low mortality in 1918. Furthermore, the results suggest that current levels of mortality in specifics regions of the world could help predicting deaths caused by the threatening avian influenza epidemic in the near future.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	Annette	 Erlangsen
2008	125	International Insights about Health and Mortality	Self-Reported Arthritis and Mortality in Aged Males and Females	We analyze the association between self-reported arthritis and mortality in the U.S. elderly disabled and non-disabled individuals using unique disability-focused data from the large-scale population-based National Long Term Care Survey. Males and females who reported arthritis/rheumatism have about 20% smaller risks of death than those who did not report those conditions. This inverse relationship is even more pronounced in disabled individuals. For females, this effect is age insensitive, while for males it is limited to ages below 85. Demographic and 19 major geriatric conditions have trivial effect on these risks supporting the view that a better survival of diseased individuals can be attributed to the effects of medical treatment. Given the widespread prevalence of arthritis/rheumatism and disability in elderly populations in the world and the increasing population of the elderly, these findings call for comprehensive analyzes of factors driving better survival and medical costs associated with extended lives.	Alexander	 Kulminski	Irina	V Culminskaya	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva
2008	125	International Insights about Health and Mortality	Selective Mortality in Norway during the 1918 Flu Pandemic	Using data from the USA, Noymer and Garenne   (2000) postulated that there was selective   mortality in the 1918-19 influenza pandemic.   Specifically, declines of tuberculosis mortality   after 1918 were accelerated by the influenza   pandemic having consumed, all-at-once, a large   number of tuberculosis-infected people. This   knocked-down tuberculosis transmission, and also   simply killed in 1918 a large number of   TB-infected people whose deaths would otherwise   have been distributed throughout the early 1920s.   This was not corroborated in Australian data  (Noymer, in preparation). The explanation  for this is that in Australia, TB was less prevalent   than the USA, and moreover the influenza pandemic   was less severe. On the other hand, this paper   looks at Norway, where the influenza was severe   and in which tuberculosis was famously a major   cause of death. A priori, Norway ought to   corroborate the American findings. It does. The   present paper shows age- and time- specific   declines consistent with selection.	Andrew	 Noymer
2008	126	Progression of Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Rising Cohort Fertility in Africa : 1900-1950	Trends in cohort fertility were reconstructed from census and survey data for some 30 African countries for women born prior to 1950. Results show major rises in more than half of the countries, and smaller increases in the other half. Fertility increases are correlated with a marked decline in infertility in many countries, and with a moderate increase in age at first marriage in some others. Reasons for the changes in these two proximate determinants of fertility level are explored. Infertility appears correlated with the control of trypanosomiasis in some of the countries of the “infertility belt”. In other countries it seems to be correlated with better standards of living. Dynamics of fertility level are discussed in light of other potential determinants, and of the colonial history of public health.	Michel	 Garenne
2008	126	Progression of Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Dilemma of Lagging Fertility Transition while Rising Contraceptive Prelavence in Rural Ethiopia: Multivariate Analysis of Socio-Economic, Cultural, Agro-Ecological And Health Service Factors	This paper analyzes factors effecting the lagging rural fertility transition, still at 6.0 TFR, in predominantly rural Ethiopia in the past 15 years, even where CPR has tripled. Our methodology includes the construction of trends from 1990 to 2005, supplemented by the national censuses of 1984 and 1994. A multilevel logistic regression model of socio-economic, demographic, cultural, environmental and health systems factors on trends in fertility and malnutrition are highlighted.     Preliminary findings indicate that factors which reduce fertility, such as modern contraceptive use and age of marriage, are occurring around the country, effecting urban but not rural fertility . Logistic regressions on fertility show that most powerful determinants of rising CPR are maternal secondary education, young maternal age, higher wealth, exposure to media, and visits by family planning workers.     Implications for policy goals in population, health and nutrition, as part of poverty reduction and food security strategies, will be discussed.	Charles	H Teller	Assefa	 Hailemariam	Tesfayi	 Gebreselassie
2008	126	Progression of Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Recent Fertility Decline in Eritrea:  Is it a Conflict-Led Transition?	During a period of military conflict towards the end of the 1990s, Eritrea experienced a remarkable decline in fertility. An important question is whether the decline is driven primarily by the recent border conflict with Ethiopia or by changes in other factors. Using data from the 1995 and 2002 EDHS, this study provides an in-depth exploration of recent fertility change in Eritrea. The findings illustrate a decline in fertility partly due to cessation of childbearing after families reach their desired family size. There is also evidence that the border conflict has contributed substantially to the decline, particularly for first birth fertility. The implications of these findings for theories about fertility change in times of military conflict is that crises may not be likely to initiate a sustainable overall fertility transition, but can still prompt short-term fertility changes among certain social groups or modify an ongoing decline.	Gebremariam	 Woldemicael
2008	126	Progression of Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa at the Sub-National Level	The objective of this paper will be to describe and provide explanatory factors for fertility levels and trends at the regional level in sub-Saharan Africa, using the available demographic and health surveys data collected since the mid 1980s in Sub-Saharan Africa. The first part of the paper will consist in describing levels and trends of general fertility and its main proximate determinants at the regional level. In the second part of the paper, we will analyze the relationships between fertility levels and trends and the main proximate determinants of fertility using the Bongaarts model. The third section will be devoted to the analysis of the influence of socio-economic and demographic factors (education, standard of living, child mortality…) on fertility levels and trends at the regional level. Special attention will be given to the identification of factors linked to the stalling fertility transitions.	Bruno	D. Schoumaker	Dominique	 Tabutin
2008	127	Fertility at the Extremes	The Chicken and Egg of Economic Disadvantage and Multiple Partner Fertility	There exists a known correlation between childbearing with more than one partner (or multiple partner fertility) and economic disadvantage. However, the direction of the relationship is not clear. On the one hand, an argument could be made that multiple partner fertility causes disadvantage by creating often unstable blended families, thus increasing the likelihood of single-parenthood and its associated economic repercussions. Alternately, one could also argue that poverty strains nuclear families and increases their risk of dissolution, which would then put women at greater risk of multiple partner fertility. In this paper, I use the Illinois Family Study dataset to examine the causal direction of this relationship by locating the arrival of children by a second father in women’s life histories of childbearing, work, and public assistance use in an effort to shed some light on the chicken and egg conundrum of multiple partner fertility and disadvantage.	Lindsay	M. Monte
2008	127	Fertility at the Extremes	Fertility of Power Couples in Sweden	This paper explores the fertility of power couples, i.e. couples in which both are academic graduates and/or have high-powered careers. We focus on how high-achieving women and men behave in relation to other couples when it comes to family formation and how the relationship between education, occupation, career and fertility has changed over time in post-war Sweden. The determinants of entry into parenthood as well as of higher-order births are analyzed by applying hazard regressions to data made up by annual aggregate time series as well as longitudinal micro-data from register data provided by Statistics Sweden. Education, labour market attachment and occupational orientation are key factors determining the fertility of high-achieving women and men, although the effects are gendered. The importance of educational and occupational orientation may reflect different degrees of work-family conflicts that exist in different fields and the relative power balance within the couple.	Martin	 Dribe	Maria	A. Stanfors
2008	127	Fertility at the Extremes	Alone in the Ivory Tower: How Birth Events Vary among Fast-Track Professionals	We use data from the 2000 Census Public Use Microsample to examine the likelihood of a birth event, defined as the household presence of a child aged zero or one, for male and female professionals. Physicians have the highest rate of birth events, followed in order by attorneys and academics. Within each profession men have more birth events than women. For men, professional variation in birth events can be explained by marital status, income, and spousal employment. These factors only partially account for professional differences in birth events for women.	Nicholas	H. Wolfinger	Mary	Ann  Mason	Marc	 Goulden
2008	127	Fertility at the Extremes	Does Public Spending on the Family in Sweden Compensate the Higher Opportunity Costs of Children for Highly Educated Women?	In Sweden the previously negative correlation between female labor force participation and fertility has shifted to a clearly positive correlation and a tendency that highly educated women have as many or more children as the low educated. But this tendency also means that the average age of the mother at first birth has been rising sharply and now is almost 30 years. We propose that the Swedish system of public intergenerational transfers compensate the higher opportunity costs of children for high educated women. We use a longitudinal microdata sample of 3 percent of the Swedish population to compare tax rates and child cost estimates for parents with different educational levels. Results so far indicate that high educated women receive a proportionally smaller decrease in tax rates as they have a new child than the low educated.	Daniel	 Hallberg	Thomas	 Lindh
2008	128	Spatial Dimensions of Local Processes	School District Fragmentation and Racial Residential Segregation: How do Boundaries Matter?	Fragmentation, or the proliferation of independent jurisdictions, is a key feature of the political structure in many metropolitan areas in the United States. This paper engages sorting theories to investigate racial segregation as one potential negative consequence of school district fragmentation in metropolitan areas. My main results suggest that fragmentation does increase multiracial segregation between districts. Using a decomposable segregation measure, I also find that fragmentation has a negative impact on segregation within districts and no significant effect on tract-level segregation. Additionally, the results suggest that the causes of segregation may differ for various race/ethnic groups. I use this context to further the discussion of appropriate units of analysis for segregation measures. I argue here that segregation between political units may in fact be more appropriate than segregation between smaller units, such as census tracts, if we believe that the negative consequences of segregation stem from access to public goods.	Kendra	 Bischoff
2008	128	Spatial Dimensions of Local Processes	Context and Death: A Spatial Investigation of the Impacts of Social Capital and Natural Amenities on Mortality In U.S. Counties	The proliferation of spatial data and the statistical techniques to analyze them have naturally given rise to increasing attention to relationships between place characteristics and human health. While some is known about how social capital and natural amenities affect individual health, their impact on mortality remains unexplored. We address this issue through analysis of data on U.S. counties, and in so doing rectify three shortcomings in the relevant literature: the crude and limited measures of social capital, the unknown impacts of natural amenities on mortality, and insufficient attention to spatial dependence which can yield incorrect findings. Our exploratory spatial data analysis demonstrates an obvious mortality clustering pattern where the Appalachian region, the Black Belt, and the Mississippi Valley are disadvantaged relative to the Great Plain and the Mexico border region. Furthermore, the spatial explanatory analysis not only indicates social capital and natural amenities benefit human health, but also indicates that spatial structure cannot be ignored.	Tse-Chuan	 Yang	Leif	 Jensen	Murali	 Haran
2008	128	Spatial Dimensions of Local Processes	Using Geographical Distance among Family Members from the Electoral List as a Measure of the Intensity of Social Networks of the Elderly in Costa Rica	The first-wave questionnaire of the project CRELES (Costa Rican Study of Longevity and Healthy Aging) collects a limited amount of information about social support of the Costa Rican elderly. We use information from Costa Rica’s electoral list linked to the CRELES main dataset to establish the district of residence of the siblings and children of the CRELES sampled individuals. Then, using the geographical coordinates of the centroids of the electoral districts, we compute mean geographical distances between each CRELES respondent and his/her siblings and children. We then compare this geographical measures with other indexes used in CRELES to assess social support and social networks in order to inspect its external validity. Finally, we run several logistic and regression models that have health indicators as dependent variables, to see whether geographical distance as a proxy for social distance is associated with health status in Costa Rica.	Gilbert	 Brenes-Camacho
2008	128	Spatial Dimensions of Local Processes	Spatial Dynamics of the Local Food Environment in the City of Chicago: An Investigation of Data Sources and Methods	Recent studies have demonstrated the importance of the local ecological environment on individual health outcomes. Data collection and analysis methods, however, need to be developed in order to extend our understanding about the mechanisms through which the local ecological environment contributes to individual health. In this paper we present a promising form of ecological data collection by combining commercial and observational data in addition to methodological innovations for analysis of these innovative data. We adapt the geostatistical method of kriging used in environmental and material sciences to demonstrate how the spatial autocorrelation of observations in the social environment can be used to derive accurate estimates of contextual variables from a relatively small sample of blocks in the city of Chicago. We use these estimates to measure the effect of the local ecological environment on individual health behaviors. Implications for data collection and spatial analysis are discussed.	Michael	D Bader	Jennifer	A Ailshire
2008	129	Infant and Child Mortality	Prenatal Care and Infant Health: Elementary, Dear Watson? Accounting for Selection Bias in Nonexperimental Data	This paper reexamines the relationship between prenatal care and infant health using cross-sectional data from India. Given the dearth of experimental evidence on the nature and extent of the effects of prenatal care on birthweight and infant mortality, we have mostly drawn conclusions from observational data. These results often suffer from the nagging problem of selection bias: women that seek a certain level of prenatal care may be systematically different in a way that also affects their birth outcomes. I employ (i)a sibling-difference model, and (ii)a propensity score model to address this unobserved heterogeneity. Neither of these approaches has been used before in the literature on prenatal care. The use of data from a non-Western setting is also a first for the prenatal care-selection literature. The huge investments made in prenatal care worldwide as part of the effort to improve maternal and child health make this a question worth revisiting and answering right.	Satvika	 Chalasani
2008	129	Infant and Child Mortality	Family Planning, Community Health Interventions and the Mortality Risk of Children	In the last four decades, Indonesia experienced rapid declines in infant and child mortality alongside active government interventions. Using the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS), this paper studies the impact of the national family planning program on the decline in mortality rates of children. First, using the difference in the timing of introduction of the program in two sets of provinces, a difference-in-difference approach shows that mortality rates of children fell in provinces where the program was introduced. Second, the relationship between contraceptive acceptance by the woman and the mortality risk of subsequent births is examined. A bivariate probit framework is used to overcome the bias due to correlation between contraceptive use and unobserved individual characteristics of the woman. The results show a 5 percent reduction in the risk of child mortality after a woman has used contraceptives, but there is no such effect of contraceptive use on infant mortality.	Ranjan	 Shrestha
2008	129	Infant and Child Mortality	The Effects of Macro- and Individual-Level Socioeconomic Status on Child Mortality in Brazil, 1970 To 2000	We delineate the effects of both macro- and individual-level socioeconomic factors on child mortality in Brazil. Using 1970 through 2000 Brazilian census data we address three questions: First, did socioeconomic disparities in child mortality decline over this period of rapid but geographically uneven economic development? Second, do macro-level socioeconomic factors affect child mortality above and beyond the impact of individual-level socioeconomic factors? Third, does individual-level socioeconomic status matter more or less depending on macro-level socioeconomic context? We find declining socioeconomic disparities in child mortality in Brazil over this period. We find no evidence that macro-level socioeconomic factors affect child mortality levels above and beyond individual level socioeconomic status, but we do find that the effects of individual-level socioeconomic factors vary as a function of macro-level socioeconomic conditions. Our findings point to the need to consider broader, macro-level socioeconomic forces in order to understand inequalities and trends in child mortality.	Elaine	 Hernandez	John	R. Warren
2008	129	Infant and Child Mortality	Metropolitan Economic Decline and Infant Mortality Due to Unintentional Injury	Health professionals assert that parents could prevent infant mortality due to unintentional injury (IMUI) by creating a safe infant environment. Examples of safe parenting behaviors include attending to a bathing infant, securing a child safety seat in a motor vehicle, and removing soft pillows from a crib. The contraction of regional economies, an ambient phenomenon previously reported to affect salutary behaviors, may distract parents from these routine infant monitoring tasks. I test this distraction hypothesis that the monthly incidence of IMUI will vary inversely with the performance of the economy. I retrieve birth data on 2,618,752 infants and economic data for all 26 metropolitan areas of California. Results support the hypothesis in that declines in employed persons coincide with an increase of IMUI. Findings remain robust to control for individual covariates. Parents may respond to regional economic decline by allocating less energy and attention to routine infant monitoring tasks.	Tim-Allen	 Bruckner
2008	130	Tracking the Displaced: Methods and Results	Going Home after Hurricane Katrina: Determinants of Return Migration and Changes in Affected Areas	This paper examines the decisions of Hurricane Katrina evacuees to return to their pre-Katrina areas and documents how the composition of the Katrina-affected region has changed over time. We use data from the Current Population Survey, which was modified in the wake of Katrina to include special questions on evacuees, in combination with outside data on damage from the storm. We show that age, race, and the severity of damage in an evacuee's county of origin are important determinants of whether evacuees returned. The demographic composition of evacuees who returned differs from that of evacuees who did not return: returnees are older and a larger percentage of returnees are white. Despite large differences in the demographic composition of returnees and non-returnees, at the aggregate level the demographic composition of the Katrina-affected region changed relatively little over time. However, changes over time in the distribution of household income were substantial.	Jeffrey	A Groen	Anne	E Polivka
2008	130	Tracking the Displaced: Methods and Results	Tracking PSID Families in the Gulf States of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama	The 34th wave of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) was underway when Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast causing devastation along the coast of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. By this point in the 2005 PSID field period, more than 90% of the families in these three Gulf states had completed their interviews. With a special grant from the NSF and DHS, a series of tracking steps was implemented prior to the 2007 wave of data collection to find these families who may have relocated for various reasons related to Hurricane Katrina, putting them at high risk for subsequent attrition. This paper describes the effectiveness of steps taken during the fall of 2006 to locate the families residing in areas affected by Hurricane Katrina who are part of the longitudinal sample of the PSID in order to enhance the likelihood of their retention in the 2007 wave.	Katherine	 McGonagle	Eva	 Leissou	April	 Beaule	Frank	 Stafford
2008	130	Tracking the Displaced: Methods and Results	Supplemental Security Income Recipients Affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita: An Analysis of Two Years of Administrative Data	We use administrative data to study Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipients in the counties affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in August 2005. Poor, elderly, and disabled SSI recipients were potentially the hardest hit by the hurricanes. While relocation and rebuilding may have opened employment opportunities for those able to work, the disruption in health supports and loss of assets may have forced recipients to become more attached to the program. Recipients in August 2005 are followed through August 2007. Outcomes such as SSI status, geographic location, and earnings are analyzed, focusing on characteristics including age group, gender, living arrangements, and type of impairment. Preliminary estimates from August 2006 show wide variability in the outcomes of SSI recipients in the affected counties. By comparing these outcomes with those of recipients in counties not affected by the hurricanes, we will estimate how the hurricanes affected SSI recipients.	Paul	S. Davies	Jeffrey	 Hemmeter
2008	130	Tracking the Displaced: Methods and Results	Impact of the 2005 Gulf Coast Hurricanes on Domestic Migration: U.S. Census Bureau Response	The Census Bureau produces domestic migration data from administrative records for the population estimates program. The method employs individual income tax data from two consecutive years to determine mover status. The Katrina and Rita hurricanes in August and September of 2005 meant that the usual measurement of domestic migration for the impacted areas would be unlikely to work well. Early examination of returns in 2006 showed large numeric decreases - - this would erode the year-to-year IRS match rates that are a crucial measure of migration.     This paper presents: 1) the approach taken to enhance the administrative record method by using National Change of Address Data; and 2) selected measures of inter-state and the inter-county migration data measured by the modified procedure.	Rodger	V. Johnson	Justin	 Bland	Charles	D. Coleman
2008	130	Tracking the Displaced: Methods and Results	Method of Tracking the Displaced : A Lesson from the Study of the Aftermath of Tsunami and Recovery in Indonesia	Tracking and finding respondents is a challenge in any longitudinal survey, but also the key to success. In communities reduced to rubble after the tsunami the task in figuring out who died, who moved away and where they went is an even greater challenge. A typical longitudinal survey obtains information about survival and movers from one informant, but finding displaced persons in the aftermath of tsunami demands a more intensive and extensive model of tracking .   This paper ,uses data from the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR) in Indonesia ,will demonstrate the use of multiple informant report in determining who died, who have moved and finding respondents that have scattered throughout the damaged areas. The paper will illuminate the success at tracking under difficult condition and show the advantages of using multiple informant report in tracking the displaced as against the regular method of tracking with single informant.	Bondan	 Sikoki	Cecep	S Sumantri	Wayan	 Suriastini
2008	131	Household Configurations and Reproductive Life	Reproductive Behavior and Nonmarital Cohabitation in the United States: Historical Change and Variation in Contraceptive Use	The reproductive behavior of cohabitors can provide important insight into the normative context and function(s) of cohabitation. Prior studies offer careful investigations of patterns of conception, childbearing, and the planning status of births to cohabitors. Yet surprisingly little is known about contemporary patterns of contraceptive use among cohabiting women. Still less is known about how the association between union status and contraceptive use may vary across groups, despite great interest in understanding subpopulation variation the meaning and function of nonmarital cohabitation. Relying on data from the National Survey of Family Growth, the current analysis addresses two key questions: (1) Has the nature of the association between union status and contraceptive use changed during the last two decades of the 20th century? (2) Does the nature of the association between contraceptive use and union status vary across groups?	Megan	M. Sweeney
2008	131	Household Configurations and Reproductive Life	Pathways to Fatherhood: Low-Income, Non-Custodial Men's Role in Fertility Decisions	Over the past several decades, nonmarital childbearing rates have risen sharply. This trend has been most prevalent among socially and economic disadvantaged groups. While recent research has cast light upon the many reasons that disadvantaged groups delay (or defer) marriage, thereby increasing the likelihood that a birth will take place outside of marriage, less is understood about motivations for having children outside of marriage. At the same time, men’s (compared to women’s) motivations for having children remain unclear. In this paper, we explore the role that low-income, non-custodial fathers play in the fertility decision process. Using in depth interview data (N = 171) from White, Black, and Hispanic fathers, we analyze fathers’ role in the fertility process at four different levels of intentionality (accidental, unexpected but not accidental, unplanned but not unexpected, planned), and describe the complex interplay between intention, socioeconomic disadvantage, and the circumstances surrounding men’s pathways into fatherhood.	Jennifer	M. Augustine	Timothy	 Nelson	Kathryn	 Edin
2008	131	Household Configurations and Reproductive Life	The Education Gradient on Unintended vs. Intended Fertility: Australia and the United States	We show that women and men with less education have a higher ratio of unintended (mistimed or unwanted) to intended births in both Australia and the United States. The two nations differ in that income inequality is higher in the United States and the U.S. lacks the universal health care available in Australia (which includes access to contraception and abortion). The fact that the two nations have a similar tendency of the less educated to have more unintended relative to intended births suggests a similar socioeconomi cause in both nations. We use multinomial logistic regression and mediation models to illuminate explanations of the education disparities, using the U.S. NLSY data and the Australian HILDA data.	Paula	S. England	Belinda	 Hewitt	Janeen	 Baxter
2008	131	Household Configurations and Reproductive Life	Non-Marital Fertility in Russia: Second Demographic Transition or Low Human Capital?	This study investigates the conditions surrounding non-marital childbearing in post-Soviet Russia. Using retrospective marital, birth, and employment histories that span 1984-2001, we analyze the changing composition of marital and non-marital fertility, including parity, maternal age, and type of union. We then develop an event history model of births that incorporates time-varying covariates such as education, employment status, occupation, and job quality. Finally, we explore the relationship between non-marital childbearing and an individual’s situation at the time of the survey. Factors evaluated include household structure, subjective measures of the family’s financial situation and social status, family income, and household possessions. By analyzing multiple dimensions of the individual and household, we aim to determine whether non-marital childbearing in Russia more closely resembles that in Northern Europe, where it primarily occurs among stable cohabiting unions, or the United States, where it is associated with poverty and the inability to maintain healthy marriages.	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris	Theodore	P. Gerber
2008	132	Spatial Demography	Making Individual School Enrollment Projections Using Micro-Geographies	The Los Angeles Unified Schools District (LAUSD) makes enrollment projections for over 600 schools annually. A key challenge is that the schools' projections are keyed to their attendance boundaries, but the data needed to support those projections are registered to geographies that aren't necessarily consistent with attendance boundaries. A second challenge is that school choice is made available at some LAUSD schools through option areas, which are geographical areas where the attendance boundaries of multiple schools overlap. In this paper we discuss a method that addresses both geographical scale and student choice by using a set of 'micro-geographies' that are created when the discrete geographies of the data sets are consolidated and their respective data are distributed using a spectrum of allocation methods that respond to the parameters of each of the geographies.	Valerie	 Edwards	Mary	 Prichard
2008	132	Spatial Demography	Spatial Modeling of Child Mortality in Nepal	Nepal has achieved remarkable reduction in child mortality over the last 15 years, yet the rates are still among the highest in the world. About one of every 11 children dies before reaching age five. Using the Nepal Demographic and Health Surveys from 2001 and 2006 and geographic data, this paper describes the spatial pattern of child mortality by modeling child mortality as a function of individual and geographic covariates in a multivariate generalized additive model. The analysis considers household and individual predictors of mortality, as well as contextual indicators of access to health services and the biophysical and built environments. Results show a strong east-west spatial pattern in child mortality which remains after accounting for individual and household level covariates. This study demonstrates a new approach to analyzing child mortality from DHS data. The results can inform policies to address health inequalities and improve access to underutilized health services.	Brian	 Chin	Livia	 Montana
2008	132	Spatial Demography	Spatial Variation in the Structural Correlates of Child Poverty in the United States	This paper examines the uneven geographic distribution of child poverty among counties in the United States with specific focus on spatial variation in the relationship between child poverty and its correlates. Using county data from the 2000 U.S. Census, we employ multiple regression models based on ecological data and include explicit terms in the models to address observed spatial autocorrelation in the data. Our approach attempts to account for and interpret the simultaneous presence of spatial heterogeneity and spatial dependence in the poverty data through spatial regime and spatial lag and error regression analysis. Our approach blends covariate predictors in the regression models to estimate person-related causes and place-related causes of child poverty and to explain differences in the correlates for sub-regions of the U.S. Results will provide an essential understanding of the causes and, it is our aim, the appropriate target for policy attempts to ameliorate poverty.	Katherine	J. C. White	Paul	R. Voss	David	D. Long
2008	132	Spatial Demography	Revisiting Highway Effects on Population Change	The effects of highway construction on population growth have been explained by several theories accompanied with numerous empirical studies, which lead to different definitions of the role that highways play in affecting economic and population growth. This research takes a synthetic spatial approach to study highway effects on population growth at the municipal level in the 1980s and 1990s in Wisconsin. Specifically, the relationship is examined by synthetically considering population growth’s driving factors, systematically selecting the optimal spatial weight matrix for spatial regression modeling, and simultaneously incorporating spatial lag and spatial error dependence into a spatial regression model. The findings suggest that after controlling other driving factors of population growth and spatial dependence in the variables and models’ residuals, highway construction has no significant impacts on population growth in both the centralization and decentralization processes –– an observation different from many existing studies.	Guangqing	 Chi
2008	133	Neighborhood/Community Influences on Adult Health and Mortality	Neighborhood Social Processes and Older Adult Well-Being: New Results from the Neighborhood Organization, Aging, and Health Study (NOAH)	Neighborhood social processes are typically theorized and assessed with a population of young families in mind. We began a data collection effort, the Neighborhood Organization, Aging and Health Project (NOAH), to examine the role of neighborhood context in older adults’ lives. We created a set of measures which tap the potentially unique dimensions of trust and community connectedness relevant for older persons. We developed and validated: 1) older adult collective efficacy (i.e., social cohesion and informal social control) and; 2) public space viability (i.e., eyes on the street and outdoor surveillance). We used NOAH, a survey of adults 65+ in 80 Chicago neighborhoods (N=1500), and the decennial census. We developed scales using multi-level item response theory and examined their impact using HLM. Preliminary findings suggest a positive and robust association between older adult collective efficacy and health. Public space viability is important to a more general measure of functional status.	Kathleen	A. Cagney	Christopher	 Browning
2008	133	Neighborhood/Community Influences on Adult Health and Mortality	Effects of Neighborhood SES And Walkability on Obesity:
Comparing Adolescents and Young Adults to Assess Selection and Causal Influences	Studies of neighborhood effects on the risk of overweight or obesity are limited because residents are not randomly distributed by neighborhood. If associations are found between neighborhood characteristics and obesity in observational studies, one cannot confidently draw conclusions about causality. We use data from the Utah Population Database (UPDB) that contain BMI data from all current driver licenses to undertake a cross sectional analysis that contrasts the neighborhood determinants of youth and young adult obesity. This analysis assumes that youth have little choice of residential location but do after leaving home. From the UPDB, we have 55,261 males and 50,527 females in Salt Lake County in 2005. There is evidence of substantial forces of selection among males but not for females. These analyses provide information about the bias in estimating the magnitude of the causal relationship between neighborhoods and the risk of obesity.	Cathleen	 Zick	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones	Barbara	 Brown	Ikuho	 Yamada	Jessie	 Fan
2008	133	Neighborhood/Community Influences on Adult Health and Mortality	Migration, Health, and Environment in the Desert Southwest	Although research on place effects and health has focused on racial/ethnic disparities, and to some extent nativity differences, more limited attention is paid to the selection of migrants into neighborhoods or length of exposure to those neighborhoods. Further complicating this picture is that new arrivals to rapidly growing parts of the United States include both international and domestic migrants and both groups face new environmental exposures. This paper addresses this intersection between studies of place and health and migration and health by analyzing new data for one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in the country, Phoenix AZ. Findings suggest that duration in the receiving community is associated with lower reported health even controlling for age, ethnicity and nativity, hinting that foreign born immigrants may not be the only individuals subject to an immigrant paradox of health. Neighborhood conditions are also associated with differential health outcomes.	Scott	T Yabiku	Elizabeth	 Wentz	Li	 Zhu
2008	133	Neighborhood/Community Influences on Adult Health and Mortality	Going it Alone?: Neighbors, Social Interactions, and Learning HIV Results	Do neighbors positively or negatively influence individuals living in rural Malawi to attend VCT centers to learn their HIV results? Using GIS data of location of homes and distance to other neighbors, we measure the social network effects of neighbors’ VCT attendance on individuals own attendance. This paper utilizes a randomized experiment that encouraged individuals and their neighbors to learn their HIV results. Using the fact that neighbors randomly received monetary incentives of varying amounts to learn their HIV status, the results in this paper indicate positive effects of neighbors attending VCT clinics on women living nearby. There is no effect of neighbors’ attendance on men. Unlike anecdotal claims that suggest social stigma has strong negative effects on learning HIV results, this paper finds no evidence of this.	Rebecca	L Thornton	Susan	 Godlonton
2008	134	Behavioral Risk Factors and Health/Mortality	Familial Clustering of Adult Mortality Risk in Russia: The Role of Education, Smoking and Alcohol	Mortality increased substantially since 1991 among Russian working age men. We investigate adult mortality clustering (or ’frailty’) within sibships, and how far high-risk behaviours, such as heavy alcohol and tobacco consumption, explains such mortality clustering. We use information about the vital status, childhood conditions and socio-economic characteristics of the sibs of survey informants, from a 2002 nationally representative survey in the Russian Federation, with a Cox proportional hazard gamma-frailty model. The overall clustering effects were much larger for men than for women but this excess is largely explained by measured socio-economic and behavioural risk factors; once these are accounted for, the magnitude of remaining clustering was similar among male and female sibs. Smoking, drinking and education made a substantial contribution to clustering of mortality in male sibs but unmeasured background familial factors remain important and are of a similar magnitude for men and women.	Michael	 Murphy	Martin	 Bobak	Amanda	 Nicholson	Richard	 Rose	Michael	 Marmot
2008	134	Behavioral Risk Factors and Health/Mortality	Do Immigrant Enclaves Protect Against Harmful Health Behaviors?	Prior studies suggest that the context of immigrant enclaves may benefit health. Using data from the Multiethnic Study of Atherosclerosis, we examined whether Hispanic and Chinese Americans (n=1922) living in immigrant enclaves exhibited better or worse health behaviors (smoking, diet, physical activity) than those in neighborhoods with fewer immigrants. Neighborhood enclaves (census tracts) were defined based on the percent of foreign-born from Latin-America, and separately, from China. After adjustment for age, gender, income, education, nativity, and neighborhood poverty, living in a tract with higher proportion foreign-born was associated with lower consumption of high-fat foods in Hispanics and Chinese (P-trend across foreign-born quartiles       	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Ana	 Diez Roux	Craig	 Hadley	Namratha	 Kandula
2008	134	Behavioral Risk Factors and Health/Mortality	The Role of Psychological Well-being in All-cause Mortality	A plethora of research demonstrates that negative affect and depression are related to mortality in clinical and non-clinical samples. Evidence of an association between positive well-being and mortality is more limited. The present study investigated whether positive and negative well-being independently predicted mortality differentials in a non-Western population based sample of 5,307 older adults (aged 50-103). During the follow-up period of ten years (1996 – 2006), there were 1,684 deaths recorded. Higher life satisfaction significantly predicted lower risk of mortality after controlling for age, sex, education, marital status and health status. Depressive symptoms significantly predicted higher risk of mortality. A significant interaction with age revealed that the protective effect of life satisfaction diminished at the oldest ages. Our results provide support for independent effects of positive and negative well-being on mortality in older adults.	Amy	L. Collins	Dana	A. Glei	Noreen	 Goldman
2008	134	Behavioral Risk Factors and Health/Mortality	Cohabitation, Gender and Physical Health: Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey	Research shows that married persons experience better overall health, but studies of cohabitors have focused mainly on mental health. Using the 2000-2003 U.S. National Health Interview Survey, we examine the physical health, specifically self-reported health and functional limitation, of cohabitors (disaggregated by prior marital status) as compared to the married, never-married, and divorced, with the aim of contributing to the understanding of the marital status-health relationship as it may be related to selection. We also explore gender and race interactions with marital status, finding that cohabitation has an uneven effect by both gender and race. Overall, our findings suggest that in terms of health, cohabitors fall between the married and the divorced or never married. Previously married cohabitors are more similar to the divorced, while never married cohabitors resemble the never married. Further, much of the self-rated health advantage experienced by the married is explained by functional limitation.	Georgiana	 Bostean
2008	135	Age-Cohort Methodological Innovations and Findings: Mortality	The Intrinsic Estimator for Age-Period-Cohort Analysis: A Simulation Study	Age-Period-Cohort (APC) multiple classification/accounting models have long been objects of attention in statistical studies of human populations. A new approach to the statistical estimation of APC accounting models for rectangular age by period tables, called the Intrinsic Estimator (IE), recently has been developed. Some finite sampling properties and asymptotic properties of the IE have been proven. But these mathematical proofs are sufficiently abstract and difficult to understand that further exposition and analyses, especially analyses using straightforward and replicable numerical illustrations, are needed. To address this need, this paper presents results of simulation studies of properties of the IE. Generally, the results show that the IE performs well as a statistical estimator under most conditions. The results of the simulation studies may be used to inform empirical studies that use the IE for statistical estimation of APC accounting models.	Kenneth	C. Land	Sam	 Schulhofer-Wohl
2008	135	Age-Cohort Methodological Innovations and Findings: Mortality	Mortality Projection Model for Japan with Age-Shifting Structure	In the latest Japanese official population projection in 2006 prepared by National Institute of Population and Social Security, new mortality projection model, which is a modified Lee-Carter model with age-shifting structure has been studied and used. Recent years, Japanese old age mortality has been improved remarkably. This model has been developed to adapt the situation.     In this study, the structure and the projected result of the model will be described. New mortality projection model with age-shifting structure is a Lee-Carter model applied with the shift amount by “the shifting logistic model” proposed by Bongaarts(2005), noticing that we can recognize recent mortality curve changes in Japan as the shifting of curves in the direction of older people.    Moreover, we have compared the age-shifting model with the Lee-Carter model. From the observation of relative level of mortality, higher performance of the age-shifting model is suggested.	Futoshi	 Ishii
2008	135	Age-Cohort Methodological Innovations and Findings: Mortality	Longevity and the  Aging Swedish Population	This paper is focusing, first, on the very concept of aging, what does it mean for a population, and what does it mean to an individual. Second, on the individual level, is longevity clustering within certain family trees?   These questions are central to a project within the research environment Ageing and Living Conditions, hosted by the Centre for Population Studies, Umeå University, Sweden. In the first part, the Swedish population is followed over time from 1850 to 2050, and the main findings  are that the age distribution is gradually changing from one where the large age groups are the young ones, to a more uniform distribution, and that only net inmigration saves the population from slow extinction. In the second part, which is more methodological, focus is on development of models for interaction between demographic processes over generations. Early results indicate, e.g, that longevity seems to cluster within families.	Göran	 Broström
2008	135	Age-Cohort Methodological Innovations and Findings: Mortality	Is Till Death Do Us Part for Better, or Worse?: Estimating the Marriage-Only Contribution to SSA's HIV Epidemic	In this paper we estimate the maximal effect that changes in individual-level sexual behavior alone can have on the present HIV pandemic. We simulate a series of estimates of HIV prevalence resulting from the drastic hypothetical scenario of all individuals alive today and in the future suddenly absolutely adhering to the stated goals of abstinence before marriage, and faithfulness within marriage. We start with initial populations that reflect ranges of HIV prevalence and differing marriage market patterns. We then move those populations forward in time assuming that no individuals falter in following prescribed sexual expectations (the A&B of the ABCs of AIDS prevention). The aim of this exercise is to determine whether, and estimate how substantially, individual sexual behavior change alone can alter the trajectory of the HIV pandemic.	Jimi	 Adams
2008	136	The Biodemography of Aging	Intergenerational Transfers, Life Histories and the Evolution of Sociality	For species that provide extensive parental care after birth, one potential advantage of living in social groups larger than the immediate family is that such groups may provide a form of life insurance for offspring who would otherwise die following the death of one or both parents. We use a stochastic micro-simulation to investigate whether varieties of a species living in larger kin based or mixed social groups have a selective advantage. We also investigate how different social contexts modify evolutionary forces in ways that lead to different life history outcomes. One intriguing finding is that sharing groups that provide life insurance thereby shape life history evolution in a way that undermines their ability to compete effectively with groups without insurance. These and other interactions of evolution, demography, and sociality are explored.	Ronald	 Lee	Carl	 Boe
2008	136	The Biodemography of Aging	Modeling Age-Related Changes from Late Middle Age in Men and Women	We present a new approach to modeling health transitions in mean and women from late middle age (55+). This approach is based on a parametric representation of health transitions using a modified Poisson distribution for the probabilities of health changes. In the Canadian National Population Health Survey (n=4330, 2548 women, at baseline in 1994), health status was defined by a deficit count, using 33 health-related variables. Changes in deficit count were followed up over 4 consecutive 2-year intervals to 2002. The model stratified by sex predicts health changes (improvement or worsening at any degree, and death) with an exceptionally high accuracy (R2 ~0.90). The model employs only four sex-specific parameters: two represent health transition of survivors, and two represent the probability of death. The parameters reflect the men/women difference in transitions: despite women show higher level of deficit accumulation, they better survive than men at any deficit level.	Arnold	 Mitnitski	Xiaowei	 Song	Kenneth	 Rockwood
2008	136	The Biodemography of Aging	The Relationship between Late Childbearing and Post-Reproductive Longevity: The Case of Nineteenth Century Germany	This paper examines the relationship between late childbearing and longevity, by using a longitudinal women’s sample of German historical village populations, between 1550 and 1950. Our methods include Nelson-Aalen estimates, as well as multivariate hazards models predicting longevity after the age of 55, based on “age at last birth”, and controlling for the number of children ever born, the total number of dead children, age at first birth, marital status, SES, religion, place of residence and period. Our findings show that before 1875 (an assumed natural fertility period) but not after 1875, each additional year of delay in the age at last birth, increased the women hazard of dying by one percent. Other findings show that before 1875, living in the North and bearing many children decreased the hazard of dying, while having many children who have died, being a widow, and being Protestant significantly increased the hazard of dying.	Elisabeta	 Minca	Francesco	 Scalone	Telesforo	 Ramirez-Garcia
2008	136	The Biodemography of Aging	Reproductive History and Mortality in Late Middle Age Among Norwegian Men and Women	We use register data to derive fertility histories for Norwegian men and women born 1935-58 and discrete-time hazard modeling to analyse later-life mortality by aspects of reproductive history. 63,312 deaths were observed during 14.5 million person years of follow-up 1980-2003 when subjects were aged 45-68. Models included detailed information on educational and marital status. Odds of death were highest for the childless and next highest for those who had had only one child. Among the parous we found a positive association between earlier parenthood and later mortality, a reverse association with late age at last birth, and an overall negative association between higher parity and mortality. The similarity of results for women and men suggests biosocial pathways underlying associations between reproductive history and health. The lack of any high parity disadvantage suggests that in the ‘family friendly’ Norwegian environment, the health benefits of having several children may outweigh the costs.	Emily	 Grundy	Oystein	 Kravdal
2008	137	Policy Studies	Using Human Capital Enrichment to Reduce Poverty and Inequality: The Case of Oportunidades in Mexico	Recent evaluations of the Oportunidades schooling and health subsidy program in Mexico have demonstrated statistically significant positive impacts on schooling and health outcomes. This paper adapts methods developed in Dinardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) for use in studying how these schooling and health impacts will affect the future earnings distributions of cohorts recently exposed to the program. The method nonparametrically simulates earnings distributions, with and without the program, and quantifies resulting changes in mean earnings, poverty and earnings inequality. It is well recognized that the Oportunidades program has reduced poverty and inequality of the current generation through its targeted cash transfers. This paper finds that by enriching human capital, as measured by schooling and height, the program will also generate increases in future earnings. However, it will achieve only modest reductions in poverty and overall earnings inequality.	Douglas	 McKee	Petra	 Todd
2008	137	Policy Studies	Beyond 80%: Are There New Ways of Increasing Vaccination Coverage?: Evaluation of CCT Programs in Mexico and Nicaragua	In recent years there has been a significant global effort to scale-up immunization programs to achieve higher levels of vaccine coverage against major childhood diseases. However, coverage disparities still exist, and traditional supply-side program strategies may not be sufficient to achieve coverage goals. This study evaluates the impact of a demand side program, Condition Cash Transfers, on vaccination coverage in two countries, Mexico and Nicaragua. The intent-to-treat effect on vaccination coverage is assessed using a randomized treatment and control design. Six months after the program introduction, implementation of Oportunidades in Mexico was associated with a statistically significant 5 and 3 percentage point increase in BCG and MCV coverage for on-time vaccination respectively. Five months after the introduction of the health component in Nicaragua, the program impact led to a statistically significant 37 percent increase in fully vaccinated children. Program effects are even greater for hard to reach populations in both countries.	Tania	 Barham	John	A. Maluccio	Logan	 Brenzel
2008	137	Policy Studies	Life Course Transitions and Internal Migration: Consequences for Family TANF Participation	Based on life course transition theory and longitudinal population survey data for the 1996-1999 and 2001-2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, random coefficients models in an event history framework provide new evidence on how before- and after-migration life course events affect post-migration family TANF receipt of inter- and intrastate migrants. Preliminary results show that, net the effects of factors selecting families to migrate, in the absence of some family-composition-altering event, neither inter- nor intrastate migration has a significant relationship with family TANF participation. As expected, those who marry tend to be less likely to receive TANF assistance, but surprisingly, when marriage precedes interstate migration, post-move TANF participation is more likely. A positive impact (i.e., increased likelihood of TANF participation) of separation and divorce life course events is markedly reduced by a subsequent interstate relocation. These effects are not explained by state economic or policy characteristics.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Gordon	F. De Jong
2008	137	Policy Studies	Casino Revenue and Indian Health: The Link between Tribal Gaming and the Health Status and Behaviors of American Indians	The legalization of American Indian (AI) casino gaming and income flows to a historically disadvantaged population from it create an opportunity for a natural experiment that examines the causal relationship between income and health. Net revenue from gaming has been used to provide direct financial support to tribe members and to support tribal infrastructure. We compare tribes that have established casino-style gaming to tribes that have not, identifying the effects of increased revenues on AI health. We use data on tribal gaming, ecological health access data from the ARF and individual health and socioeconomic data from the BRFSS (1988-2003). We estimate a positive association between gaming and AI income. Gaming is directly and indirectly (through income) associated with decreased smoking, asthma, and disability, better mental health and access to health care. Our research is the first to evaluate the potential health effects of the largely exogenous introduction of gaming income.	Barbara	 Wolfe	Jessica	 Jakubowski	Robert	 Haveman	Hannah	 Goble	Marissa	 Courey
2008	138	Abortion as a Recourse for Fertility Control	The Trend in Induced Abortion in Mexico, a High Prevalence Contraceptive Country	In Mexico, despite stringent laws on abortion (except for the recent change in Mexico City), and despite high levels of contraceptive use, many women obtain abortions, often unsafe, to avoid unplanned births. This study uses an existing indirect estimation methodology to develop new estimates of the incidence of induced abortion and of hospitalized abortion complications at the national and regional levels for 2006. We assess changes in abortion incidence over the period 1991-2006, comparing available estimates for 1991 that are based on the same methodology. Findings will allow us to verify if the level of induced abortion has changed in a context where many social, economic and demographic changes have occurred and where the right wing government in power since seven years ago has reduced family planning service provision. Findings will be useful in guiding policies and programs to improve prevention of unplanned pregnancy and reduction of unsafe abortion.	Fatima	 Juarez	Susheela	D. Singh	Sandra	G. Garcia
2008	138	Abortion as a Recourse for Fertility Control	Having Another Child Would Be a Life or Death Situation: Understanding Pregnancy Termination in Rural Bangladesh	We conducted a mixed-method study to investigate pregnancy terminations (PT) in rural Bangladesh. Cross-sectional survey and longitudinal surveillance data were combined to assess PT levels and associated characteristics. Qualitative data were gathered via in-depth interviews with couples in 2004-05. Eleven percent of couples reported a PT in the study period; however, levels were highest among couples who wanted no more children in 1998 (29%). In the in-depth interviews, over half of the respondents reported at least one attempt to terminate a pregnancy. Although informants were uncomfortable with PT, most felt that in specific circumstances PT was justified and could prevent further harm to the woman and family. Both data sources indicated the strong influence of maternal age and husband’s fertility preferences on PT. Results from this mixed-method study contribute to our knowledge of PT in Bangladesh and highlight the need for continued support of contraceptive and menstrual regulation services.	Jessica	D. Gipson	Michelle	J. Hindin
2008	138	Abortion as a Recourse for Fertility Control	What do Women Really Pay?: Personal Social and Economic Costs of Abortion in Cambodia	This study examines the direct medical costs, non-medical costs and lost income incurred by a sample of 88 women seeking abortions from a heterogeneous group of abortion providers in Cambodia. Data were collected from respondents twice, immediately prior to discharge from the index abortion procedure and 14 days following the procedure. Descriptive analysis was used to explore costs incurred in relation to several explanatory variables. Results indicate that costs incurred varied by employment status, gestational age, type of abortion provider, type of uterine evacuation procedure and the number of visits required to terminate the pregnancy. The study underscores the need for more accessible and affordable abortion services. Even in the Cambodian context, where abortion is unrestricted during the first trimester of pregnancy, study findings indicate that the process of obtaining safe abortion care was costly to women.	Rukmini	 Potdar	Tamara	 Fetters
2008	138	Abortion as a Recourse for Fertility Control	Perceived Fertility Regulation Costs and Contraceptive Use in Nepal	In this paper I examine the effects of women’s and their husbands’ perceptions of the costs of contraceptive use on subsequent contraceptive behavior. These perceived costs, here measured by both general attitudes toward the acceptability of contraception and by attitudes toward specific dimensions of multiple contraceptive methods are theorized to influence fertility limiting behavior independent of the actual costs of contraception.  This analysis is made possible by unique data from Nepal, which contain measures of both women’s and men’s perceptions of the availability, effectiveness, and side effects of multiple contraceptive methods, and 9 years of prospective, monthly contraceptive use data. I find that husbands’ perceptions of fertility regulation costs have strong consistent effects on method use, independent of their wives perceptions. Further, in this setting, the male contraceptive methods are viewed more positively than female methods by both men and women.	Amie	 Emens
2008	139	Multiple Partnerships	Polygyny and HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa	In most African countries with generalized epidemics, HIV infection is more common in men and women in polygynous unions than in monogamous unions. Using DHS data for twelve African countries and longitudinal survey data from Malawi, we study adverse selection into polygynous unions as one of the factors that explain cross-sectional differences in HIV prevalence. The survey data from Malawi allow us to evaluate selection into polygynous unions based on characteristics that correlate with HIV status (widowhood and marriage order). From the DHS surveys with linked seroprevalence data, we select women who married in a three month interval prior to the survey. This guarantees that their HIV infection predates the marriage, and assess the recruitment into monogamous and polygynous unions using their HIV status as the main predictor of interest. We conclude with reflections on the possible implication of these selection processes on population-level trends in HIV prevalence.	Georges	 Reniers	Rania	 Tfaily
2008	139	Multiple Partnerships	Evaluation of an Intervention to Address the Gendered Social, Economic, and Cultural Determinants of Youth HIV  Risk Behaviors	South Africa is a complex environment socially, politically, economically, and culturally. Illness, stigma, and death from HIV and AIDS, high rates of disenfranchisement and unemployment, growing poverty coupled with extreme income inequality, and traditional tribal leadership structures make it a challenging place in which to transition from childhood to adulthood. Various programs and policies in South Africa nominally address young people, but many fail to acknowledge the internal diversity of “youth,” or to tackle core livelihood and social support issues that underlie susceptibility to HIV. This paper provides an evaluation of one program that aimed to reach young women and men with a comprehensive package of skills that were not only HIV-related but also designed to address gendered social, economic and cultural factors. Preliminary quantitative and qualitative analysis indicates that the program was successful in building knowledge, skills, and promoting healthy behaviors among young intervention participants.	Kelly	 Hallman	Kasthuri	 Govender	Eva	 Roca	Emmanuel	 Mbatha	Rob	 Pattman	Deevia	 Bhana	Jill	 Walsh
2008	139	Multiple Partnerships	Multiple Sex Partners and Perceived Risk of HIV Infection in Zambia: Attitudinal Determinants and their Gender Differences	This paper examines impacts of individual- and community-level factors on having multiple sex partners in the last 12 months and perceived risk of HIV infection in Zambia. Data come from household and community surveys with 3,459 individuals who ever had sex. Two-level models and structural equation modeling are employed. Results show significant protective effects of individual’s disagreement toward married men’s having other sex partners, perceived others’ approval of having only one sex partner, and being female and married on having multiple sex partner. However, being female nearly doubled perceived risk. Having more than one partner increased perceived risk by four-fold. Both individual- and community-level disagreement toward married men’s having other sex partners are negatively associated with perceived risk. These factors also show differential impacts by gender on the two outcomes. The findings suggest distinct approaches to HIV transmission prevention that address men and women differently at individual and community levels.	Mai	 Do	Dominique	 Meekers
2008	139	Multiple Partnerships	Men’s Labor Migration and Sexually Transmitted Diseases among Rural Women in Armenia	The recent literature on the association between migration and HIV/STDs has shown that the effect of migration on the spread of HIV/STDs is not as straightforward as earlier believed. Studies from various countries found that in some settings migration contributes to the spread of STDs or the risk of HIV, and in other areas it has no impact. The literature also addresses the question of whether it is migrants or those left behind that increase the risks of HIV/STD but there is no agreement over this question either. To contribute to the existing literature, this study examines the association between STDs among rural women and their husbands' seasonal labor migration. The study also attempts to assess indirectly whether husbands infect their wives or vice versa. The analysis uses data from a 2007 survey of 1240 rural women in an impoverished province of Armenia characterized by high levels of labor out-migration.	Arusyak	 Sevoyan
2008	140	Inequalities in Early Education	Examining the Effect of Head Start and Child Care Partnership on Quality of Child Care and Child Outcomes	Partnerships between child care and Head Start can both support parents’ labor force participation and foster children’s school readiness, especially, for low income families. The partnership has grown much since welfare reform to meet changed needs from low income working parent by providing full-day, full-year Head Start services. I examine the effects of partnership on process measures of quality, then, the effects on children’s cognitive development employing child fixed effects. I address selection bias issues by exploiting the nature of mixed classroom in partnership and estimating the effects on non Head Start children in partnership compared to non Head Start children in non-partnership. Results show that non Head Start children in partnership do not perform better than their counterparts in non-partnership, despite partnership centers appear to be higher quality than non-partnership centers.	Youngok	 Lim
2008	140	Inequalities in Early Education	Do Family Structure Transitions Explain Race and Ethnic Differences in Academic Achievement across the Early Life Course?	Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K), we examine race and ethnic differences in the duration in a single-parent household and the timing and type of family structure transitions from kindergarten to fifth grade. In addition, we examine whether race and ethnic differences in family structure patterns and changes can explain race and ethnic differences in reading, math, and science test scores in fifth grade. We find that time spent in a single-parent household explains a substantial proportion of the association between race and test scores. Transitions are associated with lower test scores and earlier transitions seem to have a greater impact on achievement than later transitions. Finally, making a positive transition, compared to experiencing a parental divorce, is not associated with better test scores. Overall, our findings suggest that changes in household structure may be important in understanding the lower academic achievement of Black and Hispanic young children.	Kristin	E. Turney	Grace	 Kao
2008	140	Inequalities in Early Education	Does it Matter if Teachers and Schools Match the Student?: Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Problem Behaviors	Closing the racial achievement gap motivates current education policy debates but there is little agreement as to the source of these gaps and the extent to which they can be ameliorated through education policy. We address one dimension of these debates by focusing on disparities in teachers’ ratings of young children’s behaviors in the first few years of formal schooling. The analyses go beyond the focus on Blacks and whites by incorporating other groups. While Black students receive worse behavioral assessments than whites, Asian students receive better ratings. We ask whether school composition alters the relationship between teacher-student race matching and racial/ethnic differences in reported behavior problems. Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort dataset, we illustrate the importance of teacher-student race matching for diminishing racial differences in the assessment of problem behaviors. We also find that these results hold net of the school composition.	Littisha	A Bates	Jennifer	E. Glick
2008	140	Inequalities in Early Education	How Much Time do English Language Learners Need to Acquire Proficiency?	Using data on English Language Learners (ELL) in New York City public schools, this study examines how long it takes students to become English proficient, and how the time to proficiency differs for students by gender, race, nativity, home language, and socioeconomic status, and grade of entry into the school system. The data includes longitudinal panels of all ELL students entering the first through fifth grades and ungraded special education programs from 1995-96 through 1999-2000. That data tracks each cohort for at least three years, and for some, up to seven years. Using discrete-time survival analysis, I model trajectories in ELL exit rates as children age and the effects of student characteristics on these trajectories.	Dylan	 Conger
2008	141	Life Course Connections	The Past as Prologue: The Effect of Early Life Circumstances at the Community and Household Levels on Mid-Life and Late-Life Outcomes	We explore the impact of circumstances early in life on later life outcomes in the U.S. using data linking individuals from the manuscript schedules of federal population censuses shortly after their birth to Social Security records and state death records. This allows us to assess the effect of individual, household, and community level influences on education, income, longevity, and cause of death. In our preliminary analysis, we find that season of birth, parents’ literacy and fluency in English, and the local mortality environment during the first five years of life had substantial affects on age at death, as did characteristics measured at enlistment into the U.S. Army in World War Two. The current paper extends this work by examining measures of education and income (mid-life outcomes), as well as cause-specific mortality, and how they relate to early life circumstances.	Joseph	 Ferrie	Karen	 Rolf	Werner	 Troesken
2008	141	Life Course Connections	Changes in Health among the Participants of the Framingham Heart Study from 1960s to 1990s: Application for an Index of Cumulative Deficits	We used an index of cumulative deficits (DI) to investigate whether improvements documented in the general population along major health dimensions were evident at the basic level of health assessment associated with small changes in the aging-related health deterioration. We considered the 9th (performed in 1964) and 14th (1974) Framingham Heart and 5th (1991-1995) Offspring Study exams and selected 37 small-effect deficits to construct the DIs. The 37-deficit DI shows trends for improvements in health for the 5-year age groups ranging 55-to-75 years between the 1960s and 1990s. We identified also deficits-specific DIs which age patterns tend to exhibit upward trends (5-deficits DI), no trends (18-deficits DI), and downward trends (12-deficits DI) between the 1960s and 1990s. The 12-deficits DI is stronger predictor of the long-term mortality risks than the other indices. The analyses show favorable tendencies when health either did not change or improved over time for the most serious small-effect traits.	Alexander	 Kulminski	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Irina	V Culminskaya	Igor	 Akushevich
2008	141	Life Course Connections	Military Service and Men's Health Outcomes in Midlife: Findings from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study	We use data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study to examine the effects of military service on men's health and mortality outcomes in midlife. Specifically, we investigate a paradox our own research using the HRS has shown -- that older men who served in the military reported themselves to be in better health than those who had not served, but were also more likely to die over the subsequent period (London and Wilmoth 2006). Results from the current analysis indicate that men who served in the military reported themselves to be in better health in 1992, but were no more or less likely to die over the subsequent 11-year period. In broad terms, these results are similar to our other findings; men who served in the military report themselves to be in better health but do not experience a survivorship advantage over the subsequent period.	Andrew	S. London	Janet	 Wilmoth
2008	141	Life Course Connections	Does Children’s Housework Matter?: Adult Trajectories of Boys and Girls Who Spend Time Doing Household Chores and Sibling Care	Although research has focused on the impact of youth employment while in high school, less attention has been paid to the responsibilities some young adults have within the household. However, children do considerable homemaking and care work within the house. What is the impact of this work on children’s subsequent development? Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 cohort, we examine housework, sibling caretaking, and subsequent adult beliefs and behavior within a sample of adolescents with younger siblings. Our evidence suggests that work done in the childhood home may have lasting significance on beliefs and roles later in life. For instance, men in their early 40s who had cared for younger siblings as teens were less likely to have children and were more likely to favor women’s employment and believe that that men should share housework.	Jennifer	L. Romich	Xiang	 Gao
2008	142	The Transition to Adulthood Across the Globe	Creating “Nomos: Transition Strategies to Adulthood in the Post-Socialist Hungary	According to Keniston’s concept of post-adolescence, during the transition to adulthood various traditional steps (finishing studies, first job, separating from the parental household, marriage, childbearing) are realized to become an adult member in the society. The post-socialist transformation significantly modified the conventional way of starting adulthood. Their behavior reflects different strategies that are more complex than just a simple delay in family formation. In our study based on national surveys we differentiated three transition strategies: family-guided, autonomy-guided and society-guided strategies about starting adulthood. We identified the intended childlessness and remaining single in the post-socialist context. These two new patterns transform the concept of post-adolescence and might lead to radical changes in adult demographic behavior. Using data from the Echo and HSDP Surveys from 2001-2006 we built a multivariate explanatory model, exploring the interdependence of different socio-economic and personal value system indicators, accounting for three major schools of explanation.	Tamas	 Domokos
2008	142	The Transition to Adulthood Across the Globe	The Transition from School-to-Work In Russia during and after Socialism: Change or Continuity?	The paper analyzes the influence of institutional change on the transition from school-to-work in Russia. It compares the process of entering working life during socialism (1975-1991) and the transition period (1992-2005) by utilizing information from 6,455 males and females of the “Education and Employment Survey for Russia”. The results document influences both of change and of continuity. The introduction of labor markets and a mismatch between qualifications acquired at school and demanded by employers led to increasing risks of unemployment after education and first jobs at the lower levels of the occupational hierarchy. However, as the general character of the educational system and the internal structures of many firms did not change, traditional paths of mobility from educational degrees to particular occupational positions continued to exist. Thus, the transition from school-to-work in Russia did not experience an abrupt change but a gradually adjustment to the new economic order.	Christoph	 Buehler	Dirk	 Konietzka
2008	142	The Transition to Adulthood Across the Globe	School-to-Work Transition in Buenos Aires, Lima and Mexico City	The aim of this paper is to conduct a comparative analysis of the age at leaving school and entering the labor force in three Latin American metropolis: Buenos Aires, Lima and Mexico City. We explore the heterogeneous situations that young people face regarding these two transitions in three settings. We analyze the variations in the labor and enrollment status by socioeconomic stratus and sex, focusing on within and between cities differences.   The patterns of inequality that prevail in the Latin American countries are linked to the different opportunities for young people. Although the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of the youth account to a large extent for the within-cities differentials, they do not fully account for the between-cities variations. We hypothesize that institutional settings linked to the organization of the school system and to the labor market contribute to explain the school-to-work transition in the three settings.	Patricio	 Solís	Marcela	 Cerruti	Martín	 Benavides	Georgina	 Binstock	Silvia	 Giorguli-Saucedo
2008	143	Child Malnutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Determinants and Program Evaluations	Educational and Health Impact of Two School Feeding Schemes in Burkina Faso	In this paper, we report the impact of two school feeding schemes; school meals and take home rations; on the educational and health outcomes in northern Burkina Faso. Starting in October 2006, 64 newly open schools were randomized assigned to two treatment groups (school meals, and take home rations) and to a control groups, following a baseline survey in June 2006. Our results show that enrollment rates increased only marginally in treatment villages relative to control villages. Attendance rates increased significantly in villages assigned to take home rations. Changes in achievement tests and health outcomes are only marginal. Overall, the results suggest the overall impact is larger with take home ration type intervention.	Damien	 de Walque	Harounan	 Kazianga	Harold	 Alderman
2008	143	Child Malnutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Determinants and Program Evaluations	Determinants of Child Malnutrition in Senegal: Individual, Household, Community Variables, and their Interaction	There are numerous studies that show the correlates of child malnutrition using both household and community level variables. However, few of these studies test for the potential endogeneity of community infrastructure or indicate their interplay with characteristics of the mother. The current study looks at the socioeconomic determinants of child malnutrition at the individual and the household level in three regions in Senegal, and investigates how programs compensate for the increased risks facing young mothers and their children or substitute for a low social standing of the mother in the household. The empirical results show that while children of young mothers are at a disadvantage regarding their anthropometric status, there is an important role of NGOs and community healthposts in helping disadvantaged mothers overcome their difficulties. Recognizing the differential impact of community infrastructure on population subgroups adds to an improved understanding of the complex determinants of child (mal)nutrition.	Abdoulaye	 Ka
2008	143	Child Malnutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Determinants and Program Evaluations	Improving Nutritional Status through Behavioral Change: Lessons from Madagascar	We provide rigorous evidence for effects of a large scale intervention that focuses on quality of nutritional and child-care inputs during the early stages of life. We find that the program helped participating communities to bridge their gap in weight for age z-scores and the incidence of underweight. The program had also significant effects in protecting long term nutritional outcomes (height for age z-scores and incidence of stunting) against an underlying negative trend in the absence of the program. Importantly, the effect of  the program exhibits substantial observed heterogeneity: gains in nutritional outcomes are larger for more educated mothers and for villages with better  infrastructure. The results are suggestive of important complementarities between child-care, maternal knowledge and community infrastructure.	Emanuela	 Galasso	Nithin	 Umapathi
2008	143	Child Malnutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Determinants and Program Evaluations	Does Economic Growth Improve Child Health?: Understanding Discordant Trends in Malnutrition Indicators during the Economic Growth in Ghana	Policymakers have long argued that economic growth in developing countries will positively impact child health. We examine child nutrition in Ghana during the economic growth of the 1980s and 1990s. Data show that stunting declined from 30% in 1988 to 21% in 1998, but sharply increased to 27% in 2003. Wasting followed an entire opposite path, while underweight progressively fell from 30% to 24% during this period. These different responses to growth reflect differences in the underlying factors generating these outcomes. Improvement in underweight was consistent with the positive household effects of macroeconomic growth, but increase in stunting after 1998 responded to the decline in health care utilization following the reform of the health care system. The fraction of children presenting any the three forms of malnutrition remained stable at around 40% during the period of growth, indicating that macro-level economic growth does not necessary translate into better child health.	Jemima	A. Frimpong
2008	144	Childbearing in Latin America and Asia	Women’s Empowerment across Generations in Bangladesh: Influences on the Timing of Marriage and Childbearing	Analyses using data from surveys carried out in 1994 and 2002 in six villages of rural Bangladesh failed to support the hypothesis that daughters and daughters-in-law of empowered women would marry and begin childbearing later than others. This qualitative study: (a) explores processes through which women influence age at marriage and age at initiation of childbearing in the next generation of women; and (b) investigates whether, and how, institutions and processes resistant to change may be undermining women's empowerment and its transmission and effects across generations. Open-ended, in-depth interviews were conducted with triads of women--young married women, their mothers, and their mothers-in-law. Husbands were interviewed to provide additional perspectives. The findings suggest that poverty and vulnerability to economic crisis are persistent constraints to later marriage and childbearing even in families of empowered women who are aware of the risks and disadvantages of early marriage and childbearing.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Elisabeth	 Rottach	Farzana	 Islam	Lisa	M. Bates
2008	144	Childbearing in Latin America and Asia	Delay in First Marriage and First Childbearing in Korea - Trend in Educational Differentials	Korea has experienced rapid fertility decline since the 1960s, which was stimulated by socioeconomic development. Using the Korean Labor and Income Panel Study (KLIPS) and estimating Cox proportional hazard models, I examine educational differentials in the timing of first marriage and first childbearing to study this rapid social-demographic transformation. Using the parameter estimates and observed distribution, I decompose the cohort difference in the timing of first marriage and first childbearing into distributional change in women’s education and change in association between education and the timing of marriage and childbearing to understand the importance of changing educational differentials for fertility decline. Both educational expansion and growing educational differentials are expected to be observed and to contribute to fertility decline. Growing educational differentials, however, are expected to be more important than educational expansion for fertility decline because of change in opportunity cost of marriage and childbearing that socioeconomic development brought about.	Bongoh	 Kye
2008	144	Childbearing in Latin America and Asia	Is Latin America Starting to Retreat from Childbearing?	Fertility transition in Latin America has entered into a new stage in recent years. The proportion of women who are mothers, which changed little in the past, dropped substantially in most Latin America countries in the 1990s. This paper documents this new trend with cohort estimates from the four waves of censuses conducted in 16 Latin American countries between 1970 and 2000. Drawing from the European experience, we discuss whether this increase in childlessness among young adults is just a shift in the starting age of childbearing or whether it is a more radical retreat from childbearing. To substantiate the discussion, cofactors of the probability of staying childless in a series of surveys conducted in 14 Latin American countries in 2006 are examined. The paper focuses on cohort fertility and motherhood, decomposing childbearing into the contributions of entry into motherhood and the additional children that mothers have.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Teresa	 Castro Martin	Teresa	 Martin Garcia
2008	144	Childbearing in Latin America and Asia	Evaluating the Impact of the Poverty-Reduction Programs on Fertility: The Case of the Red de Protección Social in Nicaragua	Evaluating the impact of poverty-reduction programs on fertility is limited by the fact any shift in incentives for having children take time to be incorporated into decision making and the observation period for evaluation is usually quite brief. The purpose of this paper is to explore the use of birth spacing as a short-run indicator of the impact of poverty-reduction programs on fertility patterns. Using data from a Nicaraguan conditional cash transfer program that offers incentives for poor households to invest in the health, nutrition and education of children, we estimate the program impact on birth spacing using a stratified Cox proportional hazard model. The results indicate that the program decreased the hazard of a birth, indicating a subtle decrease in fertility.	Jessica	E Todd	Paul	C. Winters	Guy	 Stecklov
2008	145	The Elderly and their Kin: The Family, the Market and the State	The Roles of Family and the Welfare State in the Reception of Public Assistance by the Elderly In Three Latin American Countries	Welfare regimes in Latin America have been classified into three groups: state-productivist, state-protectionist, and familist. The state-protectionist regime is characterized by strong involvement of public institutions into the provision of social support to vulnerable populations such as the elderly. However, social support from the family is still prevalent in the region. The goal of this paper is to study the roles of the Welfare institutions and of the family in the support of the elderly. We analyze three countries that belong to the state-protectionist regime: Uruguay, Costa Rica, and Mexico. We find that number of children is associated with receiving money transfers, especially among women, but earning a pension makes a larger difference. In Mexico, number of children is associated with out-of-pocket medical expenses among the non-insured, but in Uruguay and Costa Rica, free health insurance for the destitute was strongly linked with not paying for medical services.	Gilbert	 Brenes-Camacho	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby
2008	145	The Elderly and their Kin: The Family, the Market and the State	Transitions from Independent Households to Supported Environments over Three Decades in England and Wales: Changing Roles of Family and State?	For older people with high assistance needs which preclude living independently, entry to institutional care or co-residence with family members are the main alternatives. Correlates of transitions from independent households to either institutional care or the households of relatives in England and Wales 1971-81 and 1981-91 have been previously investigated using data from the Office for National Statistics Longitudinal Study, a record linkage study including individual level data from censuses and vital registration for 1% of the population. During the 1990s major policy changes were introduced with the aim of reducing admissions to institutional care. In this paper I analyse factors associated with transition to institutions or to live with relatives between 1991 and 2001, using multinomial regression modeling, and then undertake a cross sequential analysis to see whether this balance differed in 1991-2001 from 1981-91.	Emily	 Grundy
2008	145	The Elderly and their Kin: The Family, the Market and the State	Family Support vs. Self Support: The Impact of Family Change and the Market Economy on Old-Age Support in Rural China	Based on seventeen months of ethnographic study in a rural community in Northeast China, this paper explores the transformation of old-age support from traditional dependence on children, especially sons, to a preparation for self support through purchasing recently marketed old-age security plans promoted by insurance companies in China. According to a survey I conducted with 187 couples in 2007, 56.7 percent (average age 39.5)of my informants have chosen to purchase an old-age security plan. More surprisingly, 62.9 percent of couples who have purchased a plan have a son. I argue that this transformation suggests a decline of family support as a result of the collapse of parental power and the empowerment of women in marriage. Peasants' choice for old-age security plans is also a strategy to cope with the changing family size as a result of China's birth-control policy and a shift of childbearing preference. Furthermore, China's burgeoning market economy has facilitated and hastened this transition.	Lihong	 Shi
2008	145	The Elderly and their Kin: The Family, the Market and the State	Social and Economic Context, Gender, and Care for the Elderly in Nepal	Scholars and policy makers have expressed concern that social and economic changes occurring throughout Asia are threatening the well-being of the elderly, particularly women, by undercutting their systems of social support. Using a sample of 2,109 elderly men and women from the Chitwan Valley Family Study, we evaluated the relationship between proximity to markets and health services and the likelihood of receiving physical assistance in Nepal. Overall, we found that living near markets and health services increased the odds of receiving care and that this relationship varied by gender. When we analyzed only elderly women, those living near a market had nearly double the odds of receiving care compared to those living farther way. In contrast, among elderly men, living near a market more than doubled the odds of receiving care and living near a health service nearly quadrupled the odds of receiving care.	Jennifer	 Eckerman	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2008	146	Immigration, the Labor Force, and Inequality	Workplace Non-Fatal Injuries Among Immigrants to the US	This paper investigates into the prevalence and causes of workplace injuries among foreign-born workers. Our conceptual model considers different sources of system and human errors between foreign-born and native-born workers, including system errors in informal and contract employment and human errors due to low English proficiency and unfamiliarity with the U.S. workplace. Important hypotheses include the role of home country context, current employment type, and duration of U.S. residence. The data are drawn from Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) 1996 and 2001, which contain critical information on work injury. This study is the first investigation into the prevalence and causes of immigrants’ workplace injuries. Examining immigrants’ experiences will shed insight to our understanding of the race/ethnic divide of workplace injuries. Results from this study will provide fresh evidence for health policy makers to design preventive programs targeting the growing immigrant work force that are vulnerable to work-related injuries.	Lingxin	 Hao
2008	146	Immigration, the Labor Force, and Inequality	Do Immigrants Work in Riskier Jobs?	Media and government reports suggest that immigrants hold jobs with worse working conditions than U.S.-born workers, perhaps because immigrants work in jobs that “natives don’t want.” This study investigates whether the foreign-born are more likely to hold jobs with higher industry and occupation injury and fatality rates. We combine individual-level data from the 2003-2005 American Community Survey with Bureau of Labor Statistics data on work-related injuries and fatalities to measure whether immigrants work in more dangerous industries and occupations than natives. The results indicate that immigrants are more likely to work in risky jobs than U.S.-born workers. Differences in average characteristics, such as immigrants’ lower English language ability and educational attainment, contribute to their overrepresentation in risky jobs. Given the role of English ability in the sorting of workers into risky jobs, our findings suggest the importance of providing safety training in languages other than English.	Pia	 Orrenius	Madeline	 Zavodny
2008	146	Immigration, the Labor Force, and Inequality	Spillovers from High-skill Consumption to Low-skill Labor Markets	Low-skill workers in the United States are increasingly employed in the provision of time-intensive services that substitute for home production activities. The wage gap between this sector and the rest of the economy has shrunk over time. If skilled workers demand more of these services, then wage gains at the top of the distribution (such as those observed in the last three decades) would predict a rise in the consumption of these services. We provide evidence suggesting that this kind of demand shifts are a viable explanation for the above stylized facts, and for some of the relative wage growth at the bottom of the distribution observed in the 1990s (Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2006). Given that the low-skill services we focus on are an immigrant-intensive sector, demand shifts driven by consumption spillovers might also explain the drop in the immigrant-native wage gap observed at the bottom of the distribution in recent years (Borjas and Friedberg, 2007).	Francesca	 Mazzolari	Giuseppe	 Ragusa
2008	146	Immigration, the Labor Force, and Inequality	Earnings Inequality and Earnings Instability of Immigrants in Canada	Most of the literature on immigrant labor market outcomes, both in Canada and the US, focuses on immigrants' entry wages and earnings growth. This study provides additional insights into the changing fortunes of immigrants in Canada by examining their earnings inequality and earnings instability. The analysis is based on a flexible econometric model which decomposes earnings inequality into current and long-term components. In addition to constructing earnings inequality and earnings instability profiles for different arrival cohorts, we also examine the underlying causes of earnings inequality including the impact of foreign education, birthplace and the ability to speak English or French.	Yuri	 Ostrovsky
2008	147	Residential Choice and Segregation	Neighborhood Racial Change and Regional Differences in Segregation Trends	There has been much speculation about black-white segregation trends in the emerging multiethnic metropolis. This study compares multiethnic metropolises of the Northeast and Midwest (New York-New Jersey and Chicago) and the Southwest and West (California and Texas). It demonstrates that in both cases recent declines in black-white segregation are mainly associated with the development of neighborhoods where not only whites and blacks, but also Hispanics and Asians, reside. The more rapid decline of segregation in the Southwest and West during 1980-2000 is shown to be associated with the larger number of tracts that already had white, Hispanic and Asian settlement in 1980, and where blacks entered during the period. The greater persistence of segregation in the Northeast and Midwest is shown to be linked to a smaller pool of ethnically mixed neighborhoods in 1980 and a higher rate of white exodus from previously mixed zones.	John	R. Logan	Wenquan	C. Zhang
2008	147	Residential Choice and Segregation	Hispanic Residential Segregation in New Immigrant Destinations	The influx of Hispanics into new immigrant destinations has raised important policy questions about their successful incorporation into community life. This paper provides baseline estimates of neighborhood segregation in Hispanic boom towns. Unlike previous research, our analyses are based on block rather than census track data from the 1990 and 2000 summary files of the U.S. Census Bureau, and include small towns and suburban communities in both metro and nonmetro places. We have several specific objectives. First, we identify places with exceptionally high absolute and percentage increases in the Hispanic population between 1990 and 2000. Second, we calculate various indexes of Hispanic-non-Hispanic white residential segregation (e.g., D and P*). Third, we estimate place-based multivariate models of segregation that include both place and county predictors (e.g., percent Hispanic, Hispanic-white income inequality, community size and region, etc.). Our study provides--for the first time--estimates of Hispanic residential segregation in new immigrant destinations.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Domenico	 Parisi	Steven	M. Grice	Michael	 Taquino
2008	147	Residential Choice and Segregation	Changing Neighborhood Preferences across Income, Education and Age: Findings from the Metropolitan Study of Urban Inequality	Residential preferences and their role in creating neighborhood residential segregation continue to be a subject of debate in the ongoing discussions about race and residential outcomes in US metropolitan areas. Preferences are also relevant in the work on Schelling based preference and tolerance models of residential selection. The debates about the role of preferences are not easily resolved but by examining the way in which residential preferences change across incomes, education and age it is possible to show the way in which race and socio-economic status interact to create particular patterns of neighborhood preference in particular locations. In general there is a distinct shift to greater willingness to live in integrated settings for African Americans with increasing income but also a shift to back up choices of own race selections for neighborhood composition.	William	A.V. Clark
2008	147	Residential Choice and Segregation	Racial Blind Spots: Black-White-Latino Differences in Community Knowledge	This paper explores racial differences in community knowledge as a possible mechanism through which racial residential segregation is perpetuated. If whites, blacks, and Latinos are familiar with different communities and that familiarity is influenced by community racial composition, then this may constitute one barrier to integrative mobility. We address three questions: (1) Are there racial/ethnic differences in community knowledge? (2) Do these differences in knowledge level vary by community racial composition? (3) Can these differences be explained by controlling for the social class characteristics of respondent and community? Employing hierarchical linear models with data from the 2004 Chicago Area Study, we explore how whites, blacks, and Latinos differ in their knowledge of actual communities in the Chicago metropolitan area and whether differences persist after controlling for social class and other characteristics. Initial results show a strong effect of racial composition even after controlling for other characteristics.	Maria	 Krysan
2008	148	Immigrant Migration and Dispersion	Internal Migration of New Immigrant Groups to New Destinations	Our paper examines the individual and aggregate determinants of out-migration from 740 commuting areas to Gateway and non-Gateway destinations from 1995 to 2000.  We draw on restricted access data from the 2000 Census (16% sample) to analyze how 24 national origin groups differ in their out-migration patterns.  We focus on the largest origin groups from Latin America, Asia, and the Caribbean.   In addition to finding significant differences across foreign-born origin groups in migration rates, concentration levels, and settlement preferences, our analysis indicates that context differences across immigrant’s origin areas in foreign-born composition and growth, as well as in economic trends – wage rates, unemployment levels, and employment in health and education industries, and housing and housing costs have significant effects on out-migration.	Douglas	T. Gurak	Mary	M Kritz	Min-Ah	 Lee
2008	148	Immigrant Migration and Dispersion	The Geographic Diffusion of the Foreign Born and the Shifting Scale of Spatial Assimilation	The regional diffusion of the foreign-born population, in combination with the increasing spatial diversity of metropolitan areas has increased the relevance of detailing how mobility and migration of the foreign born--at different geographic levels--contribute to our understanding of spatial assimilation. Using restricted data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, 1996-1999 and 2001-2003, I examine the individual determinants of migration into destination areas with varying population characteristics, and the subsequent consequences of migration for individual immigrant workers. Preliminary estimates suggest that, consistent with previous research, immigrants are positively selected into secondary migration, although the magnitude of these effects of human capital and acculturation vary by geographic scale. In addition, preliminary findings reveal that while migration is economically-beneficial, the returns to migration vary by both geographic scale and by characteristics of immigrant workers. These findings add to the exploratory body of research detailing the residential circumstances of a rapidly diffuse immigrant population.	Matthew	S. Hall
2008	148	Immigrant Migration and Dispersion	Is Gateway City Clustering behind Canada’s Declining Immigrant Homeownership Rates?	Recently, homeownership rates have been dropping for Canadian immigrants. These declines, though substantial on their own, are particularly striking when they’re read alongside the trends of the Canadian-born, who’ve experienced a comparative surge in recent years. Given that immigrants overwhelmingly cluster in Canada’s ‘gateway’ census metropolitan areas (Toronto, Montréal, and Vancouver), this paper uses 2-stage least squares regression techniques and the 2001 census of Canada to identify whether a shift out of Toronto, Montréal, and Vancouver would improve national immigrant homeownership rates. The results show that although homeownership propensities are higher for those who live outside of gateway cities, these differences dissolve once location choice endogeneity is addressed, suggesting that relocation policies are unlikely to yield dramatic national gains.	Michael	 Haan
2008	148	Immigrant Migration and Dispersion	Interstate Migration and the Transition to Citizen	For adult immigrants of 1978-1991 who became U.S. citizens, the majority was living in the states of initial residence, but about one-fifth had moved to another state. From logistic regression analyses, the likelihood of making interstate migration varies by visa class of admission, manner of entry, initial residence, and place of origin. Men with employment-sponsored visas experienced more interstate migration, and this may result from greater human capital allowing choice in economic opportunities and amenities, including availability of ethnics as peers. Further investigation is needed to explore the feasibility of this approach for supplementing existing sources on internal migration.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield
2008	149	International Migration II	Domestic and International Migration from China: The Impact of Migration Networks and Rural Political Economy	This paper tests a new strategy to study domestic and international migration simultaneously. Theoretical discussion draws on ideas from migration networks theory and the market transition debate. Data collection is modeled on the success of Mexican Migration Project. The paper estimated three sets of discrete time event history models: model of international migration treating internal and international migration as competing events, model of international migration treating internal migration as a covariate; and model of internal migration treating internal and international migrations as competing events. One finding is that education is more important in initiation of internal migration than international migration. Second, migration networks at the family level shows a different pattern compared to the case of Mexico-US migration. Third, there is evidence that internal and international migrations “deter” each other. Finally, consistent with market transition theory, individuals with cadres in the family are less likely to make internal migration.	Zai	 Liang	Miao	David  Chunyu
2008	149	International Migration II	International Student Mobility in a Competitive World: 
Determinants and US Policy Before and After Post 9/11	Student visas dropped after 9/11 and startled observers, worried about US enrollments, offered varying explanations. We analyze US issued student visas for a large sample of nations from 2000 to 2004. We find that source country educational capacity increases emigration, but at a decreasing rate when interacted with per capita GDP. Lagged visa rejection rates reduce visa issuances, but the effect is small and no greater than exchange rate weighted tuition costs which also reduce visas. International enrollments in other English speaking countries reduce visas, but that effect zeros out with the introduction of a post-2001 dummy. The greatest deterrent to visa demand post 9/11 was neither policy nor even sharp increases in US tuition, but perhaps the same fears, etc., that depressed other temporary visas or tourism. Demand for US student visas is likely to remain strong or even increase as other nations gear up their competitive educational capacity.	Lindsay	 Lowell	Pramod	 Khadka
2008	149	International Migration II	International Migration in Context: Migrant Types, Strategies and Outcomes	This paper explores types of migrants from Mexico to the U.S. in the period 1970-2000. Developing a context-dependent model of migration, the paper argues that variations in the social, economic and political context of sending and receiving regions create different conditions for migrating. These conditions are heightened or lessened by migrants' demographic and family characteristics. Together these elements help identify different types of migrants. A cluster analysis finds five distinct migrant types: network migrants (who follow migrant family members), income-maximizing migrants (who seek to increase income), risk-diversifying migrants (who migrate to diversify income sources), push migrants (who escape worsening economic conditions in Mexico), and pull migrants (who take advantage of favorable border conditions). The presence of each migrant type follows a clear time pattern, signifying critical changes in the migration context. Moreover, migrant types seem to influence several outcomes (legal or illegal entry, subsequent trips, length of stay) not foreseen by the theories of migration.	Filiz	 Garip
2008	149	International Migration II	Migration and Patriarchy: The Incorporation of Women into the Albanian International Migration Process	This paper examines the causes and dynamics of the shift in the gender composition of migration from Albania. We use data on migration histories for family members since 1990. Because out-migration was practically non-existent before the end of the 1980s, the Albanian case provides a unique quasi-experimental setting. Based on discrete-time hazard models, the analysis shows an impressive expansion of female participation in international migration. Female migration, which is shown to be strongly associated with education, wealth, and social capital, appears responsive to economic incentives and constraints. Yet, through analysis of the dependency of female migration to the household demographic structure as well as the sensitivity of female migration to household-level shocks, we show that it is the households themselves that are the decision-making agents behind this economic calculus and there is little to suggest that increased female migration signals the emergence of female agency.	Guy	 Stecklov	Carlo	 Azzarri	Calogero	 Carletto	Benjamin	 Davis
2008	150	Methods for Locating Hard to Find Populations	Preliminary Results of the Niakhar Social Networks Pilot Survey	This paper presents the first results from an innovative demographic social network survey fielded in rural Senegal. The design of this survey resolves a number of critical problems in previous network demographic research by linking the names network partners (alters) to demographic information collected on them by the Niakhar Demographic Surveillance System (DSS), maintained by L'Institut de recherche pour le développement (IRD) Senegal. We present here results concerning the process of linking alters named in the survey instrument to the DSS database, a separate validation instrument used to assess the validity of the name generators used to elicit alter names from respondents as well as substantive characteristics of the social networks themselves from the main survey instrument. These include the size and structure of networks across the 14 distinct but related domains of interaction for which alter names were collected, and measures of the physical and social proximity of alters.	Steven	 Rytina	John	 Sandberg	Valerie	 Delaunay	Richard	 Lalou
2008	150	Methods for Locating Hard to Find Populations	Creating a Frame: Experimenting with Random Sampling within Non-Homogeneously Distributed Urban Migrant Populations	This paper will present key elements of a random sampling methodology utilized in a recently concluded survey in Johannesburg (South Africa) with four multinational migrant communities namely, Zimbabwean, Congolese (DRC), Somali and rural-urban South African migrants. The study made use of a mixed methodology approach involving qualitative and spatial methods to ‘create’ a sampling frame for the final survey phase. The need for using these methods to generate a creative sampling frame arose from the lack of baseline household distribution information for these population groups and unique terrain of the survey site, inner city Johannesburg, where both foreign and South African migrants often inhabit dilapidated buildings that are difficult to access. A full enumeration of the method, the data collection strategies employed and challenges faced in the data collection will be provided in this paper that argues the feasibility of random sampling approaches within a non-homogeneously distributed population context.	Gayatri	 Singh	Benjamin	D Clark	Kennedy	N Otwombe
2008	150	Methods for Locating Hard to Find Populations	Making Their Own Customs: Contraband and Community Border Control on the  Mexico-Guatemala Border	This paper examines the informal economy in a clandestine passageway on the Mexico-Guatemala border. While contraband is prevalent at such crossings and is often integral to legitimate economies and states, it is difficult to measure. Yet, the pathway’s communities collect tolls, enabling a quantitative approximation of these flows. Protesting abuses of authorities, the communities prohibit the entrance of state employees and have taken the collection of “customs” fees into their own hands to the benefit of community projects. They periodically close the path to demarcate and control “the border” and its flows. Through examination of toll records from 1999-2007, participant observation, and interviews with community members and state employees, this paper not only quantitatively assesses informal flows, but also comments on alternative strategies for socioeconomic development and relations between communities and the state. Finally, it challenges static, macro-oriented views of the symbolic and material functions of borders and states.	Rebecca	B. Meyers
2008	150	Methods for Locating Hard to Find Populations	Assessing the Census Bureau's Data on Children in Foster Care	This paper assesses the data collected on foster children in the 2000 Decennial Census and the American Community Survey (ACS. Looking at the placement categories of foster children in the AFCARS data system helps identify which foster children are likely to be included in the Census Bureau figures. I argue that the Census Bureau’s data on foster children mainly reflects those who are in non-kinship family foster care (i.e. not in group homes/institutions or kinship care). The Census Bureau’s data can be used to examine a host of socio-economic characteristics for a large segment of households with foster children. There is no other national data source that can supply this kind of socioeconomic information on a regular basis. Tables are presented showing how households with foster children compare to all households with children on family structure and living arrangements, parental education and employment, and household economic measures	Bill	 O'Hare
2008	151	Population Perspectives on Cognitive Function and Mental Health	Iron Sufficiency in Early Childhood and Preschool Cognitive Development in the Philippines	In the Philippines, the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia has increased during the past decade. Studies revealed that anemia negatively impacts a child’s cognitive development.  Using data from the Early Childhood Project of the Philippine government, this study examines the association of iron status at 6-24 months with the child’s IQ and school readiness at 5-6 years. Adjusting for age and sex, children who had been anemic have lower IQ and school readiness scores. After controlling for a range of confounding factors, iron status continues to be significantly, positively associated with cognitive scores. This association between cognition and iron status at baseline was independent of, and stronger than, the effect of iron status at cognitive assessment. These results suggest that anemia in infancy and early childhood can have lasting adverse effects on cognitive development. Ongoing work will explore possible policy impacts of preschool child cognitive development by reducing early-life anemia.	Tita	Lorna L. Perez	Delia	B. Carba
2008	151	Population Perspectives on Cognitive Function and Mental Health	The Gap of Cognitive Skills between those with High and Low Levels of Formal Educational Attainment: Examining Cross-National and Cross-Cohort Variation	Using data of cognitive skills among four cohorts of adults in 19 countries from the International Adult Literacy Survey, we examine cross-national and cross-cohort variation in the gap of cognitive skills between people with college degrees and those who did not graduate from high school. Although people with higher levels of educational attainment tend to have higher levels of cognitive skills than their counterparts of low education, the gaps of cognitive skills by educational attainment may vary across countries and cohorts. We hypothesize that the cross-national and cross-cohort variation is partially accounted by between-country and between-cohort differences in the degree of educational standardization and accessibility of adult education and training. Utilizing the data structure in which individuals are cross-classified by country and cohort, we estimate models of cross-classified random effects to examine how country-level and cohort-level variables affect the relationship between educational attainment and cognitive skills at the individual level.	Hyunjoon	 Park	Pearl	 Kyei
2008	151	Population Perspectives on Cognitive Function and Mental Health	Mind after Matter: Evidence of the  Mental Health Effects of Random Exogenous Health Shocks	Estimating the causal role of physical illness in contributing to the high global burden of mental illness has been difficult due to problems of endogeneity. We employ a novel study design by estimating mental health consequences of a random exogenous health shock: being a passenger in a bus accident. Using compensation data from Karnataka, India to identify the exposed and matching on age, sex, and geographic area to identify the unexposed, we compare psychological distress levels across exposure groups one year later. Mean psychological distress level among the exposed was 1.5 standard deviations higher than among the unexposed. After adjusting for disability, household debt and demographic variables, the difference was half a standard deviation. Exposed individuals were over 6 times likely to report levels of distress consistent with a psychiatric diagnosis. Our findings suggest that even relatively small physical health shocks have significant and lasting causal effects on mental health.	Manoj	 Mohanan	Joanna	 Maselko
2008	151	Population Perspectives on Cognitive Function and Mental Health	Marriage and Children as a Key to Happiness? A Cross National Study.	This research considers the relationship between the family structure and subjective well-being and the extent to which cultural differences across 24 countries/regions may condition that relationship. Using the 2002 ISSP data, we examine how the effects of marriage status and the presence of children on the well-being of men and women differs according to the perceived importance of marriage and parenthood within a society. We find significant cross-country differences in the relationship between presence of young children and the happiness of men, and in the relationship between the marital status of women and their happiness and satisfaction with family life. Our results for national-level predictors of well-being further suggest that prosperity in combination with strong family ties leads to happier citizens.	Sofie	 Vanassche	Gray	 Swicegood	An	Katrien  Sodermans	Koen	 Matthijs
2008	152	Demography of Islamic Societies and Populations	Minority Status and Employment Outcomes: Are there Minority Enclaves in India?	Building on previous work, we use data from the newly released 61st Round of the National Sample Survey to understand the employment outcomes of Muslim minorities in India compared to a caste based minority – the dalits. We ask whether minority groups build “enclave labor markets” if they have the requisite wherewithal? We use a loose hierarchy of employment types and argue that among minorities, those with education and networks will be more likely to be self-employed, in order to skirt discrimination in formal jobs. We find that the effect of “entrepreneurial wherewithal” is felt most strongly by dalits who cannot enter self-employment. For Muslims, lack of options in salaried jobs appears to push them to build minority enclaves. Thus, the idea of ethnic enclaves in the Indian context applies to Muslim men. Very few Muslim women are in the labor force, but if employed, they are also in non-farm self-employment.	Maitreyi	B. Das
2008	152	Demography of Islamic Societies and Populations	Muslim – Christian Fertility Differences in Poor Communities in Lebanon	We examine differentials in fertility behavior between Muslims and Christians in poor communities in Greater Beirut, Lebanon using data from the Urban Health Survey. The findings show that Muslims residing in low SES communities have higher fertility than their Christian counterparts for all the reproductive age groups especially among women younger than 30 years. Muslim women, on average, have about two children more than Christian women, and the gap is greater among married women. The probabilities of progressing from one parity to the next are also greater among Muslims for every birth order. We test several hypotheses to explain the higher Muslim fertility and evaluate the applicability of various theories of fertility differentials to the Lebanese socio-political context.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Afamia	 Kaddour
2008	152	Demography of Islamic Societies and Populations	What’s Hindering Fertility Decline in Pakistan?: Perceptions and Realities	Despite significant policy and programmatic attention, Pakistan continues to struggle to reduce its fertility rate. The latest DHS (2006-2007) data show TFR in Pakistan to be 4.1, only slightly lower than the TFR in 2001. Further, the contraceptive prevalence rate which was already much lower than most countries with equivalent levels of fertility, has actually fallen to 29 percent according to the latest DHS. What explains the sluggish decline in fertility in Pakistan? Explanations have included barriers due to religion, gender discrimination against women, low levels of social development, and lack of demand for family planning services. To what extent are these explanations based on perceptions about the religious and socio-cultural context of the country? And to what degree do these perceptions differ from the realities of fertility decline suggested by recent evidence?	Zeba	A. Sathar	Laura	J. Reichenbach	Arshad	 Mahmood
2008	152	Demography of Islamic Societies and Populations	Age at Marriage in Palestine	We hypothesized that there are two types of marriage in Palestine. One type includes women, who have lower education, lower income and marry relatives. The second type has higher education, higher income, and marries men with some education. The former type marries at younger and the latter at older ages. In other words, Palestine has a marriage pattern that is similar to that in developing countries and one that is similar to that in developed countries. The analysis was based on the 2004 DHS. The sample analyzed included 10064 women age 10 to 55. The mean age at marriage was 20.1, 25 percent was married by age 17.7 and 75 percent by age 24.8. Higher education was associated with higher age at marriage. For example, women with less than elementary schooling had a median age of marriage of 18.8, while women with education above secondary had a median of 24.4.	Niveen	 ME. Abu-Rmeileh	Ulla	M Larsen
2008	153	Sex: He Says , She Says	Do Men and Women Perceive Sexual Relationships Differently?: Data from Matched Couples on Likoma Island, Malawi	In sub-Saharan Africa, the vast majority of HIV transmissions occur within heterosexual couples, yet population-based couple-level studies are extremely rare. One exception is the Likoma Network Study (LNS), which gathered data from both men and women in 244 married and unmarried matched couples living on Likoma island in Malawi. Using these unique data, we compare men’s and women’s descriptions of their relationship characteristics as well as their reports about their sexual behaviors. Our (very) preliminary results suggest that men and women, by and large, agree with each other regarding their objective relationship characteristics, but they provide quite divergent reports with respect to sexual behaviors occurring within these relationships. These differences, however, do not conform to gender stereotypes. These findings lend insight into different gender perceptions within couples, while also highlighting the limitations of relying on individual, rather than couple, reports of sexual behaviors.	Shelley	 Clark	Stephane	 Helleringer
2008	153	Sex: He Says , She Says	Disclosure of HIV Status Among Rural Malawians	With growing access to HIV testing throughout sub-Saharan Africa, the reaction to learning one’s HIV status becomes an increasingly important factor in determining the course of the AIDS epidemic. A growing number of studies reveal action being taken by individuals to prevent becoming infected with HIV, and an important component of such behavior change is to know one’s own HIV status and the HIV status of a spouse. In this paper, I use data from rural Malawi to examine an aspect of VCT that is relevant to both behavior change and divorce in sub-Saharan Africa: to what extent to couples share their HIV test results after VCT? To what extent do individuals share their HIV test results with others in the community? In addressing these questions, I investigate whether differences in disclosing HIV status are associated with actual HIV status and with gender.	Philip	A. Anglewicz
2008	153	Sex: He Says , She Says	Can’t Get No Satisfaction: Both Romantic Partners Tell Us Why	Romantic relationship satisfaction (RRS) has ramifications for personal, family, and societal well-being. However, research on RRS has often failed to account for characteristics of both partners. The couples sub-sample in Wave III of The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) addresses this by including the romantic heterosexual partners of 1,500 emerging adult respondents. My analysis of relationship characteristics, demographic factors, stressors, and attitudes reveals that, regardless of gender, own characteristics impacted RRS more than partner’s characteristics. However, for men, partner characteristics were more important in RSS than for women. Furthermore, being in an interracial relationship was associated with lower RRS for women with no effect for men. Yet, a mismatch in college attendance between partners was associated with lower RRS for men but not for women. Beyond purposes of well-being, understanding the nuanced relationship dynamics of young adults can further inform policymakers interested in promoting healthy relationships.	Andrea	 Lazar
2008	153	Sex: He Says , She Says	Gender Differences in Evaluations of Contraceptive Methods	This study employs data from the National Couples Study (NCS) to examine gender differences in the rating of contraceptive methods. The NCS is a computer-assisted self interviewing (CASI) survey of over 1,000 couples, where members of each couple were interviewed separately but contemporaneously. In this paper, we examine whether women and men rate methods of contraception differently, and whether they use different criteria in rating methods of contraception. Using the couple as the unit of analysis, we also examine partner/gender differences in method ratings, and how partner/gender differences in their evaluations of contraceptive methods along a set of dimensions account for disagreements in their overall ratings of methods of contraception. The second set of analyses identifies what couples need to negotiate in order to resolve their differences in selecting a method of contraception.	William	R. Grady	Daniel	H. Klepinger	John	O.G. Billy
2008	154	Infant and Child Mortality II	Malnutrition and Child Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa:
A Growing Gap?	A trend analysis of the DHS from 25 countries in 4 geo-ecological sub-regions of Sub-Saharan Africa over the past two decades documents a disturbing gap between nutritional status and child mortality. The analysis based on countries with 2 or more surveys in the last 20 years including one since 2000 suggests that most of the countries and sub-regions encounter a stagnant or rising prevalence of malnutrition while child mortality continues to decline, especially in the Sahelian and South African sub-regions, and selected West and East African countries. A bivariate probit model for selected countries in West Africa further examines within-country socio-demographic, human development and health system functions as determinants of malnutrition and child mortality. This analysis partially explains why malnourished children may have a greater chance of survival and stresses the need for more effective approaches to reduce malnutrition.	Soumya	 Alva	Eckhard	 Kleinau	Kathy	 Rowan	Charles	H Teller
2008	154	Infant and Child Mortality II	Detecting Bias in DHS Infant and Child Mortality Estimates	This paper is an assessment of the quality of the DHS estimates of infant and child mortality, particularly with respect to possible biases due to misrecording of children’s birthdates. In some surveys, interviewers appear to have reduced their workloads by recording recent births earlier than they actually occurred, thus avoiding the health questions asked for recent births. This tendency is greater for deceased than for surviving children. Thus, standard DHS estimates for the period immediately prior to the survey are negatively biased, those for the penultimate period are positively biased, and time trends are distorted. Inconsistencies in comparisons of successive surveys in the same country, and apparent recent rapid declines in infant mortality rates in some surveys, are probably due to such displacement. The paper develops procedures to identify such differential displacement and includes adjusted estimates of levels and trends in mortality for DHS surveys that have been most affected.	Thomas	W. Pullum	Jeremiah	M Sullivan
2008	154	Infant and Child Mortality II	Maternal Health is a Confounder in the Relationship between Maternal Education and Child Mortality	The education of mothers has been consistently linked to the risk of mortality of their children. The relationship however is complicated by reverse causalities between income, education, and health. Health of mothers as a possible determinant of child mortality has received little attention to date. It may impact the mortality of children indirectly through education and income or directly through biological mechanisms. We analyze DHS data from 10 countries, pooled and separately controlling for secular trends, to look at the effect of maternal health, proxied by measured height, on child mortality. We find that the health of the mother is an important determinant of the subsequent mortality of her children and is a confounder in the relationship between mother’s education and child mortality. This finding further emphasizes the importance of early life factors not only in the subsequent health of a woman but extending to the health of her children.	Emre	S Ozaltin	Kenneth	 Hill
2008	154	Infant and Child Mortality II	Determinants of the Rise in Early Childhood Mortality in Kenya: Adversity or Shift in the Structure of Relationships?	Early childhood mortality in Kenya increased in the 1990s after three decades of decline. A few studies investigating this phenomenon have focused on the role of adverse trends in the explanatory variables. However, none has examined the potential role of a shifting structure of relationships such as observed in some Latin American and Asian countries. This study explores the recent rise in early childhood mortality in Kenya, particularly the role of changes in the values of the explanatory variables vis-à-vis the structure of relationships. Analysis is based on pooled individual-level data from the four Kenyan Demographic and Health Surveys conducted in 1989, 1993, 1998, and 2003. Cox regression is used for multivariate analysis. By splitting the pooled data into declining (1979-89) and rising (1990-03) periods, we are able to examine whether the structure of relationships shifted, and estimate the contribution of key explanatory variables as well.	Collins	 Opiyo
2008	155	Social Status and Reproduction: Interrelationships between Poverty,  Wealth and Fertility	A Meta-Analysis of Fertility Trends by Social Status	I gathered 879 samples on fertility by status and perform a meta-analysis to study the changes. I find that until 1750 high status into 35.8% more children compared to low status fertility. The status-fertility effect later reversed, and for the most recent period, 1990-2005, those with high status had 19.8% fewer children on average relative to those with low status. The changes are similar in Europe and North-America as well as Asia, Africa, Middle East and Latin-America (although they took place at a later period for the latter regions). Fertility effects differ by type of status, where the fertility effect of high income/wealth was remained neutral throughout the entire period. Childbearing and occupation/social class was also used positively related until 1750, but has been negative on for the last century. Education (which is only found in fertility surveys and censuses from the 20th century) is consistently negatively related to fertility.	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2008	155	Social Status and Reproduction: Interrelationships between Poverty,  Wealth and Fertility	Determinants of Contraceptive Change 1975 - 2006:  A Multi-Country Study	The sharp declines in fertility in non-Western countries from 1960 to the present ranks as one of the most significant demographic developments of the past century, with multifaceted effects on the economic, social, and demographic character of these societies. The causes of these declines are not yet well understood, in particular how the contributions of various determinants are to be weighted. The accumulating stock of demographic surveys provides a foundation for analyzing this change in detail. This paper uses WFS and DHS data to examine changes in the use of contraception in 42 countries in Latin America, Asia, and Africa in the period 1975-2006. Via the method of regression decomposition, we estimate proportions of change that can be attributed to changes in key socioeconomic variables (urban-rural residence, educational attainment, occupation) and changes in fertility preferences. We also consider how the estimated contributions of each determinant vary across country and region.	John	B. Casterline	Kana	 Fuse
2008	155	Social Status and Reproduction: Interrelationships between Poverty,  Wealth and Fertility	Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions, New Answers	Research has shown that the season of a child’s birth is associated with later outcomes involving health, educational attainment, earnings and mortality. Our paper considers an overlooked explanation for this phenomenon: that children born throughout the year are conceived by women with different socioeconomic characteristics. Using vital statistics and census data, we document large changes in the characteristics of the average woman giving birth throughout the year. We then use data from multiple decennial censuses to show that variation in maternal characteristics can explain most of the observed effect of birth quarter on later outcomes such as wages and educational attainment. We conclude by briefly discussing theories for why the fertility behavior of women throughout the year may depend upon socioeconomic status.	Dan	 Hungerman	Kasey	 Buckles
2008	155	Social Status and Reproduction: Interrelationships between Poverty,  Wealth and Fertility	Female Height, Social Status and Reproductive Success in 40 Developing Countries	Effects of female height, socio-economic status, and context factors on reproductive success are studied using data on over 500,000 women aged 16-49 living in 360 districts within 40 developing countries. The data are derived from the Demographic and Health Surveys. Reproductive success is measured by child mortality, birth weight and height of children (stunting). Because height is, besides a heritable trait, also an indicator of health we expect taller women to experience less child mortality and to have children with higher birth weight and less stunting children than could be expected on the basis of her socio-economic status. Explanatory variables at the district level are modernization, women’s status, and the availability of sanitary and public health facilities. At the national level we control for level of development. District and national characteristics are aggregated from the household surveys. The data are analyzed using three-level multilevel analysis, including cross-level interactions.	Jeroen	 Smits	Christiaan	 Monden
2008	156	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult-Children and Elderly Parents	Widowed Mothers’ Co-Residence with Adult Children: Who Will Take Care of Mom?	This paper investigates whether a widowed mother lives with an adult child, and if so, with whom she resides. We explore between- and within-family differences in co-residence using information about each child’s economic and family circumstances. The analysis uses data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey, a panel study of high school graduates and all of their siblings. We find that mothers in poor health and those with daughters are more likely to live with a child. Mothers’ socioeconomic status does not affect co-residence. Among families in which mothers live with a child, married children are less likely than unmarried children to live with their mother. Among married children, daughters are slightly more likely than sons to co-reside, but among the unmarried, sons are more likely than daughters to share a home with their mother. These preliminary findings are consistent with theories about the gendered division of labor and family responsibilities.	Judith	A. Seltzer	Esther	M. Friedman
2008	156	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult-Children and Elderly Parents	A Cross National Comparison of Simultaneous Multigenerational Support: The “Sandwich Generation” Revisited	This paper examined the prevalence and risk factors of multigenerational support using OASIS -- a nationally representative dataset of four European countries (Norway, England, Spain, Germany), and Israel. We showed that among respondents with surviving parents and children, 14.7% were regularly providing care to a very old parent (aged 75 +) or a parent that required help in performing basic activities while caring for a minor child. The proportion of dual supporters varied across countries (4.4% to 23.7%), suggesting a possible contextual effect. Logistic regression analyses suggested that older age at first birth and larger births spacing were associated with higher likelihood of providing multigenerational support. Respondents who endorsed stronger obligation to parental care and those receiving support from their parents were more likely to be dual supporters. Our findings provided evidence to a link between fertility decisions and multigenerational support, and are consistent with the intergenerational solidarity theory.	Daphna	 Gans	Ariela	 Lowenstein
2008	156	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult-Children and Elderly Parents	Changing Generational Exchanges across the Young Adult Years: Interlocking Lives, Migration and Remittances in Thailand	Inter-generational exchanges can be viewed from the perspective of the senior or junior generation; but typically, because of data constraints, the view is from the senior generation. Such a perspective provides information on whether parents are receiving help, but tends to miss the dynamics of the junior generation as they pass through the demographically dense years of young adulthood, acquiring obligations as spouses and parents. Such tension between obligations across generations can be magnified when a society is undergoing the massive transition to an urban, industrial and post-industrial society. Using the theoretical framework of the life course which emphasizes interlocked lives across the life course and a unique Thai panel data set that permits examination of this issue from the perspective of the younger generation, we find that sending remittances to origin household and returning to help with the rice harvest is related to the complex interplay of the parents circumstances and the those of the migrant.	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Katherine	 Faust
2008	156	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult-Children and Elderly Parents	Financial Transfers to Husbands’ and Wives’ Elderly Mothers in Mexico: Do Couples Exhibit Preferential Treatment by Lineage?	This study extends research on differences by lineage in elderly parents’ receipt of assistance from adult children to the Mexican context. We examine couples’ preferential allocation of financial transfers to a husband or a wife’s elderly mother. The analysis differentiates between mothers’ financial and physical needs. In addition, we consider the effect of transfers by siblings of each marital partner to their respective mothers on the couple’s choice of a recipient for their financial gift. We find evidence of competition for financial assistance between mothers, with only few couples providing assistance to both. In contrast to previous research in the U.S., we show that mid-life Mexican couples disproportionately favor husbands’ mothers when faced with mothers’ financial needs. However, results indicate that couples exhibit greater financial responsiveness to wives’ mothers’ needs for personal assistance. Our analysis uncovers strong effects of help from siblings on couples’ transfers to a partner’s own mother.	Claire	M. Noel-Miller	Rania	 Tfaily
2008	157	Children's Outcomes and Parental Nonstandard Work Schedules	Parental Work and Children’s Sleep Patterns	Sleep is an important factor in child cognitive, socioemotional, and health outcomes; however, determinants of sleep patterns have been little studied. Our study uses nationally representative data from the PSID Child Development Supplement (n=2,554) to examine whether parental work schedules are associated with children’s sleep patterns. Using parent reports of the hours they work in a normal week, we find that primary caregivers’ (PCGs’) work hours are predictive of children’s sleep durations and wake-up times, even after controlling for a battery of background characteristics. Compared to children of non-working PCGs, children whose PCGs work part-time get significantly more sleep and have significantly later wake-up times; children whose PCGs work over-time get less sleep and have significantly earlier wake-up times. Timing of parental work is also predictive of children’s sleep patterns. Potential mediators and moderators—including child age and the presence or absence of a secondary caregiver—are tested.	Cassandra	 Hart	Emma	 Adam	Emily	 Snell
2008	157	Children's Outcomes and Parental Nonstandard Work Schedules	Maternal Nonstandard Work Schedules and Adolescent Overweight	This study examines the association between nonstandard shift work and overweight in 13 and 14 year-old adolescents. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth – Child Supplement, we examine how the number of years of nonstandard work by mothers over the lifetime of her child is associated with changes in body mass index (BMI) and the odds of being overweight.   We find a significant, non-linear relationship between the number of years a mother worked nonstandard shifts and both outcomes, independent of a number of covariates. Specifically, working either a few years or many years of nonstandard shifts was associated with increases in BMI and risk of overweight. Moreover, this association is driven by families with incomes that identify them as near-poor. Implications of these findings and directions for future research are discussed.	Daniel	P. Miller	Wen-Jui	 Han
2008	157	Children's Outcomes and Parental Nonstandard Work Schedules	Out of Sight – Out of Mind?: Non-Standard Work Schedules and Parent-Child Interaction	This study examines whether and how non-standard work times impact the level and quality of parent-child interaction and how parental well-being serves as a mediating factor. Using quantitative and qualitative data from the Netherlands, a multidimensional indicator of parent-child contact examines family dinners, level of face-to-face and virtual (email, phone) contact, joint leisure activities and childcare. Following a series of logistic regression models, individual and couple-level interviews examine perceived problems, advantages, well-being and quality of parent-child contact. Preliminary results show that parents in non-standard work times report lower levels of well-being (men health, women psychological problems). Lower well-being serves as a mediator to lower the level and quality of contact. Families develop strategies for increased contact including family lunches, alternative and virtual modes of communication. Fathers also engage in more childcare. Subjective views of the impact of these schedules on parent-child interaction differed highly according to work and family context.	Melinda	 Mills	Kadri	 Taht
2008	157	Children's Outcomes and Parental Nonstandard Work Schedules	Parents’ Joint Work Schedules and Young Children’s Cognitive and Behavioral Development: A Longitudinal Analysis	We explore whether having one or both parents working nonstandard hours early in infancy (nine months) is associated with cognitive and behavioral development (at 24 months). Literature on shift work traditionally focused on individual consequences (e.g., poor physical and mental health) and quality of the marital relationship. Most recently, studies have examined how parental – and largely maternal – shift work affects children. This literature conceptualizes mothers’ socioemotional states and marital quality as mediating the relationship between shift work and children’s outcomes; we follow that general approach. However, the few existing studies utilized disparate and selective samples, and often lacked data on fathers. Here we focus on how mothers’ and fathers’ work schedules, socioemotional states, and interaction with children influence young children’s cognitive and behavioral development with a nationally representative sample of children with co-resident parents from the first two waves of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey - Birth Cohort.	Chris	 Morett	Emily	 Rosenbaum	Matthew	 Weinshenker
2008	158	Current Mortality Research Issues	How Many Americans Could Be Alive?	Life expectancy in the United States is lower than in many other highly developed countries. We are interested how this  disadvantage translates into the number of hypothetical lives lost, their sex and age structure. The US population in 2004 is estimated in a component method projection using the lowest possible age-specific mortality in the last half a century and compared to its actual size. In addition, we distinguish between direct deaths and second and higher generation deaths. We show that if mortality had been as low as the best practice, the US population in 2004 would be by 14.3 million larger than its actual size. 1.6 million of the lives lost are those who were even not born. Women in reproductive ages whose lives have been lost (1.6 million) would otherwise give birth to over 68 thousand babies only in the year 2004.	Magdalena	 Muszynska
2008	158	Current Mortality Research Issues	Early-life Influences and the Seasonality of Mortality: Re-Examining the Doblhammer Effect	Doblhammer and Vaupel (2001) showed that length of life   depends on month of birth. This had major implications   for the debate on early-life influences on later-life   health and mortality. If the early-life influences   hypothesis is correct, length of life is influenced by   events circa 75 years prior. This paper extends the work   of Doblhammer by considering more recent data of comparable   sample size. We find that the effect of month of birth   (a proxy for in-utero conditions, including exposure to   cold-and-flu season viruses as well as micronutrient   deficiencies) on month of death diminishes in more recent   data. This adds an important dimension, as it suggests   that micronutrient deficiencies, which were seasonal but   which diminished over time, and not viruses (which   circulate every winter, even now), account for the  Doblhammer effect. Our use of more recent data permits  important differentiation.	Andrew	 Noymer	Bert	 Kestenbaum
2008	158	Current Mortality Research Issues	Early Life Conditions and Mortality Later in Life in Scania, Sweden 1814-1894: New Ways of Measuring Conditions during Early Life	Health in later life is often claimed to be partly determined already during intra-uterine life and infancy. To confirm this 'Barker'hypothesis empirically, lengthy population records are needed, which makes it hard to test this hypothesis using modern data compilations, but several studies based on historical population reconstitutions have confirmed such links. However, the actual early life nutrition conditions and/or disease load conditions are unknown and must be approximated, so the ability to approximate these conditions accurately is crucial for the quality of such an investigation. Also, distinguishing between early-life-effects from nutrition and from disease was recognized as highly important at an early-life-session at PAA2006. This paper suggests improved and also new measures for distinguishing between effects from disease and from nutrition during early life, and between conditions in utero and in infancy. These measures are used in Cox models with shared frailty for adult mortality in Scania, Sweden 1814-1894.	Kent	 Johansson	Jan	 Beise
2008	158	Current Mortality Research Issues	Measuring Maternal Mortality with Dual Method: 
A New Method for Maternal Mortality Estimation in Developing Countries	The Millennium Development Goal-5 (MDG-5) targets to reduce maternal mortality ratio by three-quarters between 1990 and 2015, but it remains a major challenge to evaluate its success because the estimation of maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is notoriously difficult without a functional vital registration system. We present a method of unbiased MMR estimation by combining data from two independent sources, medical records and community deaths audits, with correction for under-reporting. Using the proposed “dual method,” we estimate maternal mortality in Bangladesh, and compare to the nationally representative Bangladesh Maternal Health Services and Maternal Mortality Survey (BMMS 2001). The estimated maternal mortality ratio (MMR) by the dual method was 375 (95% CI: 369-380) per 100000 live births, and the pregnancy related mortality ratio (PRMR) was 419 (413-425). The BMMS based direct estimation of MMR was 322 (253-391), and PRMR was 382(305-460). Our empirical application shows that the proposed method is feasible.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2008	159	Improving child health in developed and developing countries	Education, Birth Weight, and Infant Mortality	This research determines if the declines in infant mortality with increased education are due to “indirect” effects that operate through improved birth weight or to birth weight independent “direct” effects. The data used are the US national linked birth death files, African, and European American cohorts, 2001. Education is dichotomized as completing 12th grade or less. The analysis is conducted using Covariate Density Defined mixtures of logistic regression, which considers “normal” and “compromised” births separately. Among “normal” births, mean birth weight increases significantly with education, 88 to 108 grams. Mortality declines significantly due to “direct” effects of education (by 1.66 to 2.21deaths/1000births). The only significant “indirect” effect occurs in African American females, which increases infant mortality despite improvements in birth weight. No consistent birth weight or mortality effects occur among “compromised” births. These results are consistent with the view that birth weight is not on the causal pathway to mortality.	Timothy	B. Gage	Erin	 O'Neill	Fu	 Fang	Howard	 Stratton
2008	159	Improving child health in developed and developing countries	Food Assistance Program Participation and Infant Growth and Health	This study examines the relationship between Food Stamp program and WIC participation and infant children’s health outcomes using the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being study. We test the association between participation during the child’s first year of life and mother-rated child health, child weight-for-age when the child is about one-year old, and whether the child was ever breastfed. Logistic regression results suggest that WIC participation after birth is negatively associated with ever breastfeeding. Future analyses will consider different associations across SES, will examine additional children’s health outcomes, as well as use propensity score matching techniques as a mechanism to account for selection bias. Little is known about the influence of food assistance participation on young children’s health and well-being. Given that the end goal of food assistance programs is to improve the well-being of low income families, an examination of their role in influences young children’s development is sorely needed.	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest	Daphne	C Hernandez
2008	159	Improving child health in developed and developing countries	Reducing Child Malnutrition through Community Intervention Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Three Regions in Senegal	This article investigates the impact of a randomized community program that aims to improve child nutrition in Senegal. We find a significant impact of the Nutrition Enhancement Program (PRN) on medical inputs and child care measures taken by mothers in original treatment villages despite substantial deviation from the planned assignment status of villages between the two data waves. We do not detect a program impact on the outcome measure of weight for age except for the youngest children, possibly because the program has not been in place long enough to show a tangible effect. When comparing the results of this prospective analysis based on randomization with those from an ex-post difference-in-difference approach, we find that the latter leads to a larger estimated impact of the intervention. The study highlights the importance of policy interventions in developing countries that aim at changes in child care practice.	Sebastian	 Linnemayr	Harold	 Alderman
2008	160	Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage: Gender Issues	Is there Dowry Inflation in South Asia?: An Assessment of the Evidence	This paper is the first systematic attempt measure the existence and degree of dowry inflation in South Asia. The popular press and scholarly literature have assumed dowry inflation in South Asia for some time, and there are now a number of theoretical papers that have attempted to explain the rise of dowries in South Asia over time. The existing empirical support for dowry inflation rests on estimates of dowry functions, which map bride and groom characteristics into a dowry amount, but the size of the dowry, year-of-marriage relationship is unknown and no systematic survey of the phenomenon exist. We examine evidence for dowry inflation using survey data from India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Nepal containing information on dowry amounts or prevalence over time. We find no evidence  that real dowry amounts have increased over time. The reports of dowry inflation, though widely publicized, have little empirical support.	Trevon	D. Logan	Raj	 Arunachalam
2008	160	Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage: Gender Issues	Trophy Wives and Boy Toys: Age Differences in Remarriage	Age differences between spouses in remarriage have received relatively little research attention. These differences are important because women whose husbands are much older tend to have lower happiness and worse health outcomes. In addition, there is popular interest in the stereotypical beliefs of trophy wives and boy toys. Drawing upon theories from marriage market dynamics, evolutionary psychology, and new home economics, I propose that the age of a spouse yields different levels of reproductive, status, sexual, and provider utilities. I hypothesize that age differences will be positively associated with earning power of both husbands and wives who seek remarriage. I test these hypotheses with data from the National Survey of Families and Households. Earnings explain variation in age differences for remarried men, but not remarried women. This evidence is consistent with social processes that lead men to take trophy wives, but not for women who take boy toys.	Scott	T Yabiku
2008	160	Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage: Gender Issues	Antiretroviral Therapy and Reproductive Behavior in Nigeria: Sex, Marriage and Fertility among People Living with HIV	Nigeria is in the midst of scaling up its antiretroviral therapy program. Current estimates are that 72,000 individuals are enrolled in the expanding program. As people realize that HIV/AIDS is no longer a certain death sentence, they strive to actualize their most important priorities, which include marriage and fertility. Although ART enables people with HIV to hope for and undertake these life projects, it also continues to interfere with them, and achieving these larger goals frequently impinges on people’s capacity to stay on therapy, follow recommended treatment regimes, and take adequate precautions to protect others (and themselves) from further infection. This paper reports on preliminary ethnographic research conducted among people on ART in southeastern Nigeria, focusing on the intersection between antiretroviral treatment, sexual behavior, marriage and reproduction, and the implications for HIV risk. Several emblematic case studies are presented to highlight the key questions and issues that emerge.	Benjamin	 Mbakwem	Daniel	 Smith
2008	161	Migration and Health in Developing Countries	Health Selection of Internal Migrants in Mexico: Evidence from the Mexican Family Life Survey	Recent research on migration supports the idea that migrants are positively selected for health. This paper tests this hypothesis in the context of internal migration in Mexico, using nationally representative longitudinal data from waves 2002 and 2005 of the Mexican Family Life Survey.     To evaluate the healthy migrant hypothesis I examine relationships between the probability a respondent moved between 2002 and 2005 and his or her health, using logit regressions. Health measures used in previous studies include mortality rates, self-reported physical health, disability and chronic conditions, and no study used objective measures prior to the move. I include objective health measures (height, BMI, hemoglobin, blood pressure) and subjective measures (self-assessments, smoking habits, alcohol consumption, physical activity and chronic conditions), all of them taken prior to the move.    I expect that young adult migrants will have greater health endowments than non-migrants, whereas older adult migrants will show no comparative health advantage.	Erika	 Arenas
2008	161	Migration and Health in Developing Countries	Rural to Urban Labor Migration, Maternal HIV Prevalence, and Life Changes among the Maasai of the Ngorongoro District of Tanzania	Rural to urban labor migration among the Maasai population in the Ngorongoro District of Tanzania is engendering changes in the social, economic, and disease structure of nonmigrating spouses. Using data from the first and third surveys of the 2002-2004 Ngorongoro Health Survey, logistic regression models will be run to assess: 1) the impact of labor migration on HIV prevalence and 2) the association of labor migration with various measures for the quality of life for mothers and children. Spatial descriptive analysis will further elucidate patterns in labor migration and HIV prevalence through mapping of the clinic sites used in the survey overlaid by spatial raster data of local transportation routes, elevation data, and land cover data. The impacts of labor migration on subsistence patterns, social dynamics, and disease prevalence within communities may have increasing negative impacts on maternal and child health and lifestyle.	Jelena	 Cali
2008	161	Migration and Health in Developing Countries	Disparities in Health and Survival of Newborns among the Urban Migrants and Non-Migrants in Bangladesh	Despite significant improvements in child survival in recent decades, infant and under-five mortality in Bangladesh remain unacceptably high among the developing countries with strong urban-rural differentials. In Bangladesh, nearly one in nine children dies before reaching age five. Neonatal mortality contributes to more than sixty percent of infant mortality and almost half of all under-five deaths. However, using the data of Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS) 2004 it is evident that urban poor as well as rural to urban migrants have the worse health situation than the nation as a whole. The urban extreme poor have the highest neonatal death at 68 per 1000 live births. Newborn mortality is 1.5 times higher among urban migrants compared to children of urban natives (48 and 32 per 1000 live births respectively). So to achieve the MDG-4, Bangladesh must tackle these enormous differences in health status and survival chances among urban children.	Subir	 Saha	Mohammad	 Kabir
2008	161	Migration and Health in Developing Countries	The Impact of Migration on Health in a Developing Setting	Previous studies on the effect of migration on health are inconclusive due to the failure to adjust for selection of migrants (especially with respect to health), and to distinguish different dimensions of health and various pathways. To remedy these gaps, we study the effect of the internal migration experience on health using high-quality longitudinal data collected in Indonesia. We treat migration and health as dynamic processes by modeling changes in migrants’ health prior to and after migration and contrasting it with nonmigrants. We further reveal underlying mechanisms generating the overall migration effect by examining changes in socioeconomic and behavioral factors associated with migration. Preliminary results suggest a detrimental impact of migration on health, in particular short-term health status. Pathway analysis demonstrates several possible explanations, including disruptions in sociocultural practices and loss of family ties.	Yao	 Lu
2008	162	Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Influence of Quality of Care on Fertility Outcomes in Kenya	The purpose of this study is to examine how quality of care at service delivery providers, as defined by Bruce (1990) interacts with individual characteristics to explain fertility outcomes of women in Kenya in 1998 and 2003. The present study provides a new perspective and findings on the debate regarding the role of socioeconomic development and the diffusion of new ideas through family planning programs as well as insights into how these factors may be influencing a stall in fertility decline in Kenya. By investigating individual-level fertility outcomes in Kenya, utilizing multi-level models applied to a unique data set integrating community-level development and family planning service quality of care indicators with nationally representative Demographic and Health Survey data from 1998 and 2003 and clinic-level data from 1999 and 2004 this study will test both direct and interactive effects of community context on changing fertility behaviors and outcomes.	Michele	 Steinmetz
2008	162	Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Impact Of HIV/AIDS-related Household Shocks on Adolescent Fertility Intentions and Early Reproductive Behavior: Evidence from South Africa	Although a great deal of research addresses the impact of HIV/AIDS on mortality, less is known about the relationship between HIV/AIDS and fertility. What we do know largely centers around the fertility of HIV-positive women. We know less about whether the threat of HIV/AIDS, and the household impact of HIV/AIDS morbidity and mortality, are altering reproductive preferences and behavior. Adolescent women are a particularly important sub-population because of their heightened risk of both pregnancy and HIV/AIDS, especially in the South African context. A shift in reproductive behavior in response to HIV/AIDS could significantly alter the pattern of fertility change as well as the course of the epidemic over the next decades. Consequently, this paper will draw on a rich longitudinal data source to explore the impact of HIV/AIDS-related household shocks on the reproductive preferences and early reproductive behavior of adolescent women in Cape Town, South Africa.	Erika	K. Barth  Cottrell
2008	162	Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	Men’s Migration and Women’s Fertility in Rural Mozambique	Labor migration, a massive and growing phenomenon across sub-Saharan Africa, plays a particularly important role in the reconfiguration of rural marriages and transformation of fertility regimes. As the macroeconomic restructuring underway in most sub-Saharan countries makes material returns to migration less stable and predictable, uncertainties surrounding migrants’ marital unions also increase. These uncertainties, further exacerbated by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, fosters reassessments of childbearing preferences and changes in reproductive behavior. In this study, we use data from a 2006 survey of 1680 married women living in 56 villages in southern Mozambique to compare fertility and reproductive preferences of non-migrant rural women married to migrants and those married to non-migrants. We further break down the former group based on objective and subjective measures of migrant “quality.” The statistical analysis is complemented by insights from in-depth interviews carried out with a subsample of survey respondents.	Victor	 Agadjanian	Boaventura	 Cau
2008	162	Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Invisible Hand of African Solidarity: Fosterage and the Buffering of Inequality Among African Children	The practice of child fosterage is widely believed to buffer educational inequalities among African children. Yet, few studies have quantified this buffering at the macro-level. While studies have estimated the prevalence and micro-level effects of fosterage, its macro –level buffering potential depends also on the direction of flows. This study complements previous research by assessing the overall directionality of fosterage flows. At issue is whether fostered children are systematically reallocated into households with smaller sibsize or higher SES. Preliminary results do show a predominantly “upward flow” whereby fostered children do in fact go into better endowed households. Yet this directionality can be upset during periods of economic difficulty. Also the upward flows are more visible in terms of family size rather than SES, a result that warrant attention to changes in the practice of fosterage during the course of on-going fertility transitions.	Vongai	 Kandiwa
2008	163	Racial Differences in Education	Are Black Students Punished for “Acting White”?: 
Race, Academic Achievement, and Friendship Choices	Many believe that black under-achievement results from a burden of “acting white”. Although previous research attempts to establish this burden, these studies confound adolescents’ opportunities for friendship with their friendship choices. In this paper, I model adolescents’ friendship group choices. Using data from Add Health and discrete-choice analysis, I estimate the effect of racial and academic friendship group composition on individuals’ probabilities of choosing friendship groups. I further show how individuals’ race and academic achievement interact with friendship group characteristics to affect their friendship choices. Preliminary results suggest that high and non-high-achieving blacks have similarly high probabilities of choosing friendship groups with a majority of blacks, and that high-achieving blacks prefer high-achieving friendship groups while non-high-achieving blacks are equally likely to choose high- or non-high-achieving friendship groups. These results support the conclusion that high-achieving blacks are rejecting their non-high-achieving black peers, rather than the other way around as the “acting white” hypothesis suggests.	Jennifer	 Flashman
2008	163	Racial Differences in Education	Parental Job Loss and Children’s College Attendance in Black and White Middle-Class Families	Job loss remains a prominent feature of the American economy. Black and white children may experience parental job loss differently, even when they share the same class location. We investigate this question using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), specifically those children “born” into the survey (1968-1979) and observed through age 21. We focus on “middle-class” families (income greater than twice the appropriate poverty threshold at the child’s birth). Our dependent variable is any post-secondary education by age 21. While the difference in the rate of job loss between black and white households is not statistically significant, the impact of this experience on black children is more than double the impact on white children. Our analysis suggests that this disparity arises because, even within the middle class, job loss has a much greater destabilizing effect on black families than white families.	Ariel	 Kalil	Patrick	 Wightman
2008	163	Racial Differences in Education	Race and Fields of Study: A Detail Decomposition of Income Growth, 1993 to 2003	Using the National Survey of College Graduate datasets, this paper estimates the significance of being Black, Hispanic, and Asian American among native-born, college-educated male workers after controlling for their field of study. Applying an averaging method, detail decompositions of racial income gaps are conducted thereafter. As a result, this paper reveals that, first, the income gaps between whites and minorities has been growing over 1993 to 2003. Second, the discriminatory component has not reduced over this time period. Third, the growing skill premium does not account for the widening racial income gap. Fourth, Hispanics’ disadvantage has grown substantially between 1993 and 2003 so that their net disadvantage is almost equal to that of Blacks. Fifth, even though all three racial minorities accumulated more human capital than Whites over this time period, their income growth rates do not equivalently correspond to the growth of their human capital. Race-specific reasons for these phenomena are discussed.	ChangHwan	 Kim
2008	163	Racial Differences in Education	Explaining the Persistence of Racial Gaps in Schooling in South Africa	This paper analyzes the large racial differences in progress through secondary school in South Africa using recently collected longitudinal data. Following the progress of students who were enrolled in grades 8 and 9 in 2002 in the Cape Area Panel Study, we document large differences in the probability of grade advancement between white, coloured, and African youth. Probit regressions indicate that grade advancement between 2002 and 2005 is strongly associated with household income and with respondents’ scores on a baseline literacy and numeracy test. We fully explain the white and coloured advantage over Africans in progress through school when we control for baseline test scores, previous grades failed, and per capita household income. The results suggest that the early disadvantage of African secondary students is a major factor driving poor progress through secondary school, with continued racial gaps in grade progression contributing to persistent racial gaps in ultimate schooling attainment.	Cally	 Ardington	Murray	 Leibbrandt
2008	164	Immigrants in Old and New Destinations	Sundown Town to “Mexican Town”: Old-Timers and Newcomers in Small Town America	For more than a century, communities across America employed aggressive strategies to remain all-White. A widespread practice was that of “sundown towns,” places that signaled to African Americans and others that they were not welcome within the city limits. Drawing from diverse qualitative and quantitative sources, this paper presents a case study of a small Midwestern community. The study documents the community's sundown history, current responses to rapid Latino population growth occurring within its boundaries, and the present spatial distributions of the town’s Latino migrants and white residents. Local housing characteristics and regulations of land use and zoning may partially account for this latter outcome. The results are informative for considering how analyses of Latino population growth in “new” areas, whether metropolitan or non-metropolitan, might be strengthened by exploring linkages between their racialized historical contexts, current racial and ethnic social dynamics, and spatial configurations.	Eileen	 Diaz McConnell	Faranak	 Miraftab
2008	164	Immigrants in Old and New Destinations	Social and Economic Well-Being of Latino Immigrants in New Rural Destinations	Immigration is fueling rapid Latino population growth in rural communities across the United States. At the same time, immigrants are dispersing to new destinations in the Midwest and Southeast. For the first time in U.S. history, half of all rural Latinos now live outside the traditional Southwestern settlement region. In this paper, we use Census 2000 data to address two research questions: (1) How does the social and economic well-being of Latino immigrants in rural areas of new destination states compare to other areas? (2) How does the well-being of Latino immigrants in rural areas of new destination states compare to that of native born residents? Our multivariate results indicate a clear and monotonic correlation between increasing levels of U.S. experience and improvements in measures of well-being for Latino immigrants. This particular trend occurs more gradually for Latino immigrants in new rural destinations, but it arguably still occurs.	Everett	 Henderson	Randy	 Capps	William	A. Kandel	Heather	L. Koball
2008	164	Immigrants in Old and New Destinations	Mexican Migration Maturity and Its Effects on Flows Into Local Areas: A Test of the Cumulative Causation Perspective	This paper examines whether the characteristics and labor market outcomes of recent Mexican immigrants are associated with the “maturity” of the migration flow into local urban and rural areas in the United States. I refine the theory of cumulative causation, which, until now has been used primarily to explain the structural effects of cumulatively caused migration on Mexican sending communities in order to formulate hypotheses relevant to the effects on U.S. migrant communities. Using 2000 census data, I develop a measure of migration maturity, and preliminary findings suggest, consistent with the cumulative causation perspective, that variation in recent migrant characteristics and labor market outcomes are significantly related to migration maturity. The implications of these findings will be discussed in the final paper.	James	D. Bachmeier
2008	164	Immigrants in Old and New Destinations	Are Ethnic Enclaves Necessary?: Differential Wage Returns to English Ability in New Immigrant Destinations	In the past two decades, we have witnessed the geographical dispersion of immigrants from traditional to new destinations in the U.S. The growth of the immigrant population outside of traditional destinations (with large concentrations of co-ethnics) provides an opportunity to study geographic variation in economic mobility for Mexican immigrants. Research on the ethnic enclave suggests that co-ethnics provide employment assistance to immigrants who lack English language skills. The importance of the ethnic enclave in providing assistance raises the question of why so many immigrants are moving to new destinations where they may not have access to co-ethnic ties that facilitate employment opportunities. Using data from the 1990 and 2000 Public Use Micro Sample (PUMS) of the Census and the 2005 and 2006 waves of the American Community Survey (ACS), we test whether the ethnic enclave becomes as asset or burden on the wage returns for immigrants in the U.S.	Sergio	 Chavez	Ted	 Mouw	Jacqueline	 Hagan
2008	165	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons (2)	The Relationship between Participation in Community Groups and Attitudes about Marriage and Gender Roles	This paper examines the relationship between non-family experiences and attitudes related to marriage and gender roles. The analysis uses the theoretical framework of ideational influences, particularly development idealism and the family mode of social organization. The study uses life histories and individual survey data from Nepal to explore the association between participation in community groups and attitudes toward early marriages for girls, widow remarriage, daughter-in-law obedience to mothers-in-law, and husbands making most of the decisions in the household. The results reveal a strong relationship between group participation experiences and attitudes, while controlling for individual characteristics, new experiences of the respondents and their childhood community context. In general, non-family experiences with community groups have the potential to reach essential services to the community and to influence attitudes and behaviors of men and women. Though the current research utilizes cross-sectional data, future panel studies have the potential to contribute towards important causal analysis.	Meeta	S. Pradhan
2008	165	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons (2)	Cultural Responses to Changing Gender Patterns of Migration in Georgia	The feminization of migration causes social tension, with economic forces typically conflicting with cultural norms defining women in terms of their domestic and childcare roles. This paper examines the emergence of female out-migration in Georgia. Using in-depth interviews with former migrant women in Tbilisi and secondary data, we examine the dramatic change in migration flows from Georgia over the past decade. Institutional changes, particularly the implementation of restrictive immigration legislation in Russia, have shifted migration destinations towards countries with higher demand for female labor. In response to these new incentives, more women are migrating from Georgia. We find limited evidence that gender norms are beginning to change in response to these economic shifts, but find strong evidence of a lag between the speed at which migration patterns change and the speed at which cultural traditions change.	Erin	T. Hofmann	Cynthia	 Buckley
2008	165	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons (2)	Temporary Migration and STD/HIV Risky Sexual Behavior: A Population-Based Analysis of Gender Differences in China	Using data from a probability survey and applying multilevel modeling, this paper examines gender differences in (1) the link between migration and risky sexual behavior and (2) individual and community correlates of risky sexual behavior. Results suggest significant interaction between gender and migration. Being temporary migrant is associated with significantly more risky sexual behaviors for females but significantly fewer for males. There are also significant interactions between gender and marriage and living arrangement. Being married and living with others both appear to be more powerful deterrents to risky sexual behaviors for females than for males. Single migrant women who live alone would have the most risky sexual behaviors while married non-migrant women who live with others would have the least. Prevention programs are urgently needed for female temporary migrants and must address the issue of gender.	Xiushi	 Yang	Guomei	 Xia
2008	165	Gender Issues: Cross-National Comparisons (2)	Statistical Discrimination and Fertility: Revisiting Gender Differences in the Labor Market	This paper provides an alternative explanation for gender discrimination by employers. Women who intend to have children might become less productive in future if they allocate less effort to employment after child-bearing. At a minimum, they will lose time due to delivery and breast-feeding. The model is one of statistical discrimination, with woman's fertility intentions being treated as the ultimate unobservable characteristic to employers. Since motherhood is believed to decrease labor productivity, women's wages are a decreasing function of expected future fertility rates. The gender wage gap can be addressed in this model, for equally skilled individuals are paid differently according to gender. The model also predicts ex post correlation between skill and fertility choices of women and a gender skill gap. Shifts in motherhood preferences and in the skill premium are shown to affect fertility rates and have consequential impacts on wages and skill investment decisions of women.	Cecilia	 Machado
2008	166	Insights on Family Transfers to Elderly Parents: A Cross-National Perspective	Labor Migration, Change in Left Behind Elderly Living Arrangement and Intra-Household Elderly Care in Kanchanaburi DSS, Thailand	Existing studies mainly focus on the impact of migration on migrants themselves, less attention has been paid to the effects of migration on the family members ‘left behind’ by migrants. This paper explores how labor migration effects familial care of the left behind elderly. The analysis is based on panel data of the Kanchanaburi Demographic Surveillance System (KDSS) in Thailand. The study tests two models: a Cox hazard model that focuses on labor migration and change in elderly living arrangements and a logistic regression model that focuses on labor migration and intra-household elderly care. The study found that labor migration triggers transitions in elderly living arrangements from co-residence to living alone, even after controlling for other confounding variables. Secondly, labor migration has several negative effects on intra-household elderly care. The paper raises the concern of the social impact of migration on the elderly in Thai society.	Min	 Qin	Sureeporn	 Punpuing	Philip	 Guest
2008	166	Insights on Family Transfers to Elderly Parents: A Cross-National Perspective	Public Transfer and Interhousehold Transfers to the Elderly in Brazil	This article examines the flow of interhousehold transfers to the elderly in Brazil. More precisely, we investigate if an exogenous increase in the income of the poor elderly, made by a public transfer program, decreased the interhousehold transfers received by this group. To test this hypothesis we used data from periods before and after two major reductions in the age of eligibility to the program. The impact is then analyzed using a difference-in-difference approach. Using nationally representative data it was found a reduction both in the probability to receive private transfers and in the magnitude of transfers received by the age groups that became eligible. This indicates that Brazilian families may crowd-out private transfers in response to public transfers and points out that the possibility of crowding-out effects should be considered in the design of future income transfer policies in Brazil.	Vitor	F Miranda	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Cassio	M. Turra
2008	166	Insights on Family Transfers to Elderly Parents: A Cross-National Perspective	Family Size and Intra-Family Transfers: An Empirical Analysis of Long-Term Care Using Chinese Household Data	I consider the effect of an adult child’s own family size on care arrangements for and resource transfer to the elderly parents. A direct implication of family size is that it imposes constraints on the care provider’s resources. I incorporate the above novel perspective in an empirical study of long-term care for the elderly in China using household survey data. Exploiting exogenous variation in the number of births per couple before and after China’s One-Child Policy (1979), I identify the effect of an adult child’s family size on long-term care arrangements for her elderly parent. Having more offspring decreases the monetary transfer one makes towards the elderly parent. Specifically, the amount of transfer from a representative adult child to his or her elderly parent would decrease by approximately 25% if the adult child has three children instead of one.	Jie	 Pan
2008	166	Insights on Family Transfers to Elderly Parents: A Cross-National Perspective	Intergenerational Exchange and Psychological Well-being	Numerous studies have documented the patterns of intergenerational exchange in the United States. Yet relatively little is known about the consequences of exchange. Are older parents better off because of the receipt of support from their children? Or do they become depressed because of the loss of autonomy by depending on their children’s support? Prior research has shown mixed evidence. Some researchers found a positive association between intergenerational exchange and older parents’ psychological well-being; others found a negative association; and still others found no association. The inconclusive evidence is likely attributable to theoretical confusion, data constraints, and inadequate analytic strategies. In this paper, I will overcome these limitations by using the Health and Retirement Study to examine the psychological consequences of intergenerational exchange for older parents over time.	I-Fen	 Lin
2008	167	Gender and Labor Force Participation in Different National Contexts	Unmet Need for the  Utilization of Women’s Labor: Findings from Three Impoverished Communities in Outer Beirut	This paper examines cause-specific labor force non-participation among women living in three impoverished communities in the outskirts of Beirut, Lebanon. It uses an expanded labor force utilization framework, separating the socially discouraged from other labor non-participants. This study is based on data from a 2699 households, carried out in 2002. A multinomial logit model is then fitted to the data in order to uncover the impact of individual and household characteristics on the socially discouraged group as well as women labor force participation. The focus is on covariates pertaining to both women and their spouses, but several human-capital, demographic and socio-economic factors are also included. Our findings overall indicate a strong influence of social and demographic factors on discouragement. These include residence, marital status, households with children and experience. Surprisingly, education of head and women, presence of children and income have no noticeable influence on social discouragement.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Rozette	 Jurdi	Shireen	 Assaf
2008	167	Gender and Labor Force Participation in Different National Contexts	Indian Women in IT sector: Beginning to Reverse Gender Discrimination?	A partial reversal of the culture of female devaluation is currently emerging among young women from the urban middle class employed in India's high-tech sector. India has a very large middle class – estimated as more than 200 million - making it a significant and crucial segment that can act as a harbinger for social change. Studies on IT sector in India have not adequately considered the important social impacts of this new development on the culture of daughter devaluation. There are far-reaching implications for gender equality and social change when young women find opportunities to improve their financial autonomy, mobility and social acceptance in a male dominated society. As part of this transition the old concept of ‘male breadwinner’ is slowly giving way to ‘gender equity model’ of family. This may have wider socio-cultural implications, at least for upgrading the image of daughters in the minds of their parents.	Alice	 W. Clark	T.V.	 Sekher
2008	167	Gender and Labor Force Participation in Different National Contexts	Women's Employment in Post-Socialist Poland: A Barrier to or a Precondition for Childbearing?	We model interdependencies between fertility and women's employment in post-socialist Poland. After 1989 this country experienced a rapid decline in fertility and employment. Since finding and maintaining employment became difficult and the state limited its support for families it has been hypothesised that women postpone childbearing until they find a job. If this is the case one can expect that fertility intentions are positively correlated with long-term plans on the involvement into employment. This hypothesis is tested by simultaneous estimation of three hazard models: transition to birth, employment entry and employment exit. Our results reveal a strong conflict between fertility and women's work. On the other hand, they indicate that women self-select themselves into work prior to birth which suggests that they view employment as necessary for family formation. The question that remains to be answered is whether this behaviour is due to economic reasons or a desire for self-accomplishment.	Anna	 Matysiak
2008	167	Gender and Labor Force Participation in Different National Contexts	How Much Does it Cost To Stay at Home?: Career Interruptions and the  Gender Wage Gap in France	We investigate the extent to which children have direct and indirect effects in the gender wage gap in France. We look at men’s and women’s returns to experience, and penalties associated to unemployment and time out of the labour market. We find that there is no gender differential in returns to work experience, but a penalty attached to time out of the labour market which affects only women. We don’t find any direct negative impact of children on women’s current hourly wage at the mean, and a positive impact at some points of the wage distribution. We find, for a sub-sample of men and women aged from 39 to 49, that the wage gap between men and women who have never interrupted their participation in the labour force is entirely “unexplained”, while the wage gap between women who have never interrupted and women who have had interruptions is entirely “explained”.	Sophie	 Ponthieux	Dominique	 Meurs	Ariane	 Pailhe
2008	168	Religion, Contraception, and Fertility	Religious Influences on American Opinion about Family Planning	Although religion is an important influence on a variety of social attitudes, the relationship between religion and views on family planning remains largely unexplored. Using data from a nationally-representative survey (N=1,500), we examine the influence of religious attendance and identification on family planning attitudes. Higher religious attendance is linked to less favorable opinions about contraception. Catholic affiliation is not consistently associated with family planning opinion, and we find mixed results for conservative Protestants. Born again and fundamentalist Christians have less positive opinions about contraception, generally, whereas evangelical identity is linked to negative views on family planning policy. These findings contribute to knowledge about the relationship between religion and family planning attitudes and the broader social influences of religious self-identification.	Jennifer	B. Barrett	Christopher	G. Ellison	Clifford	 Grammich
2008	168	Religion, Contraception, and Fertility	Explaining Increases in Non-Marital Births: Cohort Effects of Childhood Religion and Family Structure on Non-Marital Conceptions and Shotgun Weddings	This paper considers the effects of childhood religious attendance and family structure on two stages of having a non-marital birth -- having a non-marital conception and having a shotgun wedding among those experiencing a non-marital conception -- for five cohorts of American women using data from the 1988 and 1995 waves of the National Survey of Family Growth. Results show a large negative association between growing up in a two-parent family and conceiving outside of marriage and a large positive association between growing up in a two-parent family and having a shotgun wedding among those experiencing a non-marital conception. Although weekly religious attendance has weaker and less consistently significant effects on the risk of having a non-marital conception and having a shotgun wedding, it appears that growing up religious also diminished the probability of having a non-marital birth somewhat for some recent birth cohorts of American women.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2008	168	Religion, Contraception, and Fertility	Subjective and Objective Measures of Religiosity and Fertility Choices in Developed Countries	I use the ISSP98 survey Religion II to study the relationship between objective and subjective measures of religiosity and fertility behavior. I extend some of my previous analysis for the case of Spain to a larger set of countries (13 European, USA, Australia, New Zealand and Canada). I show that the positive relation between mass attendance and fertility among Catholics holds in a sample that includes those who have ever been baptized regardless of the background of their spouses.   Further I explore subjective measures of religiosity in the ISSP and its relation to the objective measures of mass attendance and prayer.   Beyond Catholics, I extend the analysis to mainline and conservative Protestants a majority in some of the countries in the sample. I study whether the relation between religiosity and fertility holds stronger in countries with religious competition than in those with a state church.	Alicia	 Adsera
2008	168	Religion, Contraception, and Fertility	The Influence of Changes in Religious Preference on Contraceptive Use and Fertility: A Longitudinal Study of the Kassena-Nankana of Northern Ghana	Religious preference is undergoing major changes in rural Sahelian Africa, with profound consequences for customs that are grounded in traditional belief systems. This study examines the influence of religious preference on contraceptive use and fertility among the Kassena-Nankana of Northern Ghana. Analysis of longitudinal data for women in 1995 and 2003 shows that 61 percent of women switched their religion with shifts from traditional religion to Christianity being dominant. Further, more women switched their religion than men. Regression results show that compared to non-switchers, switching from traditional religion to Christianity or Islam is associated with increased contraceptive use and decreased fertility. The fact that religious preferences are changing more rapidly among women than men may have social consequences for the status of women, signaling a trend toward greater autonomy in the family and new aspirations, values, and behaviour as evidenced by the proportion of people adopting contraceptives.	Henry	V Doctor	James	F. Phillips	Evelyn	 Sakeah
2008	169	Gender and Health Risks over the Life Course	Timing to Retire – Timing to Die?  A Prospective Cohort Study on The Effects of Early Retirement and Long Term Survival.	We undertake a prospective cohort study to assess the selective and protective impact of early retirement on life expectancy by accounting for age, sex, health and social status at retirement. Results are based on 130 703 members of Gmünder Ersatzkasse (GEK), a German compulsory health insurance, who retired at the age 50-65 between January 1990 and December 2004. We find significantly higher mortality risks among pensioners with reduced earning capacities than among old-age pensioners who either exited from the labour market at 56-60 or 61-65 for both sexes. However, people who retire early and have no health problems do not experience lower long term survival than people who retire late. For women, early retirement even lowers their mortality risks significantly by 25%.  Pension reformers should take these selective and protective differences of early retirement into consideration when cutting back pension programs and increasing retirement age.	Hilke	 Brockmann	Rolf	 Mueller
2008	169	Gender and Health Risks over the Life Course	Gender Difference in the Long-Term Impacts of Famine	There is an increasing literature that examines the association between restricted fetal or early childhood growth and the incidence of diseases in adulthood. Little is known, however, about gender difference in this association. We assess the impact of nutritional deficiency in early life caused by the Chinese Great Famine on famine survivors, in terms of health and economic welfare, paying special attention to gender differences. We find evidence of multiple, significant negative impacts for female  but not male  survivors, and the gender differences are statistically significant. Furthermore, based on evidence that supports the association between famine severity and gender-specific mortality, we show that the selection bias due to differences in mortality plausibly explains over two-thirds of the documented gender difference in the long-term health of famine survivors.	Ren	 Mu	Xiaobo	 Zhang
2008	169	Gender and Health Risks over the Life Course	Missing Men: The Direct Mortality Impacts of Firearm Violence in Colombia, 1979-2005	Colombia has been characterized by civil violence throughout much of the twentieth century, and the burden of excess mortality attributable to this violence has been borne by young men. Using sex-specific census and vital registration data for the period 1979-2005 and a multiple-decrement life table approach, we quantify the impact of firearm violence on differential male mortality. Colombia shows higher mortality rates in men than women at most ages; in certain departments, however, a pronounced accident hump between the ages of 15 and 35 contributes to over a decade of expected life lost. At age 20, aggregate male mortality is approximately 40% greater than female mortality at the same age. Despite recent reductions in violence, excess male mortality remains high. We discuss the strong social implications of sustained high male mortality for (1) marriage markets, (2) family formation and dissolution, and (3) patterns of parental care.	Brodie	 Ferguson	Jorge	A Restrepo	James	H. Jones
2008	169	Gender and Health Risks over the Life Course	Can Changing Patterns in Smoking Prevalence among Women and Men Explain the Narrowing Gender Gap in Life Expectancy? A Cross-National Perspective	In this paper we analyze two hypotheses on the impact of smoking on the development of male-female life expectancy differentials. First, do period changes in smoking prevalence of women and men have a considerable impact on the gender gap in life expectancy? Secondly, is the smoking history of a cohort a strong determinant of subsequent mortality and can, thus, explain the development in the gender gap in life expectancy? Our results show no clear support  for either of the two hypotheses. In some countries (the US and partly in Austria), the period changes in smoking prevalence appear to have an impact on the gender-gap in life expectancy twenty years later. Most countries, though, do not support our initial assumption. Similarly, cohort effects seems to be instrumental in some countries. Other countries display the opposite effect, though, making general conclusions about the impact of smoking for all countries unfeasible.	Roland	 Rau	Marleen	 Dettmann
2008	170	The Immigration Process and Children's Outcomes in Origins and Destinations	Teenagers’ Education and Migration in Brazil	Migration studies have paid attention to education in several ways. First, it has been argued migrants are likely to be selected among the sending population, education being one of the variables differentiating them. Both migrants’ higher and lower than the average education level have been analyzed. Second, the effect of parents’ migration on children’s education has been studied. Third, the educational achievement of the second generation has been considered. Most of the studies have focused on international migration. The effect of internal migration on children and teenagers’ education has been less analyzed. This is the topic this study focuses on. Specifically, the extent to which internal migration in Brazil affects teenagers’ educational achievement is analyzed, using 2000 census data.	Viviana	 Salinas
2008	170	The Immigration Process and Children's Outcomes in Origins and Destinations	Children's Living Arrangements Associated with Mexico-U.S. Migration	We examine the influence of own and parents’ migration on the living arrangements of first- and second-generation immigrant Mexican-American children, considering coresidence with parents, extended family members, and nonrelatives. We extend our analysis to both sides of the border, using census microdata in Mexico and census and large-scale survey data in the United States. We find that, while living apart from both parents is rare, living additionally with extended family members is common, especially among Mexican-resident children. Mexican-American children in the United States are also more likely than non-Mexican children to live in extended families, and households with recent immigrants are more likely to be extended. We relate these findings to theories of parent preferences for extended family living and theories of the constraints and networks associated with migration.	Berna	M. Torr	Michael	 Rendall
2008	170	The Immigration Process and Children's Outcomes in Origins and Destinations	Immigration and Low Birthweight in the U.S.: The Role of Time and Timing	In the growing literature on the “epidemiologic paradox” among immigrants, particularly of Hispanic origin, and on the effects of acculturation or assimilation processes on health, there is surprisingly little attention to the role of immigrants’ age at arrival as a potential determinant of these adaptive processes and subsequent health outcomes. There is also a lack of explicit recognition that observed health effects of “duration in the US” in cross-sectional studies may actually be reflecting the effects of age at arrival. We pool two birth cohort studies and link birth certificate and survey data to create a uniquely nationally representative sample of over 13,000 births and examine the associations between low birthweight and mother’s nativity, duration in the US, and age at immigration. Our findings support our hypothesis that, due to critical developmental periods in adolescence, immigration before or during this life stage may be associated with worse health outcomes.	Lisa	M. Bates	Julien	O. Teitler
2008	170	The Immigration Process and Children's Outcomes in Origins and Destinations	The Enrollment and Attainment of Hispanic Youth in the New Settlement Areas	Since 1990 the Hispanic population has dispersed to nontraditional places. Using Census data, this analysis documents the growth of Hispanic adolescents in new settlement areas versus traditional Hispanic metros and then carefully examines the trends in some of the basic educational outcomes of Hispanic teens. Similar to white and black youth, Hispanic teens educated in traditional Hispanic areas have improved their likelihood of completing high school. There has not been comparable progress for Hispanic youth in the new settlement areas. However, the penalty for residing in a new settlement area is not confined to Hispanic youth. NonHispanics in new settlement areas also have less favorable educational outcomes than their nonHispanic counterparts in the traditional Hispanic metros. Rather than an issue of immigrant adaptation per se, the subpar outcomes of Hispanic youth in their new school communities also reflect broad, long-standing geographic disparities in education.	Richard	A. Fry
2008	171	Assortative Mating	Educational Assortative Mating and Inequality: A Test from a Latin American Perspective	I conduct a comparative analysis of educational assortative mating (EAM) in Brazil, Chile, Mexico and the US using Census data, and log-linear and log-multiplicative methods.    The objectives are to describe Latin American EAM in comparative perspective; and to explain sources of cross-country variation, with an emphasis on socioeconomic inequality.     The main findings are: Within countries, the pattern of EAM largely depends on economic inequality. Specifically, the difficulty of intermarriage between two educational categories largely depends on the economic distance (earnings gaps) between them. However, differences in EAM between countries are not related to differences in economic inequality. In particular, Brazil -- the most unequal country among those compared -- displays the lowest level of EAM.     The “Brazilian anomaly” is not accounted for by a weaker anchoring of economic inequality on educational attainment, compositional effects associated with distribution of unions between marriages and cohabitations, or exchange between racial and educational resources.	Florencia	 Torche
2008	171	Assortative Mating	Mate Selection of New Legal Immigrants: Race, Skin Color, and Education	Previous research on union formation of immigrants focus on young immigrants growing up in the United States. Little is known about immigrants who came to the U.S. as spouses of U.S. citizens. These immigrants account for one third of adults admitted to legal permanent residence every year. Who are they married to? Do the mate selection patterns differ if their U.S. citizen spouses are native born or foreign born, male or female? In this paper, we use data from New Immigrant Survey to examine these questions, with an emphasis on the main and joint effects of race, skin color, and education on assortative mating patterns among U.S. citizen-immigrant couples. We hypothesize that naturalized U.S. citizen-immigrant couples are similar in race and skin color, but are dissimilar in educational attainment. U.S.-born citizen-immigrant couples, on the other hand, are expected to have similar levels of educational attainment, but different racial and skin color combinations.	Zhenchao	 Qian	Guillermina	 Jasso
2008	171	Assortative Mating	Interethnic Marriage: The Relationships between Education, Race, and Immigrant Generation	This paper examines the effect of education on intermarriage and specifically, whether the mechanisms through which education affects intermarriage differ by immigrant generation, age at arrival, and race. We consider three main paths. First, educated people may be better able to adapt to different cultures making them more likely to marry natives. Second, educated immigrants may move out of their ethnic enclaves, again making them more likely to meet and so marry natives. Lastly, if spouse-searchers value similarities in education as well as ethnicity, then the effect of education will depend on the availability of same-ethnicity potential spouses with a similar level of education. We find evidence for all three effects. Our estimates also suggest that assortative matching is relatively more important for the native born rather than the foreign born, for the foreign born that arrived young rather than old, and for Asians rather than Hispanics.	Delia	 Furtado	Nikolaos	 Theodoropoulos
2008	171	Assortative Mating	Gendered Racial Exclusion by White Internet Daters	Acceptance by the dominant group is an important indicator of the current standing of racial groups in the U.S. hierarchy, as well as of the possibility for future assimilation. However, few researchers have addressed the gendered nature of racial exclusion by whites in dating situations. We examine the degree to which white internet daters exclude blacks, Latinos, Asians, Middle Easterners, East Indians and Native Americans as possible dates, using a sample of profiles collected off of an internet dating website. We find that white men and women most often prefer to date whites, followed by Latinos. However, white men are more likely than white women to exclude blacks as possible dates, while white women are more likely to exclude Asians. Gendered patterns of racial exclusion in dating preferences are consistent with census data on inter-cohabitation and inter-marriage, suggesting that whites’ racial preferences help shape union formation.	Cynthia	 Feliciano	Belinda	 Robnett	Golnaz	 Komaie
2008	172	Gender, Neigbors, Family and School	Neighborhood Influences and the Sexual Behavior of Young Black South Africans	Most existing research concerning neighborhood influences on young people’s behavior has been conducted in the United States, with its particular social and economic context. We examine the influence of community characteristics on the sexual behavior of young Blacks in South Africa, a transforming nation emerging from decades of institutionalized racism, and investigates whether these influences differ by gender. We find that community social disorder reduces the age of sexual debut and that concentrated disadvantage and community physical disorder increases condom non-use. Furthermore, we find that young females are more likely to begin sexual activity in neighborhoods with higher levels of social disorder and males are somewhat more likely to delay their sexual debut in neighborhoods with higher levels of collective efficacy. We discuss these results in light of previous work on neighborhood effects in the US and the backdrop of the HIV epidemic in South Africa.	Susan	M Lee-Rife	Sarah	A. Burgard
2008	172	Gender, Neigbors, Family and School	Premarital Sex and Schooling Transitions in Four Sub-Saharan African Countries	With the spread of formal schooling in sub-Saharan Africa and reduction in early marriage, more adolescents remain enrolled in school when they “come of age.” Using data from the 2004 National Survey of Adolescents in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi and Uganda, this paper investigates the timing of school exit and premarital sex among those enrolled in school at age 12. Discrete time hazards models show that girls are more likely to leave school before completing primary and secondary and, among those completing primary, less likely to progress to secondary, although those who complete primary do so at the same age or younger than boys. In general, girls appear more vulnerable to dropout once they become sexually mature and engage in premarital sex. While girls were less likely to have had premarital sex (except in Ghana), school enrollment and the timing of school entry did not consistently explain gender differences.	Ann	E. Biddlecom	Richard	 Gregory	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Barbara	S Mensch
2008	172	Gender, Neigbors, Family and School	Explaining Gender Differences in the Risk of Prevalent HIV Infection:  Analyses of the Tanzania and Côte d’Ivoire AIS	This paper seeks to identify the sources of gender disparities in risk of prevalent HIV infection through analysis of AIDS Indicator Surveys (AIS) for Côte d’Ivoire, where infected women outnumber infected men by more than two to one, and Tanzania, where HIV prevalence among women is only slightly higher than that among men. A conceptual framework that unifies principles of infectious disease epidemiology with empirical literature on risk factors for sexual transmission of HIV is used to elaborate hypotheses as to potential sources of gender disparities in HIV risk. Multilevel logistic regression is conducted to pinpoint the individual and contextual factors that yield disparate risks of HIV infection among men and women. Results indicate that, in addition to biological explanations, gender-specific risks associated with sexual behavior determine gender differences in HIV risk, and the relevant risk factors vary across the two populations with differing degrees of gender-disparity in risk.	Sara	 Hertog
2008	172	Gender, Neigbors, Family and School	Orphanhood, Gender, and HIV Infection among Adolescents in South Africa: A Mixed Methods Study	This study examines the relationship between parental death and HIV infection among South African adolescents. Prevalence of HIV and HIV risk behaviors among 8,735 young people 15-24 is assessed, utilizing a household survey from 33 communities. Survey data indicate that orphaned adolescents of both genders have higher HIV prevalence than their peers, particularly before age 20. Our study points to the important roles of both parental bereavement and non-residence with a parent in adolescent HIV risk. In addition, pathways through which orphanhood may affect HIV risk are assessed by gender, using the proximate determinants framework for factors affecting the sexual transmission of HIV. Finally, qualitative data are used to supplement survey findings by describing the gendered effects of orphanhood on HIV risk behavior in two South African communities. Repeated focus group discussions and interviews with 57 orphaned or vulnerable young people 14-19 illustrate factors influencing orphan sexual debut and partnership characteristics.	Elizabeth	F. Jackson	Sharon	 Weir	William	 Miller	Audrey	 Pettifor	Frieda	 Behets	Suzanne	 Maman
2008	173	Disability and Active Life Expectancy in Asian Populations	Studying Gender Differentials in Health Using an Active Life Expectancy Approach: The Case of Older Adults in Japan	This study has two aims: (i) examine gender differentials in total and active life expectancy (ALE) among older adults in Japan and, (ii) account for these differentials using predictor variables that represent four domains often thought to intervene in the association between gender and health - behaviours, socioeconomic characteristics, psychological characteristics, social support. The latter domain may be of particular consequence given gender differences in intergenerational ties thought to shape relationships within Asian families. Active and inactive states are defined using Activities of Daily Living. Expected years of life and active life are examined by constructing multi-state life-tables, which employ probabilities of health and mortality transitions derived from hazard rate models. Preliminary results indicate older women in Japan spend more of remaining life in inactive states, and some their disadvantage is explained by factors representing intervening domains. The discussion will highlight the implications of our findings for an aging Japan.	Angelique	 Chan	Zachary	 Zimmer
2008	173	Disability and Active Life Expectancy in Asian Populations	Changes of Type-Severity-Specific Disability-free Life Expectancies of Chinese Elderly, 1987-2006	The objective of this paper is to explore the disability-free life expectancies changed over the time period from 1987 to 2006. The first national disability survey in China was conducted in 1987. The sampling rate for this survey is 1.5% of the total population, which are 1.58 million people sampled in China. Nineteen years later, China conducted the second national disability survey in 2006. The sampling rate is 1.93% of the national population, which covered 2.53 million people in China. The proportions of disabled increased from 4.9 percent in 1987 to 6.4 percent in 2006 following the aging of the population. Using Sullivan Method, we calculate the disability-free life expectancies by type and severity of the disability of the elderly, and discuss their trends, measurement and the policy implications.	Xiaochun	 Qiao
2008	173	Disability and Active Life Expectancy in Asian Populations	Disability and Quality of Life Among Older Malaysians	This study assessed disability prevalence, and factors that predict disability and quality of life, among older community-dwelling Malaysians (ages 60+). The data source is the Mental Health and Quality of Life of Older Malaysians Survey (MHQoLOM) conducted in 2003-2005. Statistical procedures for the analyses include descriptive statistics and multivariate logistic regression. Verbrugge and Jette’s model of the disablement process was used as a conceptual frame of reference. Disability prevalence (health-related difficulty in 1+ ADL/IADL) was 22.8 percent. Increasing age, being unmarried, poor self-rated health, and functional limitations increase disability for both men and women. Indian ethnicity (compared to Malay) is associated with disability for women, and Other ethnicity, for men. Very poor self-rated health, and Indian or Chinese ethnicity (compared to Malay), are associated with lower perceived quality of life for both women and men.	Sidiah	anak John  Siop	Lois	M. Verbrugge	Tengku	Aizan Tengku Abdul  Hamid
2008	174	Variability in Race/Ethnic Classification Schemas and its Effects on Demographic Patterns	Ethnic Self-Identification Selectivity and Educational Progress among Latino Adolescents	Increased immigration from Latin America and the subsequent boom in the U.S. Latino population has brought with it controversy over how these ‘new immigrants’ are assimilating relative to Europeans from earlier waves of immigration. Empirical evidence suggests a Latino disadvantage in educational outcomes as well as intergenerational decline or stagnation. However, the fluid and dynamic nature of Latino self-identification suggests that some of these trends may be, in part, an artifact of the selective nature of Latino self-identification and ethnic attrition. This study uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and its newly released educational component, the Adolescent Health and Academic Achievement Study (AHAA), to examine whether empirical evidence of educational disadvantage among Latinos at the end of high school and intergenerational decline in educational outcomes are influenced by inconsistent reports of ethnicity between home and school and ethnic attrition among adolescents with Latino parents.	Lindsey	 Wilkinson
2008	174	Variability in Race/Ethnic Classification Schemas and its Effects on Demographic Patterns	What You See and What She Gets: Isolating the Effect of Inconsistent Racial Classification on Women's Earnings and Income	Recent studies have shown that using different measures of race results in different estimates of everything from vital rates to racial disparities in income and medical treatment. Here, instead of comparing conclusions based on different measures, we combine measures of interviewer-classified and self-reported race to examine whether differences exist in the earnings and income of people who are consistently classified compared to those who are not. Because inconsistent racial classification is not randomly distributed across the population, we use propensity-score matching techniques to ensure comparison between individuals who are similar on all other characteristics, except their racial identity and classification. Drawing on data from the 1988 National Survey of Family Growth, we find that women who self-report a race that differs from the interviewer’s report have significantly lower earnings and income than their consistently classified counterparts. This finding has implications for understanding how racial inequalities are perpetuated.	Aliya	 Saperstein	Bryan	L. Sykes
2008	174	Variability in Race/Ethnic Classification Schemas and its Effects on Demographic Patterns	Caste, Kinship and Sex-ratios In India	The population of modern India is plagued by “missing women,” but this condition has deep historical roots. In this paper, we examine the sex-ratios in India at the turn of the twentieth century by caste and language at the district-level. We index the unique caste data from the 1901 census of India using the detailed ethnographic documentation of the British officials. We find that the female to male ratio varied inversely by caste-rank, was significantly lower in the North, was lower among the northern Indo-Aryan speaking peoples and varied by geographic characteristics such as rainfall and soil conditions and was negatively correlated with the length of British rule. We suggest that these systematic variances in sex-ratios are likely to be related to the strength of women’s bargaining power within marriage and kin-group which, in turn, was correlated with variations in kinship systems and their role in the economy.	Tanika	 Chakraborty	Sukkoo	 Kim
2008	174	Variability in Race/Ethnic Classification Schemas and its Effects on Demographic Patterns	Features Explaining Fertility Variations between Ethnic Societies in Zambia	To assess ethnic fertility variations in Zambia, cluster analysis, multivariate analysis of variance and discriminant analysis are applied to Zambian anthropological and demographic data. First, using 35 anthropological dimensions (as presented in the Murdock Atlas), cluster analysis is applied to nineteen Zambian societies to derive four Zambian traditional reproductive regimes. Results show that low fertility was associated with societies that had a weak control of reproduction at community level. This suggests that these societies controlled fertility at family level therefore supporting a crucial element of the intergenerational wealth-flows theory (family nucleation). Second, using census and DHS data, fertility trends (1981-2002) for the derived traditional reproductive regimes are computed. Results confirm existence and changing patterns of Zambian ethnic fertility differentials. Lastly, multivariate analysis of variance and discriminant analysis are applied to identify present-day features underlying Zambian ethnic fertility differentials.	Kambidima	 Wotela	Tom	A. Moultrie
2008	175	Circumcision, Sexual Relationships and HIV Risk:  Africa and the U.S	Disentangling the Complex Association between Female Genital Mutilation and HIV among Kenyan Women: A Multilevel Analysis	The adverse health implications of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) are well documented in research studies. It was hypothesised by Kun (1997) that FGM increases the risk of HIV transmission. In their detailed analysis of 2003 Kenyan Demographic and Health Survey, Yount and Abraham (2007) reported that FGM is not directly associated with HIV but indirectly through several pathways. We applied multilevel analysis on the same dataset to demonstrate that there is a significant direct and positive association between FGM and HIV after controlling for the data hierarchical structure, confounding factors and interactions. Furthermore, the results show that women who had FGM and older first union partners have higher odds of being HIV positive than their counterparts; the odds of being HIV positive increase further if women reported having genital ulcer. These results suggest the underlying complex interplay of bio-behavioural and social variables in disentangling the association between FGM and HIV.	Olga	 Maslovskaya	James	 Brown	Sabu	S. Padmadas
2008	175	Circumcision, Sexual Relationships and HIV Risk:  Africa and the U.S	Relational Determinants of the Similarity in Condom Use among Adolescents and Young Adults: Analysis of Close Same-Gender Friends and Bridged Heterosexual Relationships	This study compared self-reported condom use at last sex between adolescents and their close same-gender social friends, and explored the condom use of same-gender individuals who reported having sex with the same opposite-sex partner in the three months prior to participations in the Bayview Network Study (CA), designed to examine the prevalence of STI risk behaviors and transmission patterns among adolescents between July 2000 and October 2001. The analysis of similarity in condom use included 46 female same-gender friend-dyads and 31 male same-gender friend-dyads. Statistically significant female same-gender friend effect was observed. The odds for reporting condom use of two same-gender individuals, who reported having sex with the same opposite-sex partner, were not different; however, they were determined by the reciprocity in partner nomination (unidirectional vs. reciprocal). The findings suggested the important same-gender friends’ role in adolescents’ condom use and STI prevention. Implication to the STI intervention was also discussed.	Michiyo	 Yamazaki	Jonathan	 Ellen
2008	175	Circumcision, Sexual Relationships and HIV Risk:  Africa and the U.S	Unwanted Sexual Experiences among Adolescent Males in Sub-Saharan Africa: Prevalence and Context	Unwanted sexual experiences are most frequently examined from the woman’s perspective yet these experiences happen to men as well. Unwanted sexual experiences are connected over an individual’s lifetime to demographic and health outcomes such as STI exposure, including HIV, as well as negative psychological effects that place males at risk of future negative health outcomes.1 Using a unique set of data collected in 2003-2004 in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Uganda and Malawi with 12-19 year olds via in-depth interviews and nationally-representative surveys, we present prevalence statistics on sexual coercion at debut as well as over their life course, boys’ narratives of experiencing coercive sexual intercourse experiences, and the risk and protective factors that frame boys’ vulnerability to unwanted sexual intercourse. Between 4-12% of 12-19 year old boys state that they were “not willing at all” at sexual debut and between 3-7% say that they have ever been forced to have sex.	Ann	M Moore	Nyovani	 Madise
2008	175	Circumcision, Sexual Relationships and HIV Risk:  Africa and the U.S	Circumcision and the Labor Market Consequences Of HIV in Developing Countries	Understanding the impact of HIV on economic outcomes is a vital piece of the puzzle when attempting to understand the broad demographic consequences of the AIDS epidemic. Estimating this relationship is problematic, however, as it is difficult to determine whether poverty causes HIV, or HIV causes poverty. This paper uses a household level dataset spanning ten countries and exploits a recent finding from the medical literature to identify random variation in HIV prevalence and estimate the impact of HIV on five labor market outcomes.	Christopher	 McKelvey
2009	1	Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Teen Perspectives on Healthy Romantic Relationships: Results from Focus Groups	This paper presents findings from focus groups with males and females aged 12-17 in Washington, DC, in which teens describe characteristics of healthy teen romantic relationships. We have identified four themes: (1) Teens have a rich and wide-ranging vernacular to describe relationships and their various stages; (2) Teens define healthy romantic relationships in much the same way adults and researchers do, and have fairly high expectations for their partners and relationships; (3) While teens have high expectations for relationships, they have low hopes and are not optimistic of finding such qualities in a partner (Girls stated that cheating or unfaithfulness and verbal or physical violence were typical in teen relationships.); and (4) Teens identified dimensions of healthy relationships that closely mirrored research on relationships among adults. Within each theme, we identified differences by age and gender.	Lina	 Guzman	Jennifer	 Manlove	Erum	N. Ikramullah
2009	1	Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Relationships	The Social Context of Adolescent Romantic Relationships: School and Neighborhood Influences on Adolescent Relationship Formation	In this paper, we use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to analyze the impact of U.S. adolescent’s greater social context on the formation of romantic and non-romantic sexual relationships. We hypothesize that the compositional characteristics of the two settings where most youth spend the bulk of their time (school and neighborhood) influence where adolescents meet their partners and how embedded those partners are within their social networks. We test our hypotheses using descriptive statistics and multilevel regression analysis. We find that adolescents from disadvantaged neighborhoods are more likely to have known their partners from the neighborhood than the school only, as are adolescents attending schools with greater ethnic heterogeneity. Higher neighborhood disadvantage is associated with forming relationships with more socially embedded partners and greater ethnic heterogeneity within the school is associated with forming relationships with less socially embedded partners.	Lloyd	D. Grieger	Yasamin	 Kusunoki	David	 Harding
2009	1	Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Changes in Condom Use within Adolescents' Relationships: Demographic and Relational Factors and Self-Reported Motivations for Change	Ku, Sonenstein, and Pleck's (1994) sawtooth hypothesis posits that condom use decreases within a relationship, but then increases again at the start of a new relationship. Researchers typically measure change in condom use over time by comparing condom use at first sex and most recent sex. We rely on a direct measure that asks respondents about the change in condom use over the course of their relationship. Using the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study to study recent dating relationships (N=522), we find 16% reported an increase, 33% reported a decrease, and 50% reported that their condom use stayed the same. We use multinomial logistic regression to compare groups reporting these three patterns of condom use, with demographic and relational factors as predictors. In addition, we will analyze self-reported reasons for change in condom use.	Christine	M. Flanigan	Wendy	D. Manning	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2009	1	Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Sustainability of Heterosexual Relationships among Adolescents and Young Adults: One-Year Observation of Bayview Hunter-Point Area in San Francisco, CA	The objectives of this paper are: (1) estimating the odds of sustaining heterosexual relationships over six months among adolescents and young adults; and (2) assessing the effects of perceived partner types and reciprocity in partner nomination. Data: Bayview Network Study (CA), designed to examine the prevalence of STI risk behaviors and transmission patterns among adolescents (July 2000 - October 2001). A total of 667 respondents reported 1,732 heterosexual relationships at three surveys; over 90% were observed only once; and less than 5% sustained for longer than six months. Multivariate logistic regression yielded that respondents with main partners who reported their relationships were longer than six months at their survey entry had 4.6 times the odds of sustaining the relationship in the next six months compared to those who had shorter relationships (p      	Michiyo	 Yamazaki	Jonathan	 Ellen
2009	3	Fertility Preferences, Outcomes and Trends in Africa	Determinants of the Desire to Stop Childbearing among Women in Southern Ghana: Parity Progression, Partner Effects and Situational Factors	Fertility limitation may be driven by the achievement of family size targets. Since each child is born at a different stage of the life course, however, fertility preferences may also be influenced by past reproductive, social, economic experiences and perceptions about the future. In this study, the determinants of the desire to stop childbearing were analyzed, using individual-level longitudinal data on the reproductive lives of a sample of women in southern Ghana. Using a fixed-effects logit regression technique, we modeled the impact of reproductive life cycle events, health experiences, perceptions of future household economic conditions, and spousal interactions on a woman’s preference to stop childbearing. We learned that women are most likely to want to stop childbearing at the normative ideal family size of four children. Declining health, perceptions of spousal preference conflict and economic concerns are also significant determinants of the desire to limit births.	Ivy	A. Kodzi	David	 Johnson
2009	3	Fertility Preferences, Outcomes and Trends in Africa	HIV and Fertility: Long-Term Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa	The emergence of HIV/AIDS constitutes the single largest negative health shock to the international health system over the last 50 years that has resulted in a sharp disruption of the global upward trend in life expectancy, and thus provides a natural study ground for the interactions between health and socioeconomic behavior. In this paper, we focus on the effect of HIV as a health shock on family size. Combining historical micro data from the World Fertility Surveys with the most recent rounds of the Demography and Health Surveys we find little relation between the onset of HIV and the average changes in fertility on the regional level. These results, however, mask important heterogeneity in fertility responses at the individual level that are human-capital-specific: while women with primary school or less increase their fertility in the presence of HIV, the opposite is true for women with secondary or higher education.	Guenther	 Fink	Sebastian	 Linnemayr
2009	3	Fertility Preferences, Outcomes and Trends in Africa	Eager to Talk, but Waiting for the Invitation: Expectation Mix-Up and Lack of Spousal Communication on Fertility and Family Planning in Northern Nigeria	Focus group discussions (N=48) and in-depth individual interviews (N=88) with ever married men and women of miscellaneous reproductive experiences in Kano and Jigawa states in northern Nigeria were held between December 2007 and August 2008 to investigate barriers to couple contraceptive communication. While attitudes toward spousal contraceptive communication were generally positive, there was very little evidence that respondents engaged in it. The foremost barrier to spousal contraceptive discussion was a mix-up in the expectation of couples regarding who should initiate it. Respondents commonly considered it their partners’ rather their own responsibility to initiate contraceptive communication. Strategies are urgently needed to help couples early on in their marriages, to be able to open up to each other on matters of fertility and reproduction.	Chimaraoke	0. Izugbara
2009	3	Fertility Preferences, Outcomes and Trends in Africa	Gender and the Structure of Social Networks in Ghana: Implications for Fertility Processes	Enthusiasm for the analysis of social networks in demography has increased over the last decades. However, most of the studies focus on the content of what is being exchanged in social networks. This is contrary to social network literature that provides for the study of both the content and the structure of social networks. This paper makes a contribution to filling this gap by using personal network data on men and women from six communities in Southern Ghana to build the gendered context within which the structure of social networks influences fertility attitudes. Preliminary results show that gender differences in personal networks are strong even if accounting for structural factors. Similarly, support is found for the association between the content of what is exchanged within networks and fertility attitudes of men and women. Direct effects of the structure of social networks are not found. Implications of findings are explored.	Winfred	A. Avogo
2009	4	Population, Health and Economic Development	Enhancing the Health, Social and Economic Capabilities of Highly Vulnerable Adolescents for Protection against HIV and Adverse SRH Outcomes	We present baseline findings from an intervention randomized to secondary classrooms in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. With school enrollment high here, this is an effective, replicable strategy to reach a representative group and reduce possible selection bias. The program is designed to increase capacities among vulnerable adolescents in poor HIV/AIDS-affected communities for building health, social and economic assets. Multivariate results show females who are saving are more likely to be aware of family planning methods and know that pregnancy can result from only a single sexual encounter. Males with savings are more likely to have had an HIV test and have greater chances of discussing avoiding/delaying sex with sexual partners. Females with more friends have fewer sexual partners; males with more friends are more confident in their ability to use condoms correctly. Belonging to an organization confers more confidence for both males and females in their ability to use condoms.	Kelly	 Hallman	Eva	 Roca
2009	4	Population, Health and Economic Development	Outcomes for Children Born to Teen Mothers	Teenage childbearing is generally considered a social problem with costs to the teenage mother, her child and society at large. Literature from the developed world on the outcomes of children born to teen mothers is extensive. Less is known about outcomes for these children in the developing world where nuclear families are not the norm and family support structures tend to be complex. This paper uses a rich panel data set from South Africa to investigate a range of outcomes for young adults born to teen mothers compared to those born to older mothers. The data enable us to control for a detailed set of childhood circumstances and allow the estimation of sibling fixed effects. Our sibling fixed effects model finds limited evidence of a causal relationship between negative young adult outcomes and early childbearing. We investigate whether the presence of grandparents plays an important role in protecting children against negative outcomes.	Nicola	 Branson	Cally	 Ardington	Murray	 Leibbrandt
2009	4	Population, Health and Economic Development	The Causal Effect of Early Childhood Health on Cognition in Older Children in Bangladesh	The health of young children is of importance not only for the immediate improvement in their well-being but also because of the longer-term impacts on children’s physical and cognitive development. It is believed that improvements in cognition may lead to improved labor market opportunities. Opportunities to examine the long-term consequences of early childhood health interventions in developing countries are rare due to a lack of longitudinal data on individuals who participated in a program designed for rigorous evaluation. This study takes advantage of the quasi-random placement of a family planning and early children’s health program in Bangladesh in the 1970s and 1980s to evaluate the effect on the interventions on cognitive development when the children reached adolescents. The paper compares single difference, propensity score weighting and mother fixed effects models and finds that the interventions lead to a 7-15% increase in cognition development as measured by the Mini Mental State Exam.	Tania	 Barham
2009	4	Population, Health and Economic Development	Does Fertility Influence Nutrition? The Emerging Linkages in Low and High Fertility States of India	Fertility decline is known to result in improvement in women’s and children’s health and reduction in poverty and infant mortality; however, new evidence is observable from the National Family Health Survey, 2005-2006 that overweight and obesity are the emerging concerns, particularly in those states which have achieved below-replacement-level fertility. While undernutrition and anemia continue to be the major problem in high fertility states, this paper tries to assess, based on both micro and macro evidence, the possible reverse causational effect of declining fertility on rising overnutrition. This study shows that with declining fertility, the percent age of overweight women is increasing at the same that undernourishment and anemia levels are decreasing. Analysis also demonstrates higher prevalence of overweight and obesity among low parity women of both high and low fertility states.	Shannawaz	 Mohd	Perianayagam	 Arokiasamy
2009	5	Innovative Approaches to Demographic Data Collection and Methods	A Mixed Method Approach to Sample Design	Sample designs for personal interview surveys typically rely on census geography for definitions of primary and secondary sampling units. This paper proposes an alternative approach to the definition of sampling units at a local level that combines community engagement with analysis and maps created within a GIS and illustrates this approach with examples from the definition of secondary sampling units (segments) within the National Children's Study (NCS). The NCS follows a stratified multistage cluster design. Within the 105 counties that serve as the primary sampling units, there is flexibility to incorporate community input into the definition of secondary sampling units. This paper describes the scientific and operational reasons for community involvement at this stage and draws on recent experience in three study locations in North Carolina to show how it can be done.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Allan	 Parnell	Philip	 McDaniel
2009	5	Innovative Approaches to Demographic Data Collection and Methods	Responsive Survey Design, Demographic Data Collection and Models of Demographic Behavior	Falling response rates have led survey methodologists to pioneer innovative ways to use process data (paradata) to address non-response by altering the survey design. By improving representation of reluctant respondents, responsive design also changes our understanding of substantive issues studied by demographers. Using the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) Cycle 6 we illustrate how responsive survey design can improve both demographic estimates and models of demographic behaviors based on survey data. By juxtaposing measures from regular and responsive data collection phases, we document characteristics of the general population that are systematically under-represented in surveys not taking special effort to interview reluctant respondents. Using multivariate models already established in the literature and based on NSFG data, we demonstrate how adding reluctant respondents through responsive survey design changes model estimates. Results demonstrate the wide potential of responsive survey design to improve the quality of science in demographic research based on survey data.	William	G. Axinn	Cynthia	F. Link
2009	5	Innovative Approaches to Demographic Data Collection and Methods	Statistical Tests of the Assumptions behind Respondent Driven Sampling in a Survey of Female Sex Workers in Shanghai	We carry out an empirical assessment of the assumptions underlying Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS) in the context of a survey of female sex workers (FSWs) in Shanghai. By combining knowledge of the social structure of the target population with probability models implicit in the RDS methodology, we construct explicit hypothesis tests for the appropriateness of the assumptions behind the RDS methodology. This work is a component of a larger project titled “Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks and STDs in China,” which focuses on the social and behavioral determinants of HIV and other STDs in China, given a background of rapidly changing social norms and behaviors, a rising incidence of STDs and concerns that HIV will soon spread from high-risk groups to the general population.	William	Whipple  Neely	Giovanna	 Merli	Feng	 Tian
2009	5	Innovative Approaches to Demographic Data Collection and Methods	Fertility Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa: Comparing Own-Children Method and Birth History Estimates	This study compares fertility estimates from birth histories and the own children technique using 50 Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs) data sets for 25 Sub-Saharan African countries. The two methods are fundamentally different. The former focuses on women and their maternity histories while the latter uses children on the household roster. Birth histories – traditionally used by DHSs – bear certain inherent shortcomings that hinder full and accurate fertility accounting. The own children method is prone to distortions due to age misreporting, migration and child fosterage. The results show that, the differences in certain features of fertility notwithstanding, the two methods generally give comparable estimates. However, the greatest strength of the own children method remains its ability to provide un-truncated fertility trends. Nonetheless, the estimates will reflect distortions related to migration of women and children, particularly from adoption, which can be substantial in the wake of high HIV/AIDS prevalence in the sub-region.	Michael	 Levin	Collins	 Opiyo
2009	6	Sexuality and STIs	Better than Nothing or Savvy Risk-Reduction Practice?  The Importance of Withdrawal	Withdrawal is sometimes referred to as the contraceptive method that is “better than nothing,” and both family planning advocates and lay people often dismiss its potential effectiveness. In spite of skepticism, pregnancy failure rates from withdrawal closely parallel those of male condoms, and the National Survey of Family Growth has documented a substantial increase in withdrawal use since 1982. We review the current limited knowledge about withdrawal, and then draw on multiple qualitative and quantitative data sets to analyze the nature of withdrawal use in the U.S. Based on this work, we suggest that estimates of unprotected sex may be overestimated, but that many “condom users” may be alternating condoms with withdrawal. We conclude that dismissing withdrawal as a legitimate contraceptive method is counterproductive for the prevention of pregnancy and also discourages academic inquiry into this frequently used and reasonably effective method.	Rachel	K. Jones	Julie	 Fennell	Jenny	 Higgins	Kelly	 Blanchard
2009	6	Sexuality and STIs	Sexual Behavior, STIs and the Male Sex Work Market	Male sex workers serve multiple markets: gay-identified men, heterosexually-identified men, as well as their own private sexual partners. Research on sexual behavior and STIs has noted this unique social and epidemiological position of male sex workers. To date, however, the vast majority of the scholarship is qualitative. We know little about the population size, characteristics and geography of male sex work. We assemble a rich and unique data set from the largest online male sex worker website to estimate the value of sexual behaviors, personal characteristics and safer sex practices in the male sex worker market. We find male escorts who advertise safe sex charge higher prices for services. We also find that race and sexual behavior have a strong influence on the prices charged by male sex workers. We conclude by noting how our results inform policy debates about body image, desire and receptiveness to safer sex messages in gay communities.	Trevon	D. Logan
2009	6	Sexuality and STIs	Arousal Loss Associated with Condoms and Risk of Pregnancy: Implications for Women's and Men's Sexual Health	Few studies have examined arousal loss associated with either condoms or the risk of unintended pregnancy, let alone their associations with sexual risk practices. Internet survey data (2,399 men; 3,210 women) captured arousal profiles related to condoms and unintended pregnancy. Chi square tests and regression analyses gauged associations between arousal profiles, unprotected sex in the last year, and lifetime experience of unintended pregnancy. Many respondents reported arousal loss related to both condom use (35%) and risk of unintended pregnancy (45%). As expected, condom-associated arousal loss was positively associated with unprotected sex, and pregnancy-associated arousal loss was negatively associated with unintended pregnancy. Surprisingly, condom arousal loss was more strongly associated with unprotected sex among women, whereas pregnancy arousal loss was more protective against unintended pregnancy among men. Given arousal profiles' potential contributions to sexual risk-taking, they should be integrated into sexual health behavioral models, research and programming.	Jenny	 Higgins	Amanda	 Tanner	Erick	 Janssen
2009	6	Sexuality and STIs	The Correlates and Consequences of Sexual Minority Status Trajectories on Substance Abuse and Sexually Transmitted Infections: A Longitudinal Analysis	Sexual minority adolescents have been shown to have higher rates of substance abuse and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) than their non-sexual minority peers. These findings are often limited, however, as they are based on small, cross sectional samples. This paper addresses these limitations by examining the correlates and consequences of sexual minority status trajectories on substance abuse and STIs. I find that at different points in time, different sexual minority status trajectories are associated with increased risk of substance abuse and STI diagnosis. This research makes important contributions to the literature by identifying previously ignored sub-populations with particularly high risks of both substance abuse and STI diagnosis. Further, I illuminate several important family, neighborhood, school and individual factors that mediate the relationship between sexual minority status and substance abuse and STIs.	Bethany	 Everett
2009	7	Measurement and Estimates of Cohabitation	Living Apart Together at Parents Home (LATAP): Union Transition in the Mediterranean	Demographic research defines the transition to union primarily on the base of legal acts or residential moves. The exception, represented by the recent focus on unmarried couples living apart together, has been discussed only for individuals who left the parental home. This paper defines a new type of couple living arrangement, “living apart together at parents’ home” (LATAP), concerning individuals in a couple relationship, who have not left the parental home. Drawing on a large set of 75 semi-structured interviews collected in Italy in 2005-206, we specify the events marking the transition to LATAP and how LATAP shapes the timing and forms of subsequent co-residential partnerships. By explicitly defining LATAP, we put attention on a living arrangement that is not only common (even though neglected by current statistics) but also key to understanding union dynamics in countries with high incidence of long-lasting co-residence between parents and children.	Laura	 Bernardi
2009	7	Measurement and Estimates of Cohabitation	Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Couples in the American Community Survey: The Role of Misreporting, Miscoding and Misallocation	The past quarter century has seen a large amount of research on the demographic characteristics and economic decisions of gay and lesbian Americans. The majority of the nationally representative research on same-sex couples in the United States uses the U.S. Census and American Community Surveys as their data source. We utilize differences in data collection methods in the American Community Survey (ACS), 2005-2007 to explore the role of misallocation in the identified same-sex unmarried partner sample. By comparing demographic and economic characteristics over the entire distribution of responses, we show a significant portion of identified same-sex households are likely incorrectly allocated opposite-sex married couples. Based on our analysis, we provide empirical guidance to researchers interested in obtaining accurate demographic and economic characteristics of same-sex households from the U.S. Census and ACS. For completeness, we also test the robustness of our findings using the PUMS 2000 Census data.	Michael	D. Steinberger	Gary	J. Gates
2009	7	Measurement and Estimates of Cohabitation	Counting Same-Sex Couples: Official Estimates and Unofficial Guesses	When editing Census Bureau data since 2000, in same-sex married couple households, the respondent reported as the spouse was changed to the unmarried partner of the householder. Until 2004, no state granted marriage licenses to same-sex couples in the United States. However, marriages between same-sex couples have been legal in Massachusetts since 2004, in Connecticut since 2008, and briefly in California in 2008, thus creating differences in how respondents report data and how data are shown in Census Bureau publications. We will discuss the history of these editing decisions and present “unofficial” estimates of the numbers of respondents who reported themselves as same-sex married couples in Census 2000 and in the American Community Survey during the transitional periods when states began to legalize same-sex marriages. Finally, we will present some general characteristics of married opposite-sex couples, unmarried opposite-sex couples, and unmarried same-sex couples by their reporting status.	Martin	 O'Connell	Daphne	A. Lofquist
2009	7	Measurement and Estimates of Cohabitation	A Portrait of U.S. Cohabiting Families: New Data from the Current Population Survey	In this paper, we will use an important new source of cohabitation data to provide a current picture of the levels and characteristics of cohabiting households. In 2007, the Current Population Survey (CPS) introduced a new measure that identifies all cohabiting partners in a household, not simply the ”unmarried partners” identified in the relationship to household head question. The CPS now also now links children with co-resident parents and identifies the type of parental relationship (step, biological, adopted). These new variables from CPS provide critical information on U.S. families and provide an important baseline for studying trends in cohabitation as they develop. In addition to providing a snapshot of cohabiting families in 2007 and 2008, we will also analyze the impact of implementing the direct measure of cohabitation, by examining the differences between unmarried partnerships, unions and the types of cohabiting couples previously missed in the CPS.	Sheela	 Kennedy	Catherine	A. Fitch
2009	8	Migration and Neighborhood Effects	Do Immigrants Religiously Assimilate? Evidence from Western Europe, the United States and Canada	Although a number of studies have examined immigrant assimilation among various life domains, religion has been less evaluated within an assimilation framework. Using immigrant survey data from Western Europe, the United States, and Canada, frequency of immigrant religious attendance is compared to religious attendance levels within the immigrant’s host society. A consistent, positive relationship is found to exist among all data sets including longitudinal data from Canada. Therefore, the results confirm the religious assimilation hypothesis in that immigrants do religiously assimilate to the host society’s religious attendance patterns.	Phillip	 Connor
2009	8	Migration and Neighborhood Effects	Ethnic Enclaves and the Earnings of Immigrants	There is a large literature in sociology concerning the implications of immigrants’ participation in ethnic enclaves for their economic and social well-being. In this paper, we examine the economic outcomes of immigrants working in ethnic enclaves as compared to those working in the mainstream economy. The study utilizes the newly available data from the New Immigrant Survey (NIS) to provide empirical answers to some of the most pressing questions in the literature on ethnic enclaves. The NIS is particularly attractive for our research aims. First, it provides adequate coverage of even smaller immigrant groups. Second, it offers a wide range of variables, including characteristics of respondents’ employers, job characteristics, educational attainment and language ability. Third, it provides detailed geographic locations for the immigrants themselves.	Yu	 Xie	Margaret	 Gough
2009	8	Migration and Neighborhood Effects	Migration and Voting Patterns: Exploring the Linkages in Two Migrant Communities in Ghana	Internal migration is bringing about not only increases in Ghana’s urban population, but also increases in migrant proportions in urban communities. In their destination communities migrants contribute to socioeconomic development and form a critical mass which may be harnessed for development. As a result, increasingly many political parties are making electoral fortunes in some migrant-dominated communities. Yet despite the growing importance of migration, the impact of mobility and migration processes on voting behaviour and patterns has received scant attention. Using Census data, this paper analyses trends in the composition and growth of two migrant communities in the Greater Accra Region, Nima and Ashaiman and links these trends to voting behavior and patterns in the two communities. It examines the links between location, space and political orientation and recommends the need to examine the spatial context of voting patterns and the role that migration plays in determining its outcome.	Mariama	 Awumbila	Samuel	 Agyei-Mensah
2009	8	Migration and Neighborhood Effects	Neighborhood Context of Reception and HIV Risks among Latino Immigrants in Carrboro/Durham, NC	This paper builds on social disorganization theory to formulate and test a multilevel model of HIV risks, namely use of sex workers, among Latino immigrants in Durham, NC. Data for the analysis come from 1,466 face-to-face interviews with Latino migrants from 32 apartment complexes in Durham. We demonstrate that risk behaviors, as well as other social disadvantages, are directly connected with individual and neighborhood processes of social disorganization and community attachment. At the individual level, time in the U.S. alters immigrants’ propensities to engage in risk behaviors. At the neighborhood level, factors such as a highly unbalanced gender composition, large share of recent migrants, concentration of socially isolated individuals, and visible indicators of disorder such as littering are all associated with heightened exposure to risk behaviors. As a result, HIV risks concentrate in well-defined neighborhoods; implications for public health interventions are discussed.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2009	9	Infant Mortality	Evaluation of the Impact of the Mother and Infant
Health Project on Maternal and Infant Health Outcomes in Ukraine	This paper exploits a unique opportunity to evaluate the impact of improvement in the quality of prenatal care and labor and delivery services on maternal and infant mortality and morbidity in Ukraine. Since basic medical care has been universally available in Ukraine through the Mother and Infant Health Project (MIHP), implementation of evidence-based medical technologies allows us to address quality rather than quantity effects of medical care. Employing program evaluation methods, we find that the administrative units (rayons) participating in MIHP have exhibited larger decline in both maternal and infant morbidity as well as infant mortality compared to the control rayons. Among the infant health characteristics, MIHP impact is most pronounced for postneonatal infant mortality and infant morbidity resulting from deviations during the perinatal period. As for maternal health, MIHP is most effective at combating anemia, maladies of blood circulation and thyroid gland complications. The analysis suggests that the effect seems to be due to early attendance at antenatal clinics, lower percentage of C-sections and greater incidence of normal deliveries.	Olena	 Nizalova	Maria	 Vyshnya
2009	9	Infant Mortality	Infant Mortality in Kyrgyzstan before and after the Breakup of the Soviet Union	There is much uncertainty about changes over time in infant and child mortality in former Soviet Central Asia, especially since the break-up of the Soviet Union. In this paper, we examine the extent to which children in Kyrgyzstan have been affected during the post-Soviet health crisis, by examining whether recorded declines in infant and child mortality are real or artifactual. Using a variety of data sources and methods, we find overwhelming evidence that, contrary to previous assessments, actual levels of infant and child mortality in Kyrgyzstan, which were quickly declining during the 1980s, have abruptly stalled since 1991, and have even increased in some instances. The implication of this research is that the nature of the health crisis in former Soviet Central Asia is fundamentally different from that in Russia. We discuss the possible factors explaining these differences and the implications for health policy in the region.	Michel	 Guillot	So-jung	 Lim
2009	9	Infant Mortality	Factors Associated with Infant Mortality in a Rural Setting in South Africa	Studies of risk factors and causes of infant mortality (IM) present the opportunity to identify intervention programs appropriate in different populations in an attempt to meet the World Health Organization Millennium Development Goals. The aim of the study was to determine factors associated with (IM) in a rural setting for children born between 1998 and 2002, in the Agincourt Health and Demographic Surveillance Site (AHDSS) using survival analysis on 10,496 children born between January 1, 1998 and December 31, 2002. Results from this study suggest that (IM) was associated with biological factors, e.g., breastfeeding duration and birth weight and health-seeking behaviour of parents such as utilization of under-5 programs in clinics. Proxies for socioeconomic status such as education, marital and refugee status of the mother were associated with IM. However, the effects of these factors differed significantly according to whether mothers were either pregnant for the first time or had been pregnant before.	Akeem	T. Ketlogetswe	Kathleen	 Kahn
2009	9	Infant Mortality	Do New Interventions Influence Neonatal Mortality? Evidence from Recent Population-Based Surveys	Neonatal mortality rates continue to be high in the developing world and their fraction over infant and childhood mortality increases, due to faster progress in the survival of older infants. There is renewed interest in interventions such as provision of thermal care, early postnatal care to mother and newborn, and counseling on health care to mothers. Questions about these interventions have recently been added to Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs) in five Asian countries: Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nepal and the Philippines, providing an opportunity to analyze their associations with neonatal mortality. Results indicate associations exist between mothers’ perceived size of their babies, birth weight, receipt of postpartum care, use of a sterilized delivery kit, wrapping of the baby after birth, giving mothers maternal and infant care advice, and reduced levels of neonatal mortality. These associations merit further investigation for their potential to contribute to policy design in this crucial area.	Alfredo	L. Fort	Monica	 Kothari	Noureddine	 Abderrahim
2009	10	Empowerment, Agency and Gender Dynamics	His and Her Relationship Quality: Effects on Childbearing	This study examines the influence of partner relationship quality on childbearing. We are innovative in using relationship quality reports from both partners, drawing on the first and second wave of the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study. This enables us to investigate what happens when partners have disagreeing perceptions of the relationship. A second focus is on the direction of the effect of relationship quality on fertility. We pose a new hypothesis, predicting that medium level relationship quality results in the highest rates of childbearing. Our results indicate that only women's perceptions of relationship quality influence the likelihood of a first birth, whereas women's and men's perceptions affect second births. We do not find unique effects of disagreeing perceptions of relationship quality; each partner’s perceptions have an independent effect. Women with medium levels of relationship quality are most likely to have a(nother) child, whereas the effect of  relationship quality for men is positive.	Arieke	J. Rijken
2009	10	Empowerment, Agency and Gender Dynamics	The Quality of Family Relationships and Its Effect on Women’s Agency in India	Empowering women is seen as both a development goal in itself and a way to improve the health and broader well-being of families. However, the family context of women’s agency has not been adequately addressed. The quality of family relationships – particularly positive aspects, like affection and support – may be an important determinant of women’s agency. Using the Women’s Reproductive Histories Survey, I find that women with higher quality family relationships do have greater agency. Specifically, women in nuclear families score higher on an agency index when they see their natal families more often and have closer relationships with their husbands. Similarly, women in joint families who have closer relationships with their husbands and fewer difficulties with their in-laws have greater agency. Further, the size of these effects are often just as large, if not larger, than more commonly discussed sources of agency, such as education and age.	Keera	 Allendorf
2009	10	Empowerment, Agency and Gender Dynamics	Women’s Empowerment across the Life Course in Madhya Pradesh, India: The Influence of Time-Varying and Fixed-Time Covariates	Women’s empowerment both influences and is influenced by family formation processes. Yet, most studies describe empowerment as a fixed attribute, ignoring variations across the life course. This paper examines its dynamic changes over the life course. It uses retrospective data from a representative sample of 2,444 married women in Madhya Pradesh, India, that captures reproductive events, household circumstances, and empowerment (mobility, spending decision-making, violence) for each of 11,309 pregnancy intervals from marriage until the time of survey. In a structural model, I analyze the influence of initial empowerment resources and socio-demographic determinants (education, spousal age gap, age at marriage) with time-varying determinants (childbearing pressures, family size, sex composition) of women’s empowerment at marriage and each pregnancy interval to the time family formation is complete. I find that initial empowerment resources enhance initial empowerment, and that women’s final empowerment is determined by their family formation and initial empowerment, but not initial empowerment resources.	Kerry	 MacQuarrie
2009	10	Empowerment, Agency and Gender Dynamics	Measurement of Women’s Empowerment in Rural Bangladesh	Women’s empowerment is often described as a key factor in the well-being of women and their households, and as such, has been quantified, measured and described in a variety of ways. It is a dynamic process that cannot be observed directly, but through the use of proxies and indicators can be approximated. Empowerment is very context specific, and in a predominantly Islamic society with high levels of illiteracy and poverty, the indicators used to measure global dimensions of empowerment are very different from those applicable in a Western context. This paper measures empowerment of rural women in Bangladesh with a number of selected indicators and examines their distribution with data from 128 villages where an NGO health and microcredit study is ongoing. A framework is presented, and descriptive data on each of the dimensions and covariates of empowerment are illustrated.	Simeen	 Mahmud	Nirali	M. Shah	Stan	 Becker
2009	11	Health Disparities among Immigrants	Do Mexican Immigrants Import Social Gradients in Health to the U.S.?	Greater educational attainment is consistently associated with lower mortality rates and better health behaviors in the U.S.: the well-known social gradient in health. However, recent research suggests that Mexican adults in the U.S. have weak or nonexistent gradients, in contrast to steep gradients for non-Hispanic whites. Healthy migrant and acculturation hypotheses have not been persuasive in explaining this finding. We propose a third hypothesis: Could the relative weakness of social gradients in health observed among Mexican-origin adults in the U.S. be explained simply by weaker gradients in the sending population? We test this “imported gradients” hypothesis with data from two large nationally representative data sets: the U.S. National Health Interview Survey and the Mexican National Health Survey. We compare the gradients in smoking and obesity for recently-arrived Mexican immigrants in the U.S. to gradients in high-migration regions of Mexico. Results generally support the imported gradients hypothesis.	Alison	M. Buttenheim	Noreen	 Goldman	Anne	 Pebley	Chang	Y. Chung
2009	11	Health Disparities among Immigrants	Health Selectivity and SES Gradients in Mexico–U.S. Migration at the Ecological Level	The Hispanic Health Paradox potentially implies that migrants are self-selected in terms of health. At the same time, Mexican migrants tend to have weaker SES gradients in health. A potential explanation consistent with these stylized facts implies higher selection from those with lower SES. Alternatively, given that the distribution of both health and SES vary considerably across Mexico, migrant selectivity could also be a result of selection at the ecological level. As studies directly comparing the health status of migrants and non-migrants have only estimated average effects and not distinguished this variation, we use data from the Mexican Family Life Survey to analyze the association between Mexico-U.S. migration and a range of health measures while considering the role of ecological conditions in origins. We also explore whether urban-rural and regional variation in migration, health and educational attainment help explain the weaker SES-health gradient of foreign-born Mexicans in the U.S.	Fernando	 Riosmena	Jeffrey	A. Dennis
2009	11	Health Disparities among Immigrants	Black Immigration and the Health of Adults: Does Country of Origin Matter?	There is limited research on the health of black immigrants. Recent research suggests that black immigrants from majority black regions of the world have better health than black immigrants from majority white regions of the world. However, these studies suffer from relatively small samples of black immigrants and limited data on the country of origin for black immigrants. Using data on specific country of origin taken from the 2000 Census of Population, the American Community Survey, and the March Current Population Survey, this study analyzes the importance of the racial context of an immigrant’s home country. The analysis in this study finds limited support for this argument. The results suggest that most of the differences in health among black immigrants are explained by health selection or country-specific differences in health production.	Tod	 G. Hamilton
2009	11	Health Disparities among Immigrants	The Health of U.S. Immigrants from the Former
Soviet Union: A Puzzling Case	Since 1970, more than one million individuals from the former Soviet Union (FSU) immigrated to the United States. Using data from the U.S. Census, the National Health Interview Survey, and the Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Study, we provide the first comprehensive study of the determinants of health in this immigrant group. We find that older FSU-born immigrants report considerably higher levels of disability and poorer overall self-rated health compared to older U.S.-born whites and most other major immigrant groups. Harmful behaviors (smoking, heavy alcohol use), obesity and diagnosed medical conditions do not explain the poorer health of this group relative to U.S.-born whites. Hence, the relatively poor reported levels of health among FSU-born immigrants remain unexplained. Additionally, older U.S. Russian-born immigrants are better off with respect to self-reported disability and health-related behaviors compared to the Russian population, although the immigrant group reports considerably poorer self-rated health compared to their sending population.	Neil	 Mehta
2009	12	Life Course Perspectives on Aging	Do Childhood Circumstances Predict Adult Biomarkers?	It is well known that childhood circumstances affect adult self-reported health, specific chronic diseases, disability and mortality. In this paper we address the question: do childhood circumstances affect mid-life biologic risk factors for disease? We specifically consider as outcomes, levels of glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and high-density cholesterol (HDL) as measured in the 2006 Health and Retirement Study. Our approach is grounded in a life course perspective. We adjust for current demographic, health and socioeconomic variables. We find that father’s education and being in poor health as child predict the risk of having unfavorable HDL levels above age 50, even after controlling for current SES characteristics. Mother’s education is strongly associated with HbA1c: respondents with better educated mothers are less likely to have elevated levels of HbA1c, an association that remains statistically significant after accounting for current SES and health characteristics.	Iliana	V. Kohler	Beth	J. Soldo
2009	12	Life Course Perspectives on Aging	Understanding the Socioeconomic Determinants of Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Obesity Using a Life Course Perspective	Adult obesity is a major public health concern in the United States given the positive association between obesity and a number of chronic diseases. Of equal importance are the stark social inequalities in obesity. Among women, blacks and Hispanics have a much higher risk of obesity compared to whites. This paper uses the 1995 Study of Midlife in United States to examine the extent to which socioeconomic status (SES) across the life course accounts for obesity disparities. Results show that early-life SES is negatively associated with adult obesity, net of adult factors, but that some of this effect operates via adult characteristics. Early-life SES accounts for some of the racial/ethnic gap in obesity. The gap is completely accounted for by adult SES, health behaviors and family structure, factors that are themselves a product of early life conditions. Thus, early-life may be an important point of intervention to reduce population obesity.	Jennifer	A. Ailshire
2009	12	Life Course Perspectives on Aging	Reconceptualizing Health as Wellness among Older Adults: Conditions, Constellations and Social Risk Factors from a Nationally Representative Probability Sample of Men and Women 57 to 85 Years of Age	This study explores the social distribution and etiology of health constellations in the general population, using data from the 2005-2006 U.S. National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP), a nationally representative probability sample of 3,005 community-dwelling women and men ages 57-85. Each constellation is characterized by a profile of conditions from multiple domains of health, with the list of indicators including self reports as well as a uniquely wide range of objective biomeasures. Latent class analysis is used to extract 14 underlying configurations from these observed data. In addition, survey-weighted multinomial logit models are used to estimate the social-structural correlates of these latent health constellations.	Edward	O. Laumann	Linda	 Waite	Aniruddha	 Das	Martha	 McClintock
2009	12	Life Course Perspectives on Aging	Parental Age at Birth and Health of the Offspring at Age 65	Parental age at birth significantly influences health and well-being of the offspring in childhood or in young adulthood. This paper examined the relationships between parental age and health of the offspring at age 65, controlling for an array of childhood and adulthood variables. Parental age was measured in two ways: at birth of the first child and at birth of the respondent. Health outcomes included general health status, number of physical symptoms, number of medical conditions and cognitive ability. Using high school graduate respondents from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (1957-2004), I found that parental age at first birth was a robust predictor for health of the offspring at age 65, and that the associations were independent of effects of parental SES, adverse childhood, one's own cognitive ability in childhood, SES, fertility and marriage. Additionally, controlling for childhood health, parental mortality, and one's own health at age 54, the relations sustained. Possible mechanisms were discussed.	Daphne	 Kuo
2009	13	Parental Work and Children’s Lives	Bad Jobs in America: The Effect of Maternal Work Conditions on Children's Cognitive Outcomes	We examine the relationship between maternal work conditions and children’s cognitive outcomes, using the 1997 and 2002 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics-Child Development Supplement and the Occupational Information Network (O*Net). Additionally, we consider whether the deleterious effects of “bad” jobs work through the quantity and type of mother-child time. The results suggest that poor work conditions (e.g., exposure to stressful social contact and physical hazards) are associated with lower verbal scores among children. More importantly, the results show that time with children may be a mechanism through which occupations influence child outcomes. Bad jobs exert negative effects because exposure to stressful and hazardous occupations (1) change the types of activities mothers perform with children and (2) change the effect of maternal time on child outcomes (For mothers exposed to poor work conditions, developmental time with children has a positive effect whereas non-development time has a negative effect).	Amy	 Hsin	Christina	 Felfe
2009	13	Parental Work and Children’s Lives	Father Involvement and Young Children’s Well-Being:  The Role of Nonstandard Parental Employment Schedules	This study addresses how father engagement with children, responsibility for care, and confidence in parenting condition the negative impact on young children when one or both parents in dual-earner families work for pay during nonstandard hours. Past research has demonstrated that behavioral development is harmed more when mothers are employed on a non-day schedule than when fathers are. To try to understand this finding, we investigate two questions. First, how is father involvement with children affected when the mother works a nonstandard schedule, and how is it affected when the father does? Second, are variations in father involvement and confidence more predictive of child well-being when a parent works nonstandard hours? To answer these questions, we make use of a nationally representative sample of young children with co-resident parents from the first three waves of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey-Birth Cohort.	Matthew	 Weinshenker	Emily	 Rosenbaum	Christopher	 Morett
2009	13	Parental Work and Children’s Lives	Making Time for Well-Baby Care: The Effect of Maternal Employment and Paid and Unpaid Time Off	The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends children receive eight well-baby visits before their second birthday. By 18 months, the average baby has received fewer than three. Cost sharing under public and private insurance is very low. The fact that compliance rates are low despite the low cost of care suggests other factors, such as time costs, may be important. This paper examines relationships between well-baby care and maternal employment status using the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Results suggest full time work may reduce the amount of care received, but there is no evidence of a significant relationship between mother's access to paid leave and receipt of care.	Mary	 Hamman
2009	13	Parental Work and Children’s Lives	Maternal Employment and Child Well-Being: Maternal Well-Being - A Possible Mediation?	Breaking ground for new social policy, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act was passed in 1996, promising to significantly change the economic landscape for low-income families across the nation. Proponents of the policy changes have argued that requiring maternal employment will increase maternal self-esteem, thereby benefiting children. Skeptics are concerned however, that these requirements may harm child well-being by increasing parental stress, limiting parental monitoring, and decreasing the time children spend with parents. Using data from the Three Cities Study, this research finds that mother’s employment status is not significantly associated with the likelihood of development delays for children ages 0-4 or with scores on the W-J Letters-Word Identification or Applied Problems for children ages 2-4. For children ages 10-14, maternal employment is a significant predictor for serious delinquency and the use of alcohol/drugs, but not school problems or psychological well-being.	Aurea	K. Osgood
2009	14	Social Programs and Economic Well-Being in Developing Countries	How Does Family Planning Promote Development? Evidence from a Social Experiment in Matlab, Bangladesh, 1977-1996	Family planning and allied public health programs focused on women’s reproductive health and child health may have long term consequences for families and economic development. Malthus expected that reducing population growth would increase wages and thereby foster economic development, whereas the Cairo Population Conference of 1994 advanced the idea that women’s health and empowerment enhanced by family planning was itself a development policy objective. Twenty years of data from a social experiment in family planning and maternal and child health in Matlab Bangladesh shows it has raised women’s wages by one-third, but has had no appreciable effect on the wages of youth or male adults, who might have been expected to benefit from the slowing of population growth. Program villages also record greater child survival, women’s health (body mass index), child schooling, and larger household physical assets, which provide parents with support in their old age as an alternative to additional children.	T.	Paul  Schultz
2009	14	Social Programs and Economic Well-Being in Developing Countries	Oportunidades to Reduce Smoking in Mexico?	This paper investigates the causal effect of Oportunidades, a federal anti-poverty program in Mexico, on the smoking behaviors of its participants. The benefits of this program include sizable cash transfers, health information sessions and schooling. Affecting smoking is not a goal of this program. However, health economics research suggests that the Oportunidades intervention could substantially change smoking among poor Mexicans. Exploiting an exogenous jump in program participation by means of a fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Design, the evidence of this paper suggests a zero local average treatment effect on smoking among adults that participated in the program an average of four years. In contrast, Oportunidades might have increased slightly the smoking rates of participant adolescents. Finally, differential treatments by sex enable isolating the income effect of Oportunidades by estimating the program's impact on adult male smoking. The findings in this paper indicate a null income effect on adult smoking.	Mabel	 Andalon Lopez
2009	14	Social Programs and Economic Well-Being in Developing Countries	Randomized Evaluation of a Program Extending Social Security Health Insurance to Informal Workers via MFIS in Nicaragua	We evaluate whether marketing the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute’s (INSS’s) health insurance program through microfinance institutions (MFIs) increased uptake among informal workers, and measure the impact of insurance on their healthcare utilization and expenditures. A baseline and follow-up survey were conducted with 2,610 market vendors in Managua. 1,386 vendors were randomized to receive six months of free insurance. Two-stage least squares regression was used to measure the impact of insurance on key outcomes. Overall, allowing workers to sign up at MFIs did not increase enrollment rates. Controlling for selection bias, there was no net increase in health care utilization, including reproductive health services. Enrollees switched away from government health centers and private hospitals into INSS-contracted clinics. Total health expenditures for insurees decreased, especially for those with chronic illnesses. Non-monetary costs were substantial enrollment barriers; policy-makers need to develop more effective approaches for encouraging vulnerable groups to voluntarily enroll in insurance.	Mursaleena	 Islam	Barbara	 Magnoni	Laurel	E. Hatt
2009	14	Social Programs and Economic Well-Being in Developing Countries	Population, Vulnerability and Poverty: A Methodological Exploration Based on Iquitos, Peru	In recent years the theme of global poverty has come to take on ever-increasing importance, as the World Bank and other multilateral and bilateral donors have come to focus more on how its development assistance can better contribute to poverty reduction in low-income countries. The focus on poverty also coincides with the UN-system focus on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), with Goal number 1 being that of reducing poverty to half the 1990 levels in each country by 2015. On the other hand, it has come to be recognized that monetary poverty, whether based on income or consumption data, does not capture key aspects of the lives of the poor. In particular, factors that they are particularly exposed to  may drop them below the poverty line, even if they are not poor. These aspects can be considered to be embodied in another term that has come to take on its own popularity, “vulnerability.”	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2009	15	Life Expectancy	Trends in Senescent Life Expectancy	The distinction between senescent and non-senescent mortality has proven very valuable for describing and analyzing age patterns of death rates. Unfortunately, standard methods for estimating these mortality components are lacking. The first part of this study discusses alternative methods for estimating background and senescent mortality among adults and proposes a simple new approach. The second part examines trends in senescent life expectancy (i.e. the life expectancy implied by senescent mortality) and compares them with trends in conventional longevity indicators between 1960 and 2000, in a group of 19 developed countries with low mortality. Senescent life expectancy for females rose at an average rate of nearly 1.5 years per decade between 1960 and 2000, in these countries. The shape of the distribution of senescent deaths by age remained relatively invariant while the entire distribution shifted over time to higher ages as longevity rose.	John	 Bongaarts
2009	15	Life Expectancy	Life Expectancy and Disparity	Alongside historic gains in life expectancy, the equalizing of life chances has fundamentally improved the human condition. Remarkably, during the past 167 years from 1840 to 2006, 106 record holders of life expectancy have been the countries enjoying the lowest life disparity, which we measure as the average remaining life expectancy at the ages when death strikes. Although saving lives at any age increases life expectancy, averting deaths at younger ages reduces life disparities while averting deaths at older ages increases inequalities in lifespan. There is an age that separates early deaths from late deaths. Countries with long life expectancy have gained this victory precisely by focusing on reductions in early deaths—and in doing so reduced their life disparity. This shows that it is not a question of either long life or low disparity: by averting early deaths, countries can achieve both.	James	W. Vaupel	Alyson	A. van Raalte
2009	15	Life Expectancy	Conventional versus Tempo-Adjusted Life Expectancy: Which is the More Appropriate Measure for Period Mortality?	This paper discusses the question: which characteristics are appropriate for a measure of period mortality should have and how are these characteristics met in conventional and tempo-adjusted life expectancy. According to our perspective, a period mortality measure should include exclusively the current mortality and should enable comparison of period-specific mortality conditions of two populations or the changes between two periods without depending on past or future trends. By using a simple population model, we show that the conventional period life expectancy does not meet these demands since it includes specific assumptions regarding future mortality, which differ between different populations. Tempo-adjusted life expectancy, however, is free of these compositional effects and thus enables the analysis and comparison of pure period-specific mortality conditions. From these considerations we also derive an interpretable definition for tempo-adjusted life expectancy. We suspect that this lack of definition could be a major reason for the general rejection of mortality tempo-adjustment.	Marc	 Luy	Christian	 Wegner
2009	15	Life Expectancy	Forecasting Life Expectancy in an International Context	Many factors influencing mortality are not limited to their country of discovery—both germs and medical advances can transcend borders. How can we consider the impact of common factors on the future mortality of different countries? We suggest using a country-aggregated measure of mortality, the best-practice line, to obtain better forecasts of life expectancy at the national level. Over the past 160 years, female best-practice life expectancy has been extraordinarily linear. This phenomenon was first observed by Oeppen and Vaupel (2002), who suggested that life expectancy could be forecasted in individual countries by considering the gap in national performance in comparison to the best-practice level. We apply this logic by modeling and forecasting the best-practice level with the classic univariate ARIMA model. Diverse models are instead used for the gap. Correlation among different countries is considered and the uncertainty in the forecast is combined together via Monte Carlo simulation.	Tiziana	 Torri
2009	16	Residential Segregation in a Multiethnic Society	Residential Segregation in Metropolitan Areas since 2000	In the past, racial and socioeconomic segregation could be measured only once a decade. The American Community Survey now provides annual estimates of population at the Public Use Micro Data (PUMA) level. In preparation for the release of data at the census tract level in 2010, that source now provides experimental census tract data for several dozen large metropolises. Using PUMA data, this paper considered metropolitan areas of two million or more and tested hypotheses about changes since 2000 in: racial residential segregation, socioeconomic segregation, and the segregation of new immigrants from older immigrants and the native-born population. Census tract data has also been examined to provide information about recent changes in segregation.	Ren	 Farley
2009	16	Residential Segregation in a Multiethnic Society	Measuring Racial Inequality of Neighborhood Context: Adaptation of Traditional and Nontraditional Segregation Measures	While measures of residential and economic segregation assess the degree to which different groups live in the same neighborhoods, they are limited for understanding the degree of inequality of neighborhood quality (other than racial or socioeconomic composition) experienced by two groups. We present four measures that summarize the extent of racial inequality in neighborhood context, including adapting two traditional measures of residential segregation, and developing two new measures. We apply the measures to Census and Home Mortgage Disclosure Act tract-level data in the largest 100 metropolitan areas, to assess housing, mortgage and socioeconomic environments of neighborhoods. We use correlation analyses and graphs to illustrate findings. We find that racial inequality in neighborhood quality is lower than comparable measures of neighborhood racial composition. However there is vast variability by metro area. Racial neighborhood inequality is highest for indicators tapping poverty, unemployment, and subprime loans, and lowest for residential stability.	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia
2009	16	Residential Segregation in a Multiethnic Society	Immigrant Residential Segregation in the U.S. in Established Immigrant Gateways and New Destinations, 1990-2000	In the 1990s, many immigrants bypassed established gateways like Los Angeles, New York, Chicago and Miami. Instead, they migrated to other metropolitan areas across the U.S., creating new immigrant destinations. In this paper, we examine how segregation and spatial assimilation might differ between established gateways and new destinations. Are immigrants in new destinations segregated at the same levels as those in established gateways? How does this vary by race/ethnicity and year of entry? Did both types of immigrant destinations experience similar trends in segregation during the 1990s? Using restricted data from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, we calculate levels of dissimilarity and isolation by race/ethnicity, nativity and year of entry for these two gateway types. Our preliminary findings show that segregation levels are consistently lower in new destinations. However, both types experienced increases in segregation over time. Using multivariate models, we examine what factors explain these patterns.	Julie	 Park	John	 Iceland
2009	16	Residential Segregation in a Multiethnic Society	Spatial Assimilation despite Hypersegregation: The Mexican-Origin Population in Los Angeles	Immigrants to U.S. metropolitan areas have historically funneled into co-ethnic neighborhoods and slowly fanned outward. But longstanding and heavy immigrant flows can mask the gradual process of immigrants dispersing. This paper presents both relative and absolute levels of co-ethnic concentration for Mexican Americans in Los Angeles to show how young adults can live in neighborhoods with relatively fewer co-ethnics and immigrants than in their childhood even as the proportion of Mexican Americans and immigrants is rising. It assesses the change between respondents’ neighborhoods over their lifetimes in terms of ethnic and immigrant composition and cultural (linguistic) concentrations. The paper also decomposes that change into the secular part caused by high immigration and the individual-level part caused by moving. It further examines these changes from childhood to adulthood by generation since immigration.	Susan	K. Brown
2009	17	Low Fertility	Subreplacement Fertility in the West before the Baby Boom, 1900-1940: Current and Contemporary Perspectives	Between 1920 and 1940, fertility was below the replacement level in many western countries. In today's scholarly literature, the interwar fertility trough is explained by economic crisis and war threat. This paper collects series of fertility and net reproduction rates that are hard to reconcile with such a view. It then contrasts current and contemporary interpretations of low fertility during the interwar period. The views held by interwar demographers appear to differ systematically from current interpretations. According to contemporary interpretations, low fertility was due not to war threat or economic crisis but rather to rising individualism, secularization, rationalization and consumerism. These were trends that, according to leading social scientists of the first half of the 20th century, were already going on at least since the 19th century. The paper concludes by discussing some implications for current theorizing about subreplacement fertility.	Jan	 Van Bavel
2009	17	Low Fertility	High Suburban Fertility: Evidence from Four Northern European Countries	This study examines fertility variation across different residential contexts in four Northern European countries: Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. We move beyond the conventional urban-rural focus of most previous studies by distinguishing between urban centres and suburbs of cities and towns. Our analysis shows that fertility levels are significantly higher in suburbs than in urban centres; this pattern has persisted over the past quarter of a century for all four countries. A parity-specific analysis of Swedish data reveals that total fertility varies between central cities and suburbs due to the relatively high first- and second-birth propensities in the suburbs. Further analysis shows that fertility variation between the central cities and suburbs persists after controlling for women’s socioeconomic characteristics. We discuss the role of various factors in accounting for high suburban fertility including omitted individual characteristics, contextual factors and selective residential moves of couples planning to have a child.	Hill	 Kulu	Paul	J. Boyle	Gunnar	 Andersson
2009	17	Low Fertility	Revisiting Missing the Target: Correspondence of Fertility Intentions and Behavior in the U.S.	Most young men and women intend to have children; two children is highly normative and the modal response. Fertility levels well below replacement result because these intentions are not met – a common occurrence in many countries. Using U.S. data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79), we examine the co-variation in actual fertility and fertility intentions over a three-decade period. We build on Quesnel-Vallée and Morgan (2003) who used these same data. Specifically, the younger half of the sample has now reached the end of their reproductive years, and we can explore fully the correspondence between intended and realized family size (for women and men in the 1957 to 1964 birth cohorts). We begin to examine causes for the lack of correspondence in intent and behavior by examining the effect of blended families. Blended families change fertility intentions and realizations, contingent upon where previous children reside and other factors.	S.	Philip  Morgan	Heather	M. Rackin
2009	17	Low Fertility	The End of Lowest-Low Fertility?	In the 1990s, the total period fertility rate fell below 1.3 in Eastern and Southern Europe and East Asia, and along with this fall, came the idea of lowest-low fertility. These new lows in fertility inspired a large literature, notably Bongaarts and Feeney's (1998) work on tempo-adjusted fertility, Kohler, Billari, and Ortega's (2002) exploration of the causes of lowest-low fertility and reasons why it might be easier for fertility to fall than to rise, and Lutz et al.'s (2005, 2006) notion of a low-fertility trap in which falls in fertility could be self-reinforcing. Even some official forecasts have shifted to the idea that fertility would stay low. It comes as news therefore that fertility in the lowest-low countries is now on the rise in Southern Europe, Eastern Europe and East Asia. We describe the extent of this rise and explore how it is associated with the tempo effect, migration, and economic and policy improvements in these countries.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Aiva	 Jasilioniene	Tomas	 Sobotka
2009	18	Historical Perspectives on Family and Household Change	When Harry left Sally: A New Estimate of Marital Disruption in the U.S., 1860 – 1948	Divorce rate is a poor indicator of marital instability because many marital disruptions never become divorces. This paper provides the first estimate of the rate of marital disruption in the U.S. in 1860-1948. Marital disruption rate was similar to divorce rate after the Civil War, but the two rates wildly diverged in the early 20th century. In 1900-1930, the disruption rate was as much as double the divorce rate, implying that perhaps half of all disruptions never reached the court. In the long run, the cohort rate of marital disruption increased from about 10% in the mid-1860s to about 30% in the 1940s.	Tomas	 Cvrcek
2009	18	Historical Perspectives on Family and Household Change	Red, White and Black: Interracial Marriage, 1850-2000	Despite the advent of historical census data, most studies of interracial marriage have focused solely on patterns and trends since 1960. This paper traces the trend in interracial marriage between both whites and blacks and whites and American Indians from 1850 until 2000. By focusing on a comparison between these two groups, this analysis provides evidence of the different ways in which the boundaries between whites and blacks and whites and American Indians were developed over time. In addition to the overall trend, the paper examines differences by gender, region and education. The results indicate far fewer barriers to prevent the marriage of whites and American Indians throughout the period than for whites and blacks, although substantial social distance still remains between the most assimilated individuals of American Indian ancestry and whites.	Aaron	 Gullickson
2009	18	Historical Perspectives on Family and Household Change	Immigrant Incorporation in American Cities: The Case of German and Irish Intermarriage in 1880	Intermarriage reflects group boundaries because it affects the links between the social networks of the groups that each partner belongs to. For this reason marriage choice has often been used as an indicator of social relations among different ethnic groups in the United States. This study uses full-count Census data to study intermarriage in major cities in 1880, at the height of the great wave of German and Irish immigration that was already in high gear in mid-century. It considers gender, national origin, generation in the U.S. and socioeconomic status as important individual factors. In addition, it examines contextual variables such as the size and composition of groups in the cities where they lived, the sex ratio of group members, occupational standing of group members relative to native whites, the predominance of first- or second-generation group members in the city, and measures of residential and industrial segregation between groups.	John	R. Logan	Hyoung-jin	 Shin
2009	18	Historical Perspectives on Family and Household Change	Strong Families, Weak Families: Reevaluating the Northwest European Family System through Comparative Historical Analysis	During the past four decades, historians and demographers have argued that historic Northwest Europe and North America had a unique weak family system characterized by neolocal marriage and nuclear family structure. This analysis uses newly available microdata from 97 historical and contemporary censuses of 37 countries to evaluate whether the residential behavior of the aged in historical Northwest Europe and North America was truly distinctive. The results show that with simple controls for agricultural employment and demographic structure, comparable measures of the living arrangements of the aged show little systematic difference between 19th century Northwest Europe and North America and 20th century developing countries. These findings cast doubt on the hypothesis that Northwest Europeans and North Americans had an exceptional historic pattern of preference for nuclear families.	Steven	 Ruggles
2009	19	Social Contexts and Child Health	Recent Trends in Mortality Inequality among African Children	This paper uses Cameroon as a case study and three waves of Demographic and Health Surveys to investigate recent trends in mortality inequality among children. The paper further uses decomposition methods to estimate how these changes in inequality are associated with: (1) increased interhousehold inequality, (2) differential fertility decline, (3) privatization, e.g., changing health returns to SES, and (4) general health environment, e.g., baseline mortality. Preliminary analyses of the data show important non-linearities in the SES gradient in mortality and suggest the importance of general health environment and differential decline in fertility. In countries such as Cameroon that have experienced recent stalling of health transitions, studies of this kind can shed light on the relative contributions of economic and demographic policy in shaping future gains in child mortality and in reducing mortality inequality.	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	Gervais	 Beninguisse	Parfait	 Owoundi
2009	19	Social Contexts and Child Health	Socioeconomic Inequality in Malnutrition in India, 1992-2005	This paper examines the trends and patterns of socioeconomic inequality in child malnutrition by wealth status of population across major regions and states of India. The data from three rounds of National Family and Health Survey conducted during 1992-2005, were analysed. Underweight children (measure of both acute and chronic malnutrition) are the dependent variable. The wealth index was estimated by principal component analysis using a set of household assets and living conditions variables for all three rounds. Bivariate analyses, rich-poor ratio and concentration index were used to understand the trends in socioeconomic inequality in childhood malnutrition. The preliminary result indicates disproportionately higher concentration of malnutrition among the poor over the years. In fact the rich-poor ratio (1.8 to 2.9) and concentration index (-0.10 to -0.16) have shown an increasing trend during 1992-2005. In addition, average decline in underweight has concealed larger socioeconomic inequality across space and time.	Praveen	Kumar  Pathak
2009	19	Social Contexts and Child Health	On the Home Front: Stress and Adverse Birth Outcomes for Military Families	This study investigates whether the rate of adverse birth outcomes increased for mothers affiliated with the military from the time before and throughout the Afghanistan and Iraq Wars. Data come from the North Carolina Detailed Birth Record Database, a record of live births that occurred between 1996 and 2006. Using regression models and controlling for a number of confounding factors, we find that for both blacks and whites, military mothers were significantly less likely than civilian mothers to have a low birth weight birth in 1996. By 2006, this gap for whites had disappeared completely, and for blacks, the probabilities of a low birth weight birth were actually higher for military as compared to civilian mothers. A similar pattern of effects was not found for preterm births. We hypothesize that the stress associated with the recent wars may account for the increased probability of adverse birth outcomes for military mothers.	Christina	M. Gibson-Davis	Heather	M. Rackin	Geeta	 Swamy
2009	19	Social Contexts and Child Health	Stalled Mortality Decline in the  Gaza Strip: Evidence from Recent Surveys	Recent data from several national-level surveys conducted in 1995, 2000, 2004, and 2006 indicate that Palestinian infant mortality rate in Gaza stalled during the recent Intifada at a rate well above 20 per 1000 birth. This paper seeks to examine the causes of these trends in more detail, using available micro data and both descriptive analysis and statistical modeling. The relative impact of household poverty and closures on mortality change will be examined. The deteriorating situation caused a decrease in food security; thus, a decrease in nutrition for pregnant women and children is probably behind the stalling of mortality decline. The analysis will adjust for relevant demographic and socioeconomic factors. The continuing conflict and worsening economic situation may provide clues to address the stagnation of mortality decline in Gaza. Policy implications of the findings will be discussed.	Marwan	 Khawaja
2009	20	The Emergence of Health Trajectories in Childhood	Understanding Childhood Pathways to Adult Health		John	 Hobcraft
2009	20	The Emergence of Health Trajectories in Childhood	Effects of Early Life Events on Later Health		Rucker	C. Johnson
2009	20	The Emergence of Health Trajectories in Childhood	Biological Memories of Early Life Experience: Implications for Health Disparities		Christopher	 Kuzawa
2009	20	The Emergence of Health Trajectories in Childhood	Stress, Development and Health		Andrea	 Danese
2009	21	Social and Economic Well-Being	Subjective Well-Being and Retirement	By exploring whether economic, social and personal resources from childhood, early adulthood and later adulthood help explain subjective well-being before and after retirement, this paper extends prior research. Using a sub-sample of individuals from the Health and Retirement Study who made the transition to retirement between 1994 and 2006, this study analyzes not only whether the influence of factors from three different points in the life course on subjective well-being differs before and after retirement but also contrasts the experiences of men and women. Preliminary findings suggest that consideration of factors from different points in the life course contributes to a better understanding of subjective well-being and retirement.	Michelle	Pannor Silver
2009	21	Social and Economic Well-Being	Race, Accessible Wealth and the Transition to Homeownership	We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine the impact of extended family wealth processes on individual household wealth accumulation and transitions to homeownership. Preliminary results indicate that the black-white disparity in nonhousing wealth can be fully explained by extended family wealth. We find smaller evidence for the role of extended family wealth in households' transitions to homeownership, although the results do suggest that both household and extended family wealth matter more for black than white householders - a finding consistent with the ”weak” version of the stratification model. At this exploratory stage in the analysis, we do not find evidence that the effects of extended family wealth are attenuated by the provision or receipt of financial support; future analyses will test alternative specifications of these terms.	Matthew	 Hall
2009	21	Social and Economic Well-Being	The Probability of Experiencing Poverty and Its Duration in Adulthood	Using information from four decades of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we calculate the probability that an adult will experience a first poverty spell and the proportion of time spent in poverty. To disentangle the heterogeneity that may exist in the probability of ever experiencing adult poverty, we use survival analysis and regression techniques to estimate the hazard of falling into poverty and the proportion of time spent in poverty as a function of economic and demographic characteristics at age 25. We find that there is substantial heterogeneity in the hazard of ever falling into poverty and the proportion of time spent in poverty. The higher one’s income at age 25, the less likely one is to ever experience poverty during adulthood. There are similar large differences between the most-educated and least-educated, of whites and blacks and of men and women.	Lloyd	D. Grieger	Sheldon	H. Danziger	Peter	 Gottschalk
2009	21	Social and Economic Well-Being	Marriage Advantages, Child Costs: Family Structure and Income Inequality among American Women across Birth Cohorts	Few studies consider how the income distribution of American women has changed, how women's incomes are related to their family characteristics, and how this varies across cohorts and population subgroups. Using Current Population Survey data, 1980-2005,  I describe how inequality in women's total family income and the constituent income components have changed across cohorts born between 1946 and 1975 by race/ethnicity, education and family structure. I find that the marriage advantage in total family income has decreased across cohort, while the costs of single motherhood have remained stable. Women's income inequality increased because of cohort shifts in the population distribution and changes in the association of education and race/ethnicity with income inequality, but not from cohort changes in the association between family structure and income inequality.	Christine	 Percheski
2009	22	Fertility Timing and Transitions	Fertility Timing Within Marriage: Are Changing Contexts Associated with Changing Dynamics?	The relationship between marriage and fertility in the U.S. has changed drastically since the 20th century baby boom as fertility rates have become increasingly delinked from marriage. This study seeks to fill a gap in the literature on marriage and fertility by providing information regarding how the timing of marital fertility has changed during the past 40 years. Using data from the 1969-2005 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we use a variety of survival analysis methods to follow the fertility behavior of new marriages to determine whether changes have occurred in the timing of births within marriage. Preliminary results show that childbearing has increasingly been delayed within marriage since the late1960s, but only among marriages in which no children from before the marriage reside. In addition, rates of childlessness among couples with no previous children nearly doubled between the 1969-1973 and 1984-1988 marriage cohorts.	Tara	L. Becker	Jessica	 Jakubowski
2009	22	Fertility Timing and Transitions	Couples’ Decision-Making on Having a First Child: Comparing Pathways to Early and Late Parenthood	Starting from theories on reflexive individualization in modern societies, with a focus on deliberate life choices, long-term planning and negotiating partnerships, we investigate the nature of couples' decision-making processes on having a first child. We use semi-structured interviews with 33 couples, selected from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study and compared couples who entered parenthood at a relatively young age with those who did at a relatively old age. We expected more explicit decision-making among postponers and differences in motives and arguments between the two groups. Our qualitative analyses show that the decision-making preceding first childbirth is often implicit, even among postponers. Disagreement between partners does not necessarily lead to discussion. Factors that are known to result in postponement of childbearing, like higher education, do not always play a conscious role in people’s decision-making.	Arieke	J. Rijken	Trudie	 Knijn
2009	22	Fertility Timing and Transitions	Early Fatherhood Trajectories: A Latent Class Growth Analysis	Past research suggests that young fatherhood results in men’s subsequent disadvantage. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79), we confirm this finding, but also establish that young fathers are a heterogeneous group with respect to economic and social outcomes in young and middle adulthood. Men who become fathers around age 24 (cohort average) are our comparison group rather than all men or all fathers. Distinguishing young fathers by participation in the other adult roles of spouse and worker and comparing them to average men we make three discoveries: (1) some young fathers are far more disadvantaged than others; (2) that, in contrast to women, the disadvantage associated with young parenthood increases with age for men; and (3) the relationship context and fulltime employment status surrounding a birth matter. With socio-demographic factors controlled, we find differences among men in terms of marital and fertility behaviors, income, educational attainment and incarceration.	Jacinda	K. Dariotis	Joseph	H. Pleck	Nan	M. Astone
2009	22	Fertility Timing and Transitions	Family Structure and the Transition to Early Parenthood	This paper describes how family structure and processes shape the transition to early fatherhood and motherhood among a relatively disadvantaged group of youth. The data come from the linked Child-Mother and Young Adult Samples of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79), which provide information on the children of the women of the NLSY79 from birth until they enter young adulthood. The results suggest that both females and males growing up with a single parent or in an unstable family transition to parenthood early, particularly nonresidential fatherhood for males. These direct effects are stronger for girls than for boys. For both males and females the effects are strongly mediated by parenting processes and adolescent behaviors, and shaped by economic circumstances. Having experienced nontraditional family structures in childhood, acts to reduce the likelihood that males father their first child within marriage, demonstrating how changes in family structure alter family structure patterns over time and generations.	Sandra	 Hofferth
2009	23	The Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	The Impact of Livelihood Strategies of Adolescent Girls and Poverty on Marriage Timing in Nepal: A Study Using  the Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS)	In the developing world, child marriage, particularly among girls, remains prevalent at very high levels. Among factors that influence marriage timing for girls, relatively less attention has been paid to livelihood strategies such as economic participation compared to factors like schooling. This study aims to examine this important yet understudied topic by using longitudinal data from Nepal, where child marriage still exists at alarming levels. Using a two-wave panel of 962 households from the Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS), this study examines the influence of such strategies and household poverty on the hazard of marriage before age 18 and on other important non-marriage adolescent outcomes. While some evidence suggests that economic participation empowers girls and engenders greater autonomy in decision-making including about marriage, preliminary results from the NLSS show that economically active girls marry early, particularly in poor households. The interrelationship among these variables is examined further.	Ashish	 Bajracharya
2009	23	The Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Incapable to Aspire: A Conceptualization of Ethiopian Youths' Well-Being Using the Capability Approach and Its Consequences on Life Course Plans	This paper explores correlates of youths’ well-being and its consequences on life course plans. Using the Capability Approach, I identify dimensions of social well-being of 2,083 youth aged 13 to 17 in Jimma, Ethiopia. Logistic regression models show a marked heterogeneity in the strength of biography, family and community context as correlates of well-being. Furthermore, I use trivariate probit models to delineate the effect of well-being on three concomitant life course decisions, namely educational and occupation plans, transition to independent household and marriage. The results find evidence for bounded strategic action, by which youths use their well-being as a signal of opportunities and obstacles in their life course. Also, the results show that Ethiopian youths follow a socio-culturally construed normative sequencing of life course transitions. Finally, I investigate the differential strength of the impact of well-being on life course plans across varying biographical and social contexts.	Optat	H. Tengia
2009	23	The Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Just a Little Bit Later: The Effect of Oportunidades on Age at Marriage among Poor Girls in Mexico	Early marriage and childbearing can contribute to the transmission of poverty in developing countries, with young parents facing difficulty in accumulating and passing along the human capital their children need to move out of poverty themselves. Conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs, which provide payments to families for adopting practices that protect or improve their health and increase school attendance, can potentially break this cycle through economic and non-economic mechanisms. This paper investigates the effect of a CCT program in Mexico on delaying the age at which girls marry, using panel data from the program evaluation. We find that girls whose families receive cash transfers based on their school attendance are less likely to marry early than girls whose families don't receive transfers. The study results suggest that CCT programming can lead to long-term benefits that should be considered when planning scale-up in countries with existing or new CCT programs.	Janna	 McDougall	Margaret	 Greene	Anne	 Golla
2009	23	The Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Should Interventions Address the Full Complexity of Transitions to Adulthood? Lessons from a Program Experience in India	This paper bridges academic understanding on the complexity of adolescent life course transitions with the practical lessons learned from implementation of field-based programs to answer the question: should intervention programs be taking on the broad mandate of addressing the full range of life course transitions during adolescence, including education, employment, marriage and childbearing? We use evaluation data from an integrated youth program in India from 2003 to 2008 to answer this question and map direction for researchers and policy-makers. Our results show that even in challenging settings and in a short time, integrated programs can be implemented and result in behavioral change on marriage and childbearing. The results were less conclusive on empowerment and livelihood outcomes. Integrated programs are challenging to implement in environments with limited economic options, health infrastructure and NGO capacity and more creative and selective strategies may be required to implement ambitious multisectoral programs in developing country settings.	Sanyukta	 Mathur	Anju	 Malhotra	Sreela	 DasGupta	Sushmita	 Mukherjee	Anjala	 Kanesthasan
2009	24	Racial Discrimination	Determinants of Ethnocentric Attitudes in the United States	The multiculturalism debate has spawned questions concerning the determinants of ethnocentric attitudes in the United States. What characteristics are most likely to be associated with ethnocentrism? This paper examines the relationship between ethnocentrism and one’s political ideology, strength of religious affiliation, social conservatism as well as certain demographic characteristics such as age, sex, race and education. Political views are found to have a significant impact on attitudes toward ethnic minorities; people with more conservative political views are found to be more likely to have ethnocentric attitudes. The addition of demographic variables as well as variables measuring subjective attitudes improves the overall predictability of attitudes toward ethnic minorities. Age and social conservatism, in particular, are found to be strongly correlated with ethnocentric attitudes.	Saheli	 Datta
2009	24	Racial Discrimination	Race and Friendship Choice: A Test of Contact and Group Threat Theories	According to contact theory, exposure to individuals of different racial/ethnic backgrounds changes attitudes in positive ways, leading to stronger preferences for other-race friends. As a result, as schools integrate racially, so should friendships. Group threat theory predicts the opposite; as diversity increases within a school, group competition increases and friendships become more segregated. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and discrete choice models, this paper attempts to distinguish between these two theories. I improve on past research by showing that bias is introduced into models of friend choice when non-chosen friend alternatives are sampled in small numbers, and by modeling friendship group choices rather than choices for individual friends. I show that when the number of sampled non-chosen friend alternatives is small, the relationship between school racial diversity and interracial friendships is negative. As I increase the number of sampled non-chosen friend alternatives, this relationship becomes positive, providing support for contact theory.	Jennifer	 Flashman
2009	24	Racial Discrimination	Who Is at Risk of Racial Discrimination? 
Perceived Race and Health Disparities in the United States	Recent scholarship argues that the experience of discrimination is an important cause of racial disparities in health. Yet standard methods of measuring race in surveys rely on the respondents’ racial identification – how they choose to describe themselves – rather than a measure (presumably) more directly connected to discrimination: how they are perceived racially by others. This study draws on data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and explores whether adding perceived race to an analysis of health disparities provides more insight than self-identification alone. The results – that perceived race matters but not necessarily in the ways we might expect – raise important questions about how racial discrimination operates and what we are measuring (or want to measure) when we measure “race.”	Aliya	 Saperstein
2009	24	Racial Discrimination	Is Racial Discrimination a Risk Factor for 9/11-Related Psychological Trauma?	Using cumulative risk theory as a framework, this study provides the first evidence linking perceived racial discrimination to fear of terrorism in a nationally representative sample of African Americans interviewed up to two years after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Based on data from the National Survey of American Life, findings reveal that African Americans who had experienced racial discrimination in the past were 63.3% more likely to report that the 9/11 terrorist attacks had shaken their sense of safety “a great deal,” compared to those who had never experienced discrimination. Moreover, this association is only slightly attenuated and remains statistically significant after controlling for a number of hypothesized confounders. These results suggest that racism poses a significant risk factor for psychological vulnerability to acute stressors, even if such stressors are unrelated to the experiences of racial discrimination.	Nathan	 Fosse	Ethan	 Fosse
2009	25	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	Social and Physical Predictors of Inflammation in U.S. Children Aged 6-17	Inflammation may link early environments to later life patterns of chronic disease and aging. Socioeconomic differences in inflammation exist in U.S. adults, and potential influences of childhood SES on adult inflammation have been suggested. Little is known about what factors are associated with inflammation in U.S. children and whether differences in inflammation by socioeconomic factors emerge in childhood. This paper will use data from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey from years 1999-2000, to (1.) describe the distribution of C-reactive (CRP) protein in U.S. children ages 6-16 by age, gender and race/ethnicity; and (2) examine the association between markers of household socioeconomic status, low birth weight, infections, household smoking and body mass index with high-sensitivity (CRP) in U.S. children aged 3-16. The results will help shed light on whether socioeconomic differences in inflammation begin early in life in the United States, and if so, what the potential pathways may be.	Jennifer	 Dowd	Allison	 Aiello
2009	25	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	The Link between Social Isolation and Inflammation: Dimensions, Measures and Mechanisms	Social isolation has been linked to poor mental and physical health and mortality, but we know little about the physiological processes that underlie this association. This paper examines one important potential pathway between social isolation and health. The stress response leads to short-run increases in blood pressure that may damage arterial walls in the long-run, leading to hypertension and inflammation. Inflammation is now thought to be a root cause of a number of diseases, especially cardiovascular disease. We use data from the 2005-2006 National Social Life, Health and Aging Study to model the effect of key dimensions of social isolation on systolic blood pressure and C-reactive Protein, a marker of inflammation. We also model effects of isolation through several measures of emotional well-being and through health behaviors, and assess gender differences in these relationships.	Linda	 Waite	Martha	 McClintock	Erin	 York Cornwell	Lissa	 Patterson	Juyeon	 Kim
2009	25	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	No Consistent Effects of Prenatal or Neonatal Exposure to Spanish Flu on Late-Life Mortality in 24 Developed Countries	Hypotheses about the effects of childhood inflammation and disease on late-life mortality are hard to test because of confounding with other adverse childhood events such as malnutrition. The Spanish flu pandemic of 1918-1919 is a natural experiment that circumvents this confounding, and we test these hypotheses using data from the Human Mortality Database for 24 countries. We used fertility statistics and half-year cohorts to test for finer-scale effects in France, Italy and Switzerland. Across the 24 countries, after controlling for age, period and sex effects, residual mortality rates did not differ systematically for the cohorts born in 1918 or 1919 relative to cohorts born in surrounding years. We calculate at most a 20-day reduction in life expectancy for those born in flu cohorts. Similarly, there was no notable difference in 1918-1919 half-year cohort mortality in France or Italy, though it is possible there was a difference in Switzerland.	Alan	A. Cohen	John	 Tillinghast
2009	25	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	Racial Disparities in Biomarkers of Health among the Survivors of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic: A Natural Experiment Exploring the Role of Early Life Events in Health and Longevity	Between August 1918 and March 1919, pandemic influenza swept the globe killing five times as many people as World War I and reconfiguring conventional expectations about the social stratification of disease and mortality. The pervasive and unexpected nature of the pandemic makes it a unique natural experiment for studying the influence of an external “shock” to established patterns of human development, aging and longevity. This study extends previous research on the relationship between early life events and later life aging by using biomarkers and social group patterns to study the mechanisms linking early and later life health and survival.	Margaret	M. Weden
2009	26	Data and Methods of Migration Analysis	Combining Internal Migration Data from Different Sources	At present, the publicly available internal migration data in England and Wales are limited due to differences in sources, availability, quality and measurement. In this paper, we present a framework and statistical model for combining (incomplete) annual National Health Service registration data with (auxiliary) decennial census and annual Labour Force Survey data to predict age- and sex-specific interregional migration flows by ethnicity, economic activity and education. More detailed and current information on migration flows is needed so that local governments have the means to improve their planning policies directed at supplying particular social services or at influencing levels of migration. Also, this information is needed for understanding population redistribution of specific groups in relation to areas with, for example, high unemployment, high costs of living or high immigrant concentrations.	James	 Raymer	Peter	W.F. Smith	Corrado	 Giulietti
2009	26	Data and Methods of Migration Analysis	Evaluation of Migration between Mexico and the U.S. 
Estimated from a Border Survey: The 1993-2003 EMIF	A number of specialist surveys have been fielded in Mexico allowing in-depth insights about the Mexico-U.S. migration process. Only two surveys, however, have been fielded with the frequency and regularity to allow for the analysis of change in the migration process, the Mexican Migration Project (MMP) and the Survey of Migration at the North Border of Mexico (EMIF). While the EMIF is much less exploited in the scholarly literature in the U.S., its sample design allows for a claim of fuller coverage of migrant flows both to and from the U.S. than the MMP. Our main objective in this paper is to evaluate the EMIF against emigration and return migration data in national household surveys and censuses in Mexico and in the U.S. We then apply the 1993-2003 EMIF data to the estimation of first emigration to the U.S. and duration of stay.	Michael	 Rendall	Emma	 Aguila	Ricardo	 Basurto-Davila
2009	26	Data and Methods of Migration Analysis	Pioneers and Followers: Migrant Selectivity and the Development of U.S. Migration Streams in Latin America	This paper presents a method for dividing the historical development of community migration streams into an initial period and a subsequent take-off stage with the purpose of systemically differentiating between pioneer migrants and follower migrants. The analysis is organized around the following research questions: (1) can we empirically identify a junction point in the historical development of community-based migration streams that marks the transition from an initial stage of low levels of migration and gradual growth into a take-off stage in which the prevalence of migration grows at a more accelerated rate? (2) does this juncture point exist at roughly similar migration prevalence levels across communities? (3) are first-time migrants in the initial stage (pioneers) different from first-time migrants in the take-off stage (followers)? (4) what is the nature of this migrant selectivity? and (5) does the nature and degree of pioneer selectivity vary across country migration streams?	David	P. Lindstrom	Adriana	 Lopez Ramirez
2009	26	Data and Methods of Migration Analysis	Immigration and STEM Talent in the United States: Estimating the Size of the Pre-LPR Population	Highly skilled foreign-born persons make large, sometimes spectacular, contributions to the United States. However, although the United States warmly welcomes students and trainees and, less warmly, temporary workers such as H-1B workers, those who would like to make it their permanent home face an unwelcoming array of requirements, obstacles and delays, often resulting in ineligibility for legal permanent residence or discouragement with the visa process. Hence, there appears to be a large and increasing number of highly skilled persons at various stages of the visa process. This paper reports new estimates of the number of persons waiting in line in the United States for legal permanent residence via the main three employment-based categories. Estimates are also provided for those waiting abroad and for family members.	Guillermina	 Jasso
2009	27	Spatial Demography	The Limits of the Deconcentration of Poverty: The Spatial Context of the Poor	After decades of striking increases in poverty segregation, far fewer poor families were isolated in high-poverty neighborhoods in 2000, after what many argue was a significant deconcentration of poverty in the 1990s. Yet while the deconcentration thesis has been widely accepted, it has been subjected to relatively little empirical analysis and conflicting evidence has not been reconciled. I use U.S. Census summary data for 1980-2000 to undertake a detailed evaluation of the deconcentration of poverty using multiple segregation measures, including indices that include more spatial detail, and examining the comparative context of trends in other forms of segregation. I find that while poverty segregation became less severe in important respects, there were limits to the deconcentration of poverty. In fact, when the full spatial and relational context of the poor is taken into account, along some dimensions the poor became more segregated at the end of the 20th century.	Rachel	E. Dwyer
2009	27	Spatial Demography	Unequal Neighborhoods: Trends in Spatial Concentrations of Affluence	The residential distribution of diverse socioeconomic groups is an important aspect of social stratification. This study focuses on the distribution of income and wealth across U.S. neighborhoods, and how those have changed over time. Substantial attention paid to the prevalence and persistence of poor neighborhoods offers only a picture of economic deprivation. In order to understand social inequality, the full spectrum of the economic distribution, from deprivation to affluence, must be considered. I will extend past research on residential segregation by investigating the spatial divisions between affluent, non-affluent/non-poor and poor neighborhoods. I describe the prevalence of neighborhood types, calculate geographic indices for assessing spatial segregation, and look at neighborhood change in the U.S. between 1970 and 2000, a period of increasing income inequality. This paper will enhance our understanding of economic residential segregation and offer insight on a relatively understudied dimension of social stratification.	Claudia	 Solari
2009	27	Spatial Demography	A Longitudinal Analysis of Family Migration and the Gender Gap in Earnings in the United States and Great Britain	This paper uses longitudinal data for Great Britain and the United States to examine the impact of residential mobility and childbirth on the earnings of women, their family earnings and the related division of earnings by gender. This project is the first to compare explicitly the impact of childbirth and family migration on women’s earnings. The results indicate that families respond in similar ways in both countries to migration and childbirth. In response to both, women’s earnings fall at the time of the event and recover slowly afterward, but the magnitude of the impact is roughly twice as large for childbirth as for migration. However, migration, but not the birth of a child, is also associated with a significant increase in total family earnings due to increased men’s earnings. As a result, the effect of migration on the relative earnings of wives to husbands is similar to the effect of childbirth.	Thomas	 Cooke	Kenneth	 Couch	Peteke	 Feijten
2009	27	Spatial Demography	Spatial and Temporal Dimensions of Neighborhood Effects on High School Graduation	Research into the effects of neighborhood characteristics on children’s behavior has burgeoned in recent years, but these studies have generally adopted a limited conceptualization of the spatial and temporal dimensions of neighborhood effects. We use longitudinal data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and techniques of spatial data analysis to examine how both the socioeconomic characteristics of extralocal neighborhoods—neighborhoods surrounding the immediate neighborhood of residence—and the duration of exposure to disadvantaged neighborhoods throughout the childhood life course influence the likelihood of graduating from high school. At least among whites, socioeconomic disadvantage in the immediate neighborhood reduces the likelihood of completing high school, but disadvantage in extralocal neighborhoods increases high school graduation rates. Extralocal neighborhood disadvantage suppresses the influence of disadvantage in the immediate neighborhood so that controlling for extralocal conditions provides greater support for the neighborhood effects hypothesis than has been observed previously.	Kyle	 Crowder	Scott	J. South
2009	28	Biodemography of Human Fertility and Reproduction	The Prevalence and Risk Factors of Infertility in Moshi in Northern Tanzania	This study analyzed the prevalence and risk factors of infertility in a community-based study of 2,019 women ages 20-44 in Moshi, Tanzania. Infertility was measured by the absence of a live birth after 24 months of regular, unprotected intercourse. The associations of infertility and selected characteristics were analyzed using stacked logistic regression. The prevalence of infertility was 8.1% (95% CI, 6.5-10.0). Infertility was associated with sexual practices, as measured by Herpes Simplex Virus-1 and trichomonas infection, as well as with obstetric care, as measured by complications at last delivery and ever had an abortion. The social consequences of infertility were reflected by the finding that women married more than once had more than the double odds of infertility compared to women married once. Infertility was relatively rare in Moshi, in comparison with other Sub-Saharan African communities, and Moshi may serve as a model for efforts aimed at reducing the incidence of infertility.	Ulla	 Larsen
2009	28	Biodemography of Human Fertility and Reproduction	Testing Socioeconomic Status as a Marker for Condition in the Trivers-Willard Hypothesis within the Human Context	Applying evolutionary reasoning to reproductive strategy differences between the sexes, the Trivers-Willard Hypothesis suggested that parental resources condition sex differentiation of parental investment. This suggests that socioeconomic status could condition child sex preference in humans. While researchers have tested this possibility, they have neglected the explicit condition that the increases in a child’s reproductive success from parental investment vary between sons and daughters. This paper tests the assumption's validity by examining sex differences in reproductive success, controlling for parental socioeconomic status and multiple dimensions of parental investment. I use fertility-related behaviors to construct a measure of expected births that bypasses modern contraception. The results of OLS regressions find no significant sex differences in reproductive success at any level of parental socioeconomic status. The lack of support for this underlying assumption calls previous research into question and urges closer attention to the use of biological models within social research.	Brandon	 Wagner
2009	28	Biodemography of Human Fertility and Reproduction	Reproductive Health and Reproductive History of German Men	In one of the first studies ever on the subject, we have reported a higher lifetime mortality rate for subfertile and sterile men without co-morbidity over all age groups in comparison to fertile men. This retrospective cohort study is to explore the association between male fertility and lifetime morbidity and mortality. Little is known from literature reviews and own research about eventual biological mechanisms behind the reported mortality differentials. Here we report on a survey of surviving subjects and proxies on lifetime morbidity and reproductive biography. Databases are general medical and semen parameters of 1,375 patients attending the andrological service at Marburg University Hospital in 1949 and later, and data from a core interview with 944 survivors and a proxy interview with 431 surviving family members. Results may indicate a protective effect of cohabitating with children (own/foster/adopted/step) for subfertile men.	Katharina	 Pyka	Hanna	 Seydel	Ronny	 Westerman	Walter	 Krause	Sabine	 Groos	Markus	 Thiede	Martina	 Schmidt-Stolte
2009	28	Biodemography of Human Fertility and Reproduction	Effects of Family Structure on Premarital Sexual Intercourse	This study examined the linkages between several types of family structure and premarital intercourse. Data were drawn from two surveys (N = 1,445 in 1996 and N = 2,465 in 2002) that collected retrospective information on family living arrangements at ages 6 and 12, and reproductive health outcomes. Using discrete-time hazard models, the study demonstrated that living with two biological parents, with a biological father and in a monogamous two-parent family are associated with lower risks of premarital intercourse after controlling for family processes (parent/guardian-child communication, parent/guardian-child relationships, parental supervision, parental financial support, family changes and parental death).	Zacharie	 Tsala Dimbuene	Barthelemy	D. Kuate
2009	29	Interrelationships of Migration and Health	Recent Immigrant Cohorts, Country of Origin, Duration of Stay and Their Impact on Immigrant Psychological Distress: Evidence from Hierarchical Analyses of National Health Interview Surveys, 1997-2007	Studies focusing on immigrants and mental health are not as systematic as those on physical health. The findings are less consistent; researchers do not agree on whether immigrants have better, equal or worse mental well-being than native-born Americans. Furthermore, scholars have not realized the hierarchical nature of the research questions concerning immigrant and mental health. A handful of person-level migration variables dominate hypotheses of immigration and well-being, but few researchers have attempted to distinguish the effects of group-level migration variables from those at the individual level on immigrant mental health. This paper employs two-level hierarchical models to investigate how these factors pattern immigrant mental health. First, an overview of native-immigrant comparison in psychological distress is documented. Second, I look into how group-level variables (migration cohort and country of origin) and personal characteristics including duration in U.S. contribute to this difference. Results have significant implications for the “healthy immigrant effect” hypothesis.	Jing	 Li
2009	29	Interrelationships of Migration and Health	The Effect of Job Characteristics on the Self-Rated Health of Immigrants to Canada	The objective of this paper is to look at the effect of income and job characteristics as “fundamental causes” of health and to compare those key determinants on immigrants and non-immigrants in Canada. We consider the effects of employment, education and qualifications (including those received prior to migration) and labour outcomes on measures of self-rated health. The data used in this study come from the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics, a panel study collected yearly by Statistics Canada. We expect that inequalities in health arise from educational differences in the immigrant population, with qualifications received outside of the U.S. or Canada having less impact as they are not recognized in Canada. We also expect to see some nonlinearity in health trajectories as immigrant health slowly merges with Canadian health; however, the degree of such change is expected to vary with employment characteristics and educational qualifications.	Magali	 Girard	Sean	 Clouston
2009	29	Interrelationships of Migration and Health	Disability Status Differentials across Different API Ethnic Groups and the Effect of Nativity and Duration in the U.S. : A Replication of Cho and Hummer’s 2001 Analysis	The current analysis has two aims: (1) to examine patterns of disability status across different Asian and Pacific Islander (API) groups using the 2000 Public Use Microdata Sample, and 2) to examine changes in API disability trends by replicating Cho and Hummer’s 2001 analysis from the 1990 PUMS. We use logistic regression models to test the differences in work, sensory, physical, mental, mobility and self-care disability status across 18 API groups. We also include an interaction term to test whether the effect of duration in the United States is the same across different ages. The distribution of socio-demographic variables among the API ethnic groups is still very similar, as are the disparities in disability status. It appears that immigrants have lower levels of some disability but higher levels in others, compared to the U.S.-born. There is limited support for a varied effect of duration on disability by immigrant age.	Annie	 Ro	Gilbert	C. Gee
2009	29	Interrelationships of Migration and Health	Migration and Health of Young Adults 15-29 years old: Evidence from Kanchanaburi Demographic Surveillance System (DSS), Thailand	The neoclassical migration theory stated that the moves will result in improved economic well-being for migrants and their families, while health status may constitute consequences of movement in non-monetary costs and benefits. It is expected that health status of migrants is worse than non-migrants because of being in the unfamiliar environment at the destination. This study is based on data of 6,973 young adults aged 15-29, living in the Kanchanaburi DSS area. Health status, including social functioning, emotional well-being and its role limitation, and pain were measured by SF-36 Health Survey. Among lifetime internal migrants, health status was worse than non-migrants, but the opposite is for the lifetime cross-border migrants, the majority of whom are from Myanmar. Perhaps the cross-border migrants are selected for the most physically and emotional healthy. However, focus studies are needed to determine whether the cross-border migrants perceive their health status due to their assimilation to the destination or as a survival strategy.	Sureeporn	 Punpuing
2009	30	Socioeconomic Status, HIV/STIs and Safe Sexual Behavior	Economic Inequality as an Underlying Cause of HIV in Africa? The HIV-Poverty Thesis Re-Examined	Contrary to theories of poverty as the underlying cause of HIV in Africa, an increasing body of evidence at the national and individual levels indicates that wealthier countries and individuals within countries, are at heightened risk for HIV. This study tests the hypothesis that HIV infection increases under conditions of socioeconomic inequality rather than poverty. Examining demographic and health survey data from 16African countries, this study utilizes a multilevel model to assess the relationship between HIV infection and economic inequality. All multivariate models were run as a two-level, hierarchical random intercept and slope models in Stata adjusted for clustering at the regional level. Results from the two-level random intercept model demonstrated that individual wealth quintile and regional gini coefficient are positive and significant. As hypothesized, wealthier individuals are at higher risk for HIV infection and the probability of infection increases with rising regional (within-country) inequality.	Ashley	M. Fox
2009	30	Socioeconomic Status, HIV/STIs and Safe Sexual Behavior	HIV Risk Perceptions, School Participation and the Timing of Adolescent Sexual Debut in Southern Malawi	While many studies have focused on the cross-sectional association between adolescent HIV risk perceptions and sexual behavior, most have neglected the potential confounding role of school participation. Given that many studies have found lower levels of sexual activity among students as compared to adolescents who are not enrolled in school, it is important to consider how school participation may interact with HIV risk perceptions. By integrating schooling experiences and outcomes into the assessment of adolescent risk perceptions and sexual behavior, this paper will contribute an important missing element to the literature. Using a longitudinal, school-based sample of adolescents from southern Malawi, this paper will examine (1) the association between HIV risk perception and schooling outcomes, (2) the association between HIV risk perception and the subsequent onset of sexual activity and (3) the impact of sexual onset of HIV risk perceptions.	Monica	J. Grant
2009	30	Socioeconomic Status, HIV/STIs and Safe Sexual Behavior	The Impact of Income Shocks on Sexual Behavior in the Commercial Sex Market: Evidence from Kenya’s Post-Election Violence	After a disputed election, Mwai Kibaki was announced the winner of the Kenyan Presidential election in January, 2008, sparking widespread outrage and resulting in extended road and market closures. We study the impact that this shock had on one understudied population that particularly depends on markets functioning normally: commercial sex workers. First, the crisis had major effects on income and consumption, suggesting that existing risk coping mechanisms were not effective. Second, we test whether the crisis affected sexual behavior. Without adequate formal consumption smoothing devices, sex workers may resort to unprotected sex, at significant risk to their long-term health. We find large increases in unprotected anal and vaginal sex after the crisis, which has important implications for the spread of HIV and highlights the fact that vulnerable populations such as sex workers are likely to suffer from shocks along many dimensions other than income and consumption alone.	Jonathan	 Robinson	Pascaline	 Dupas
2009	30	Socioeconomic Status, HIV/STIs and Safe Sexual Behavior	Compensated for Life: Sex Work and Disease Risk in Ecuador	As STI prevalence rises, individuals substitute away from risky sex; this behavioral response renders STI epidemics self-limiting. In the commercial sex sector, however, prostitutes draw a compensating differential for engaging in unprotected sex, mitigating their propensity to use condoms. Using evidence from sex workers in Ecuador, we find that the compensating differential for risky sex is increasing in association with local prevalence of STIs. A one percentage point increase in the local STI rate increases the premium for non-condom sex by 17%. Market forces may curb the self-limiting nature of STI epidemics.	Raj	 Arunachalam	Manisha	 Shah
2009	31	Contraceptive Use in Asia	Understanding Myths, Misconceptions and Barriers Associated with Modern Contraceptive Use in Cambodia	Less than one-third (27.2%) of married Cambodian women use modern contraceptive methods, though 23% want to delay the birth of their next child by two or more years and 56% do not want any more children. This qualitative study was conducted in rural and urban areas of a province of Cambodia to understand the barriers to modern contraceptive use. Results show that social dynamics contribute to a woman’s initiation, use and discontinuation of contraceptive methods. Rumors of myths and misconceptions about side effects are the main barriers to use and are spread among the women through key players in their social networks: elders, family members and other women. Husbands and medical providers serve as positive influences on contraceptive use. Programs should help unpack the myths around side effects and should target husbands to encourage wives to seek birth spacing service from a trained provider.	Ghazaleh	 Samandari	Katherine	 O'Connell	Panhavy	 Hav	Long	 Dianna	Vandy	 Ly	Heng	 Kheng	Dan	 Borapich
2009	31	Contraceptive Use in Asia	Understanding the Pattern of Contraceptive Switching and Discontinuation in India	In India, the use of spacing methods has increased from 10 to 18% among currently married women in the last 14 years. However, the sustained use of spacing methods remained low, as the use of 42% of all modern spacing methods was discontinued within a year. This paper analyses the calendar data of 2005-2006 National Family Health Survey of India to understand the contraceptive discontinuation and switching-over behavior of women. Two approaches, namely the cohort approach and single-decrement life table are used. Results indicate that the 12-month discontinuation rate of the cohort approach is 37% for the pill users, 19% for Intrauterine Devices (IUDs) and 9% for traditional methods. These rates are higher than the estimates derived using the single decrement life table. The switching-over from spacing to limiting method is higher compared to switching-over among spacing methods. Among the modern spacing methods, the switching-over is highest for injectables and lowest for the IUD.	Kiran	 Agrahari
2009	31	Contraceptive Use in Asia	The Effect of Contraceptive Knowledge on Fertility: The Roles of Mass Media and Social Networks	This study explores the effect of contraceptive knowledge on fertility using an instrumental variables approach. It draws upon the “Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practice of Contraception in Taiwan” data set and focuses on the period when Taiwanese family planning programs were in effect. This study differs from previous studies examining the effectiveness of family planning programs on fertility by focusing on individuals’ obtained contraceptive knowledge and fertility behaviors. The results indicate that mass media and social networks play important roles in disseminating contraceptive knowledge. Women who are regularly exposed to mass media, or who have a wider social network, have more knowledge about contraceptives than their counterparts. This study finds that women transform their knowledge into behavior; that is, contraceptive knowledge reduces fertility, no matter which fertility metric is measured (lifetime fertility or probability of giving birth).	Kai-Wen	 Cheng
2009	31	Contraceptive Use in Asia	Husband-Wife Communication and Family Planning Decision-Making in Nepal	Using Demographic and Health Survey 2006 data, this paper examines the role of husband-wife communication on family planning decision-making in Nepal. The general hypothesis tested is that the likelihood of accepting contraception is positively related to husband–wife communication and husband’s approval of contraceptive use. Analysis of data of 7,646 currently married and non-pregnant women revealed that an overwhelmingly significant proportion of women (82%) perceive that their husband approve the use of any contraceptive methods. Yet about three-fifths of the women never discuss family planning with their husbands. Multiple logistic regression analyses show that husband-wife communication, particularly, the wife’s perception of her husband’s approval of family planning, is highly associated with current contraceptive use (odds ratio of 8.41). In the context of relatively low contraceptive use and high unmet need, program efforts should be focused on encouraging and motivating couples to discuss contraceptive matters.	Devendra	P. Shrestha
2009	32	Social Factors and Mental Health in Late Life	Gender Differences in Depression among Japanese Elderly: the Impact of Informal Social Support and Residency Status on Elderly Well-Being	This research assesses the underlying causes of gender differences in depression among the Japanese elderly. Data from the Nihon University Japanese Longitudinal Study of Aging were examined with a specific focus on the roles played by health, household residency patterns and informal social support from family, friends and community organizations. On the bivariate level elderly women reported higher levels of depression than men. The results of multivariate analyses provided evidence that poor health had a greater impact on mental well-being among elderly men than among their female counterparts.	Andrew	D. Tiedt
2009	32	Social Factors and Mental Health in Late Life	Till Death Do Us Part - Widowhood, Gender and Depression in Old-Age	This study examines the gender differences in depression after widowhood. Whereas several studies suggest that widowhood has stronger adverse effects for men, other studies find either no gender differences or higher levels of depression among women after bereavement. Using the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe, we estimate multilevel models with N=25,097 respondents. Preliminary results indicate that although women report higher levels of depression after widowhood than men, the negative effect of widowhood is stronger for men. But this difference in depression after bereavement between women and men loses significance when holding constant traditional household labor division, financial strains and duration of widowhood. The gender-by-widowhood interaction terms vary significantly among the12 participating countries, which suggests that contextual influences play a role.	Barbara	 Schaan
2009	32	Social Factors and Mental Health in Late Life	Parenthood and Trajectories of Distress among Women in Later Life: Race Differences	Although mental health consequences of parenthood are well-documented, little research has investigated change over time or race differentials. Analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Mature Women shows that parental status is influential among white, but not black, women in later life. Specifically, childless white women have lower levels of depressive symptoms than white mothers in mid-life, but the groups converge in late life. The benefits of childlessness are greater for never married white women than for other marital statuses. Sensitivity analyses demonstrate that the pattern described above holds generally for white women, but it is more dramatic among white women who died during the course of the study. The results suggest that: (1) important race differences may be masked by analyses that combine black and white women, and (2) longitudinal analyses help to clarify discrepancies in previous studies of the relationship between parenthood and distress.	Naomi	J. Spence	Daniel	E. Adkins
2009	32	Social Factors and Mental Health in Late Life	Depressive Symptom Trajectories after an Unexplained Loss in Later Life: The Role of Locus of Control	The propensity to experience the loss of a spouse, other family member, or friend increases exponentially across age just as one's own risk of mortality increases. Previous research finds that growth in the experience of such loss-events is strongly related to the well-known increase in depressive symptoms in later life. We investigate: (1) whether the expectedness of a loss event mediates the relationship between the event and its long-term mental health consequences and (2) whether locus of control moderates the role the expectedness of the event plays. We hypothesize that: (1) expected events have less impact on long-term mental health trajectories than unexpected events, and (2) persons with stronger internal locus of control experience fewer mental health consequences from unexpected events than those with external locus of control. We investigate the hypotheses using growth models of data from a multiwave study of elders in North Carolina, Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly.	Scott	M. Lynch	Sarah	O. Meadows
2009	33	Methodological Challenges in Studies of Couples and Families	Continued and On-Time Participation in a Weekly Online Survey	This paper describes a new and innovative approach to measuring relationships, contraception and unintended pregnancy among young women. The project begins with a 60-minute in-person interview about family background and current relationship characteristics. At the conclusion of the interview, respondents are enrolled in an ongoing journal, which consists of a 5-minute survey via phone or web occurring weekly for 2.5 years. We have so far enrolled over 700 young women in the study and have experienced excellent baseline response rates and journal participation. The current paper describes the study, its design strengths and weaknesses and analyzes the factors associated with attrition and on-time participation.	Jennifer	S. Barber	Heather	 Gatny
2009	33	Methodological Challenges in Studies of Couples and Families	A Comparison of Mother and Father Reports of Father Involvement	Typically, mother reports have been the sole source for studying father involvement. The current study will expand on prior literature that has compared mother and father reports of father involvement by utilizing all four waves of the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being study to conduct an HLM analysis of the discrepancy between reports. Implications and suggestions for future research are discussed.	Lauren	 Rinelli
2009	33	Methodological Challenges in Studies of Couples and Families	Illumination with a Dim Bulb? What Do Demographers Learn by Employing Text Analysis Software and Narrative Approaches?	We examine the potential gains and pitfalls from the incorporation of qualitative and mixed methods into demographic analysis. We attempt to go beyond standard understandings of augmenting demographic analysis with a qualitative approach, hoping to point the way to improved use of such techniques. Although there has been discussion of mixed methods, a gap remains regarding the evaluation of how best to integrate quantitative and qualitative findings. We take up these matters in the context of the growing analytic power of contemporary text-analysis software packages. We illustrate the issues more directly with our own mixed methods research in two different projects. We draw on data collected in Ghana via a conventional survey augmented by in-depth interviews. We also draw on a project examining low fertility in Italy, which combines analysis of large nationally representative survey data with qualitative in-depth interviews with women across four cities in Italy.	Michael	J. White	Maya	 Judd	Simone	 Poliandri
2009	33	Methodological Challenges in Studies of Couples and Families	Modelling Time-Varying Contextual Effects in Family and Fertility Research	There is increased interest in examining the impact of contextual characteristics on partnership and fertility behaviour of individuals. The conventional multilevel approach provides guidance on how to measure time-constant contextual effects; the proper way of modelling time-varying contextual effects, however, remains unclear. This paper proposes a framework, that allows us to distinguish between time-constant and time-varying contextual effects in multilevel event history analysis and to properly control for clustering in multilevel models with time-varying contextual factors. We use retrospective survey data from Austria to show how regional time-constant and time-varying characteristics influence fertility behaviour of individuals who live in these regions. The framework can be applied to also examine how country-level factors influence demographic behaviour of individuals.	Hill	 Kulu
2009	34	Environment and Health	The Spatial Patterns of Low Birth Weight and Infant Mortality at the County-Level: Using Spatial Analytical Techniques	In this paper, we use spatial analytical techniques to visualize spatial variation in low birth weight rates (LBWRs) and infant mortality rates (IMRs) at the county level and provide improved understanding of the underlying mechanisms of differentiating outcomes of interest across areas. We utilize the 2002 Area Resource File. The result shows a clear spatial pattern of LBWRs and IMRs. The spatial autocorrelation is much higher for LBWRs than IMRs. The concentration of high LBWRs is observed in the southeastern and middle northeastern regions of the U.S., while southeastern regions have a high level of IMRs. The spatial regression model shows that socioeconomic aspects of areas play an important role in determining the county level of both the LBWRs and IMRs. Physical features (e.g., humidity, temperature and elevation) greatly influence the county LBWRs, while health care relevant resources (e.g., states' Medicaid eligibility, per capita physician supply) have substantial influences on the county IMRs.	Seung-Eun	 Song
2009	34	Environment and Health	Water Pollution and Digestive Cancers in China	Following China’s economic reforms of the late 1970s, rapid industrialization led to a deterioration of water quality in the country’s lakes and rivers. China’s cancer rate has also increased in recent years, and digestive cancers (e.g., stomach, liver) now account for 8.1% of fatalities (WHO 2001). This paper examines a potential causal link between surface water quality and digestive cancers by exploiting large regional variation in water quality, which is driven in part by plausibly exogenous variation in rainfall patterns. I also exploit variation driven by the presence of manufacturing in an upstream river basin, which increases water pollution downstream and is plausibly exogenous to the digestive cancer rate downstream. Using a sample of 145 mortality registration points in China, I find using OLS/2SLS that a deterioration of the water quality by a single grade is associated with a 14%- to 30% increase in the death rate due to digestive cancer.	Avraham	 Ebenstein
2009	34	Environment and Health	The Urban and Nutrition Transition: Using Giscience and Remote Sensing to Map Predictors of Urban Household Food Security in Accra, Ghana	The urban transition is occurring at unprecedented rates in the poorest cities of the developing world. At the same time, urbanization has yielded higher numbers of undernourished urban households. Using survey data from the 2003 Women’s Health Study in Accra and from 2002 Quickbird satellite imagery, this study determined socioeconomic, spatial and environmental predictors of food insecurity (defined as poorly nourished households) in Accra. Logistic regression and multilevel modeling were used to determine socioeconomic, environmental and spatial predictors of food security. Results show that neighborhood vegetation cover, breastfeeding and access to sanitation services are positively related to better nutritional health and household food security. I conclude that data derived from satellite imagery can contribute important information for urban social science and health research. Additionally, improving neighborhood environments and child and maternal nutrition programs may promote better nutritional health outcomes among households in Accra.	Anna	Carla  Lopez	John	R. Weeks
2009	34	Environment and Health	Environmental Degradation, Population Pressure and Health in South India: Elite Capture or Poor Information?	Despite efforts to mandate and finance local governments’ provision of environmental sanitation services, outcomes remain poor in the villages we surveyed in the four South Indian states despite the dangers presented by high population density and crowding. Our analysis indicates some key issues that appear to hinder improvements in environmental sanitation. We find that politicians tend to capture sanitary infrastructure and services for themselves, while also keeping major village roads reasonably well-served. However, their decisions suggest that they do not understand the public health benefits of environmental management or the negative externalities to themselves of poor sanitation in surrounding areas. Our findings suggest that improving environmental sanitation outcomes requires disseminating information on its benefits and on local governments’ responsibilities and putting in place regulations and other measures to enable accountability in service provision.	Monica	 Das Gupta	Vijayendra	 Rao	Radu	 Ban
2009	35	Demographic Perspectives on Religion	Participation in Religious Services and Parental and Child Well-Being of Low Income Families: Evidence from the 1999 and 2002 National Survey of America’s Families	Using data from the 1999 and 2002 National Survey of America’s Families (NSAF), I examined how parents’ participation in religious services was associated with several aspects of parents’ and children’s well-being for low-income families. Six dependent variables were tested in this study, including parental self-rated health, parental mental health, aggravation in parenting, parent-rated child health, parent-rated limiting heath condition and child's engagement in school. Weighted OLS regression models were fit to examine the research questions, taking into account the complex design of the NSAF. Preliminary results show that parental participation in religious services is significantly and positively associated with every single measure of parental and children’s well-being. Child participation in extra-curricular activities seems a plausible mediator linking parental participation in religious services to child well-being in low-income families. Interaction effects of parental participation in religious services with demographic variables were also tested and reported. Policy implications were briefly discussed.	Ming	 Wen
2009	35	Demographic Perspectives on Religion	Infant Mortality and Mother’s Religious Involvement in Brazil	Although several variables have been recognized as determinants of infant mortality in Brazil, almost no attention has been given to the implications of religion involvement for this phenomenon. This paper helps to fill this gap employing data from the 1996 Brazil Demographic Health Survey and a Cox proportional hazards model to examine the potential association between infant morality and mother’s religious involvement, as measured by religious affiliation and service attendance. Unadjusted results show that differences in the hazard ratios of infant mortality by mother’s religious involvement are large in magnitude and statistically significant. When controlling for demographic and socioeconomic variables, the baseline relationship disappears, supporting the selectivity hypothesis. Based on our quantitative results and using available ethnographic evidence, we conclude by suggesting that Protestantism and attendance at religious services may be indirectly associated with infant mortality through mediating factors, such as marriage and the age at first child.	Ana	Paula A. Verona	Cláudio	S. Dias Júnior
2009	35	Demographic Perspectives on Religion	Demographic Perspective on Women’s Work and Religion	Giving the central focus on religious affiliation which “was once at the forefront of demographic research” (McQuillan, 2004), this paper examines the association between religion and women’s employment. Generally speaking, gender characteristics such as high fertility and low employment level for Muslim women in both intra-country and worldwide comparisons have been asserted in an extensive literature. The context, method and comparison groups of this study provide the opportunity to examine the long-standing debate as to whether religion per se or other determinants explain such gender characteristics in Islamic settings. Using logistic regression and the multicultural context of Australia (containing a substantially diverse ethnic composition of Muslims from origins throughout the world), this paper highlights Muslim/non-Muslim employment differentials. The paper also analyses the employment level of Muslim women across the regions of origin representing various contexts in order to provide empirical evidence to examine the above debate.	Yaghoob	 Foroutan
2009	35	Demographic Perspectives on Religion	Religion and the Intergenerational Transmission of Female Genital Cutting: A Case Study	Female genital cutting (FGC) is often assumed to be strongly associated with Islam. However, the correlation between religion and FGC varies across contexts. We examine the salience of various aspects of religious identity – specific beliefs, individual religious identity, and collective religious identity – in determining circumcision behavior through a case study of one West African country. Burkina Faso is a religiously and ethnically diverse country where approximately 75% of adult women are circumcised. We use data from the 2003 Burkina Faso Demographic and Health Survey to carry out multilevel models of religious variation in the intergenerational transmission of FGC. Differences between affiliates of Christian and traditional religions are largely explained by socio-demographic differences and specific religious beliefs. Catholic-Muslim differences, in contrast, persist even after accounting for both individual and community differences. We relate our conclusions to a larger body of research on religious variation in health behaviors.	Sarah	R. Hayford	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2009	36	Parents, Children and Sibling Linkages across Households	Intra-Family Exchange and Europe’s Low Fertility	Understanding the pathways to the emergence and persistence of low fertility in Europe remains a fundamental challenge. We examine the importance of changing patterns of resource exchanges among family members for both the timing of first births and cumulative fertility. We hypothesize that shifts in exchanges among family members of material support and labor play an important role in the postponement of fertility. We analyze a new data set of over 500 kinships collected in eight European countries and show that intra-family exchanges of wealth and child care are significantly related to both age at first birth and cumulative fertility. Employing both family and kinship fixed effects, we further show how family structure, distinguished by co-residency patterns and measures of proximity to near kin, has important independent effects on the postponement of childbirth.	Robert	G. White	Laura	 Bernardi
2009	36	Parents, Children and Sibling Linkages across Households	The Impact of Different (Step)Family Trajectories on the Parent-Child Relationship	Increasing divorce rates go hand in hand with an increasing number of children living together with a stepparent. In addition, as co-parenting is increasingly seen as the preferred parenting model following divorce, children are more and more entangled in a complex network of bi-nuclear (step)family relationships. As a consequence, the parent-child relationship may come under pressure. In this study, the relationship between the (step)family trajectories of children and different characteristics of the parent-child relationship are explored. Making use of the technique of sequence analysis, a typology of (step)family trajectories will be constructed. Therefore, data from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study will be used. Next, the relationship between different family trajectories and the parent-child relationship will be explored.	Sofie	 Vanassche	Kim	 Bastaits	Koen	 Matthijs	Christine	 Van Peer
2009	36	Parents, Children and Sibling Linkages across Households	Ties that Bind: Children, Marital Status and Time with Non-Residential Persons	Increasing numbers of children born to cohabiting parents underscores the need for continued consideration of the place of cohabitation in the kinship system. We use data from the American Time Use Survey (2003-2007) to examine how the presence of children affects the time married and cohabiting individuals ages 25 to 59 spend with non-residential family members. We find that the presence of children moderates the relationship between marital status and spending time with non-residential family members. Cohabiters with children are more likely than those married with children to interact with non-residential family members, though the amount of time is not substantially different. The results demonstrate greater similarities between married and cohabiting couples with children than without children and underscore the complexity of relationships between individuals and their non-residential family members.	Vincent	 Louis	Sarah	 Flood
2009	36	Parents, Children and Sibling Linkages across Households	Fathers’ Financial Contributions across Households	Understanding the resources available to children is complex when biological parents are not sharing a household and when the mother has children with multiple fathers. Using data on Wisconsin welfare families, we examine mothers’ reports of the support provided by nonresident fathers for his own children as well as for other children co-residing with his children. We analyze changes over time in his contributions, comparing fathers whose previous partners have had subsequent births with another man and those whose partners have not. About half the mothers in the first wave have children by multiple fathers in the first wave; more than one in five mothers had a child with a new father between the baseline and the third wave of the survey. Using a difference-in-difference approach, we control for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity. We compare these estimates with estimates derived from cross-sectional analysis.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2009	37	Marriage and Union Formation	Union Formation and Economic Opportunity in the United States	This paper presents preliminary results from a new project to assess the impact of changes in male and female economic opportunity on marriage formation in the United States since 1960. Our analysis capitalizes on a vast new archive of restricted-access long-form census data currently in preparation by the Census Bureau. This study breaks new ground by analyzing the local economic context of marriage decisions for African Americans, Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between economic opportunity and early marriage formation and cohabitation in 2000. To address these issues, we used multilevel analyses of the effects of changes in local economic conditions on the marriage decisions of young people. The models also include controls for individual-level characteristics such as age and educational attainment and local characteristics such as partner availability, levels of cohabitation and welfare generosity.	Catherine	A. Fitch	J.	Michael  Oakes	Steven	 Ruggles
2009	37	Marriage and Union Formation	Toward a Unified Theory: Understanding the Associations of Earnings with Marriages and Births	This study examines the conventional assumption that marriage and fertility are interconnected by comparing the effects of earnings on marriage to the effects of earnings on fertility. Data come from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, a nationally representative sample of U.S.  adults. Change in male earnings was more strongly related to marriage than to fertility, as earnings were positively correlated with marriage but had no effect on childbearing. The positive association between male earnings and marriage held only for childless men, suggesting a moderating role of childbearing. Females were also more sensitive to changes in earnings for marital than for fertility decisions. Effects differed from those of men, as female earnings had no significant correlation with marriage, but were negatively correlated with fertility. The findings confirm that earnings  havea differential effect on marriage than on fertility and suggest that models should recognize the disconnect between the two.	Christina	M. Gibson-Davis
2009	37	Marriage and Union Formation	Educational Attainment and Transitions to Marriage Following a Nonmarital Birth	Educational differences in the retreat from marriage are well documented, but surprisingly little research has tested the explanations for educational differences in marriage. We combine survey data from an urban sample of over 2,000 unmarried mothers and fathers in the U.S. with labor market data from the Current Population Survey to test explanations for educational differences in marriage following a nonmarital birth. In our sample, 33% of college-educated mothers and 15% of mothers without a high school degree married the father of their child after the birth. This big difference is not explained by educational differences in family-related attitudes. Instead, economic circumstances and labor market opportunities explain a sizable portion of educational differences in marriage following a birth. Father having higher levels of educational attainment than the mother is positively associated with marriage, and this result is not altered by controls for attitudes, economic circumstances, or economic opportunities.	Kristen	 Harknett	Arielle	 Kuperberg
2009	37	Marriage and Union Formation	Norms and Nuptials: The Changing Social Price of Marriage	Recent qualitative evidence suggests the emergence of norms in the United States requiring couples to wait to marry until they own a home and a car and accumulate financial assets. However, this hypothesis, and the general relationship between asset ownership and marriage, remains understudied. I extend limited existing work on assets and marriage to inform four key debates in the sociology of marriage. Using event history models with three sources of longitudinal data, I find that asset ownership has become an increasingly important predictor of first marriage across recent cohorts, providing an explanation for shifts in first marriage timing. Second, differential asset ownership helps to explain gaps in marriage by race and education. Third, though assets are positive predictors of marriage for men and women, they are valued differently by gender. Finally, I find evidence that assets are valued in marriage primarily for their symbolic rather than their use value.	Daniel	 Schneider
2009	39	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	The Effects of Anti-Poverty Policy on Poverty Exits versus Poverty Cycling among Poor Children	This study examines the potential impact of several public policies on poverty exits among children: (1) the Earned Income Tax Credit, (2) minimum wage laws, (3) child-care subsidies, (4) job retraining/job transition programs, (5) college attendance grants, and (6) affordable/subsidized housing programs using data from the 1996-1999, 2001-2003, and 2004-2007 Panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation merged with state-level data from several sources. Using multinomial logistic regression models in a discrete-time event history modeling framework and a multicategory poverty exit outcome (remain in poverty, exit poverty with reentry and exit poverty without reentry), the current study improves and adds to the existing research on poverty exits. This study is unique because it examines not only the impact of anti-poverty policies on poverty exits, but it also determines whether the effects differ for poverty exits and poverty cycling and whether the effects differ across racial/ethnic and nativity groups.	Shelley	K. Irving
2009	39	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Child Care Subsidies and Childhood Obesity	Child care subsidies are an important part of federal and state efforts to facilitate the transition of low-income families from welfare to work. Although a large literature examines the impact of subsidies on mothers’ employment and child care utilization, researchers have largely ignored the question of whether they have implications for child development, including obesity. Perhaps the most important channel through which child care subsidies can influence obesity is the level of quality that parents are able to purchase. Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort, we examine the relationship between subsidies and obesity for children of single mothers (N=3,186). To account for the non-random assignment of subsidies to low-income families, we estimate regression models that include county fixed effects and instrumental variables. Our preliminary findings are consistent across both estimators: participation in subsidized child care increases the likelihood of being overweight and at-risk of overweight.	Chris	 Herbst	Erdal	 Tekin
2009	39	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Income-Related Gaps in School Readiness in the U.S.and the UK: An Analysis of the Mediating Factors	This paper documents the income-related gaps in school readiness among two recent nationally representative cohorts of children from the U.S. and the UK. We show that substantial differences in cognitive ability are apparent in preschool in both countries. We then conduct a decomposition of these income-related differences, with the aim of identifying the reasons that low-income children fall behind and the areas in which interventions may potentially be most effective. Factors we consider are demographic characteristics, parenting behaviors, maternal and child health and exposure to child care settings. Contrasting the relative importance of these factors across the two countries allows us to draw some conclusions as to whether the drivers of low-income children’s deficits are common, despite the very different public policy environments in the UK and the U.S.	Jane	 Waldfogel	Elizabeth	 Washbrook
2009	39	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Do Children Benefit if Their Unmarried Parents Marry?  A Focus on Young Children’s Behavior	Marriage has long been associated with a wide range of positive outcomes for children. In response, policies are aimed at promoting marriage among unmarried parents. It is unknown, however, whether marriage in response to a child is associated with the same benefits for children as marriage prior to conception. We use data from the Fragile Families Study (N=3,068) to examine the association between children’s behavioral problems at age 3 and the timing of their biological parents’ marriage relative to conception. We examine the extent to which maternal background characteristics, economic resources and relationship quality and commitment mediate the association between parents’ marriage timing and child behavior. Results show that marrying in direct response to pregnancy is associated with similar outcomes as marriage prior to conception, yet marriages that occur after the child’s first birthday are not associated with any benefits for children.	Nina	 Palmo
2009	40	Fertility, Contraception and Reproductive Health in Latin America	Fertility and Contraception in Latin America:  Historical Trends, Recent Patterns		Suzana	M. Cavenaghi	José	Eustáquio Diniz  Alves
2009	40	Fertility, Contraception and Reproductive Health in Latin America	Unintended Pregnancy in Latin America:  Historical Trends, Recent Patterns		John	B. Casterline	Jennifer	A. Mendoza
2009	40	Fertility, Contraception and Reproductive Health in Latin America	Evaluating the Millennium Development Goal Target on Universal Access to Reproductive Health: A View from Latin America and the Caribbean		Maren	Andrea  Jimenez	Jorge	 Rodriguez Vignoli
2009	40	Fertility, Contraception and Reproductive Health in Latin America	Recent Trends in Latin American Fertility		Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Teresa	 Castro Martin	Teresa	 Martin Garcia
2009	41	Family and Aging	Housework over the Life Course: Trajectories of Change within Marriage	This paper argues that the division of household labor should be conceptualized and modeled as a trajectory that develops over the course of a relationship. Research on housework is largely cross-sectional, yet prominent housework theories define the division of household labor as a process of negotiation or performance rather than a static contract. Using data from the 1969-2005 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this paper employs growth curve models to (1) describe the development of time spent on housework within a marriage, (2) test for differences in housework trajectories by gender, birth cohort and timing of marriage, and (3) examine the interdependence of change in women’s and men’s housework over time. Findings show that women remain responsible for meeting the increased demand for housework during the first 15 years of marriage, even though the overall level of housework hours has declined substantially for younger cohorts of women.	Matthew	 Loyd
2009	41	Family and Aging	The Differences in Perceived Social Support Potential and Perceived Additional Support between Permanently Childless Individuals and Parents	Research on intergenerational relationships has shown that children and partners are the most important support persons in old age. Less attention has been paid to the situation of older childless individuals. Applying the concept of intergenerational solidarity, here I aim to compare perceived social support potential and support need of childless individuals and parents. Both dimensions are assumed to be important in contributing to well-being. Analyses are based on the German Aging Survey, which provides almost 8,000 cases of persons aged 40-85, thus allowing differentiated analyses of the childless. The results show that the older childless are not a homogeneous, deprived group, as is often assumed, but that other factors can partially compensate the lack of children. Socioeconomic status has a positive effect only in regard to cognitive support, possibly because higher status jobs give access to information from larger weak-tie networks.	Sebastian	 Schnettler
2009	41	Family and Aging	Effect of Childlessness on the Health Status of Elders	An increasing proportion of U.S. adults are childless. If childless elders require greater health care than elders with children and childlessness continues to increase, financial pressures on publicly financed health programs will expand faster than the rising dependency ratio would imply. The existence and size of any effects of childlessness on health, especially physical health, have received little attention. This study examines the relationship of childlessness to several indicators of elders’ health status, including self-reported general health and indices of limitations on activities of daily living, functional limitations and mental health. It presents descriptive data on differences between the childless elderly and those with children as well as regression models to better establish the net association between childlessness and the outcomes. The study uses instrumental variables methods to assess the likelihood of self-selection into childlessness and examine how doing so affects the findings. The Health and Retirement Survey provides the data.	Robert	D. Plotnick
2009	41	Family and Aging	The Long Term Effects of the Divorce Revolution: Health, Wealth and Labor Supply	During the “Divorce Revolution” of the late 1960s and early 1970s, a large number of states passed laws allowing for unilateral divorce, which made divorce easier by requiring the consent of only one spouse to dissolve a marriage. During the same period, the United States divorce rate doubled. This paper examines the effects of divorce law liberalization on the later-life well-being of those who were young adults when the laws were changing. Experiencing a law change at ages 16-25 increased labor supply and financial status at older ages for women, but is associated with poorer health. Men exposed to the law change as young adults also have higher financial status and poorer health later in life, but show no effect on their labor supply. The results suggest that the policy change affected long-term outcomes even for those who did not divorce, with one channel being increased labor supply for young women around the time of the reform.	Kristin	 Mammen
2009	42	Migration and Child Well-Being	Gender and Migration Effects on Education and Health Outcomes: The Case of Ghana	Although the effects of migration on education and health outcomes have received little attention, the gender effects of migration have received even less. Nonetheless, policy-makers in developing countries are drafting policies to stop women from migrating. Meanwhile, the effects of migration on education and health are still unclear. This paper seeks to measure the effect of migration and gender on children's education and health outcomes. This paper will use the Ghana Living Standard Survey 2005, which includes a module on migration with information on migrant socioeconomic status (SES) and remittance behavior. We expect education outcomes, in terms of school attendance, might improve as a result of male migration and worsen when females migrate, but that either effect may lessen with remittances. In health, we expect a SES gradient that together with migration and gender will have different impacts on the household's children.	Juan	C. Guzman	Mirja	 Sjoblom
2009	42	Migration and Child Well-Being	Labor Migration, Child Health and Mortality in Rural Mozambique	Labor migration may influence the ability of households to care for their children. Despite large-scale internal and international labor migration in Sub-Saharan Africa, little is known about the effect of labor migration on child health and childhood mortality in origin areas. Using data from a survey of 1,680 women married to migrants and non-migrants conducted in rural areas of southern Mozambique in 2006, this study examines differences between households of migrants and households of non-migrants in under-5 mortality and child health. Preliminary results show that father’s current migration has a net negative effect on child survival, while cumulative migration experience, on the contrary, positively affects child survival. The analysis of selected health indicators also suggests that children of current migrants may be disadvantaged. We provide explanations for these complex patterns in terms of economic, social and gender implications of contemporary male labor migration for the well-being of non-migrating household members.	Boaventura	 Cau	Arusyak	 Sevoyan
2009	42	Migration and Child Well-Being	Impact of Rural-Urban Migration on Childhood Risk of Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) among Children under Five	Although the implications of rural-urban migration for socioeconomic development are of long-standing interest to social scientists, relatively little is known about the effect of migration on the health of the most vulnerable members of migrants’ families –young children under 5 years of age. This study uses a large nationally representative data set, the Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS), 2004 to examine whether rural-urban migrant children are more likely to suffer from Acute Respiratory Infections (ARI) than their non-migrant peers (urban non-migrants and rural non-migrants). Even after controlling for potential confounders such as poverty, use of solid fuels, maternal malnourishment, child malnourishment, maternal education and maternal age, rural-urban migrant children are significantly more likely to suffer from ARI than non-migrant children (OR: 1.30). Interestingly there is no difference in childhood ARI risk between the two non-migrant groups (rural and urban non-migrants) once adjustments are made for household poverty.	Kazi	Md. Abul Kalam  Azad	Md.	Omar  Rahman
2009	42	Migration and Child Well-Being	Exposure to Migration, Parental Human Capital and Children's Health in Mexico	We examine the role of having family members as United States migrants on overweight among children in Mexico and its interactive relationship with socioeconomic status. Economic development and globalization (e.g., international exchange of goods, populations and ideas) are associated with increases in the consumption of unhealthy foods and obesity, labeled the nutrition transition. The socioeconomic gradient in obesity has important implications during this transition, going from positive to negative. We find that having international family migrants has an interactive relationship with socioeconomic status, such that at low levels of socioeconomic status it is a risk factor, but at high levels it is protective.	Elizabeth	H. Baker	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Claire	 Altman
2009	43	Genetic Influences and Demographic Behaviors	The Serotonin Transporter Polymorphism (5-HTTLPR): Allelic Variation and Links with Depressive Symptoms	We use data from a nationally representative sample of older adults in Taiwan to explore variation in the serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and to examine interactions among sex, stressful experience and 5-HTTLPR genotype on depressive symptoms. The Taiwan sample comprises a much higher frequency of the S/S genotype and a lower frequency of the L/L genotype than Western samples. Nearly 9% carry an XL allele, an allele rarely reported in the literature. Our findings are consistent with research demonstrating that the effects of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism are moderated by exposure to stressful experience. We find a positive relationship between depressive symptoms and both lifetime exposure to trauma and major life events in the previous year for persons with the S/S or S/L genotypes, but not for those with the L/L genotype or at least one XL allele. This gene-environment interaction is more notable among females than males.	Noreen	 Goldman	Dana	A. Glei	Yu-Hsuan	 Lin	Maxine	 Weinstein
2009	43	Genetic Influences and Demographic Behaviors	Mental Health and Schooling: Causal Evidence Using Genetic Lotteries between Siblings	In this paper, we exploit “experiments in nature” by using genetic variation within siblings and within twins to identify the causal effect of several poor health conditions on academic outcomes via a family fixed effects / instrumental variables strategy. We use a subsample of the Add Health data to examine the impacts of depression, ADHD and obesity status during adolescence on completed years of schooling. We present compelling evidence of large impacts of poor mental health on years of schooling completed, dropping out of high school and idleness as a young adult. Our estimates suggest that accounting for family fixed effects is important, but these strategies cannot fully account for the endogeneity of poor mental health. Finally, our results demonstrate that the presence of comorbid conditions presents immense challenges for empirical studies that aim to estimate the impact of specific health conditions.	Jason	 Fletcher	Steven	F. Lehrer
2009	43	Genetic Influences and Demographic Behaviors	Socioeconomic Status, Genetic Risk Factors and Psychological Distress: Exploring Independent, Correlated and Interactive Effects	Research shows that both socioeconomic status (SES) and genetic risk factors are associated with psychological distress. To date, however, very little research has explored whether and how these two predictors might be interconnected. The present study addresses this shortcoming by formulating, and then empirically testing, five conceptual models of gene-environment effects. Results show that (1) both SES (inversely) and genetic risk (positively) are significantly associated with levels of psychological distress in bivariate models, (2) that the relationship between SES and distress is explained, to a considerable degree, by genetic risk factors, (3) that the correlation between genetic risk factors and distress is stronger at low levels of SES, and (4) that the association between SES and distress exists primarily among individuals who are at high genetic risk. The implications of these findings for sociological inquiry are discussed, and an agenda for future research is outlined.	Matt	 Bradshaw	Mark	D. Hayward
2009	43	Genetic Influences and Demographic Behaviors	Changes in the Genetic Influences on Smoking over a 50-Year Period	We describe trends in the genetic influences on regular smoking across multiple cohorts of U.S. adults born between 1925 and 1970. We estimate that 36% of the variance in regular smoking is due to additive genetic influences. We also show that the timing of the first Surgeon General’s Report coincides with an increase in the genetic influences on regular smoking, but subsequent legislation prohibiting smoking in public places caused a significant reduction in the genetic causes for regular smoking. We argue that systematic variation in genetic influences across periods makes it difficult to estimate genetic effects on health behaviors using data obtained from a single point in time. Without properly describing the location of the sample within the larger epidemiological trend, the results from genetic studies are difficult to interpret and may lead to erroneous conclusions about the genetic and social factors that may underlie complex behaviors like smoking.	Jason	D. Boardman	Casey	 Blalock
2009	44	Economic Development and the Family	Health Shocks and Consumption Smoothing: Evidence from Indonesia	Uninsured illness events can seriously compromise households' well-being. This paper provides further evidence on the consequences of illness episodes on earnings and consumption in Indonesia. We exploit a rich panel data set that allows combining fixed effects and instrumental variables to address biases associated with the endogeneity of illness. Using deteriorations in physical functioning abilities to measure illness, we find that labor supply and earnings are significantly reduced. However, the effects on consumption seem to be subject to substantial heterogeneity. In particular, the effects vary significantly by age. In addition, we explore informal mechanisms households may be using to smooth out the consequences of these episodes. We find that transfers received from non- co-resident family members play an important role in insuring illness.	Maria	 Genoni
2009	44	Economic Development and the Family	Estimating the Effect of Adolescent Fertility on Educational Attainment in South Africa: A Comparison of Methods	What is the impact of adolescent fertility on educational attainment in South Africa? We make use of longitudinal data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS) to answer this question. CAPS is a data set of approximately 4,800 youth in the Cape Town metropolitan area. Answering this question well is difficult as there are socioeconomic factors that correlate with both educational outcomes and fertility. We employ multivariate regressions, sibling and individual fixed effects models and matching estimators. The matching estimators are promising as the data set has detailed information on sexual activity, date of sexual debut, use of contraceptives and number of partners. Preliminary results suggest that teenage mothers are indeed adversely selected. However, we still find that all of our estimators suggest a statistically significant and negative impact of adolescent fertility on educational attainment at age 20. These range from  -0.667 to -1.47 fewer years of attainment.	Vimal	 Ranchhod	David	 Lam	Leticia	J. Marteleto
2009	44	Economic Development and the Family	Her Land and His Leisure: Testing Household Models
Using Distributional Factors	I empirically investigate whether in rural Tanzania: (1) couples bargain over the allocation of household resources  or (2) a dominant member makes all the household decisions. The uniqueness of this study is that I use a longitudinal survey that has information on both the allocation of private expenditures as well as leisure . I exploit the exogenous variation across the survey rounds in the (1) share of household land that is held by the females, and (2) losses of crops primarily under the control of male and female members, to identify the impact of changes in relative bargaining power on the relative allocation of leisure time and consumption expenses within the household. I find that the relative leisure time (consumption expenditures) of wives is rising in the fraction of household land held by females (relative share of coffee losses, male crop).	Susmita	 Roy
2009	44	Economic Development and the Family	Intrahousehold Bargaining and Fertility	This paper analyzes the impact of female bargaining power on total number of births using the Indonesia Family Life Survey. The measure of power is generated from binary responses to questions on wife’s participation in decision-making within the household. This measure is instrumented using relative wage, types of credit institutes available and relative education in the community. The findings suggest that an increase of one standard deviation in the power measure may decrease the number of births by 0.8 for the full sample of women and by 0.9 for the sub-sample of women with at least one child. Furthermore, this negative effect is stronger for younger women than for older women who are more likely to have completed their childbearing. The estimates suggest that an increase of one standard deviation in power measure may result in a reduction of three births for a 15-year old woman but only one birth for a 27-year old woman.	Nalina	 Varanasi
2009	45	Family Influences on Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental Treatment	Time diaries and sibling fixed effects models are used to examine whether parental time investments in children compensate for or reinforce birth weight differences among siblings (i.e. 666 sibling pairs, age 0-12). The findings demonstrate that the direction and degree of differential treatment varies by socioeconomic status (SES). Less advantaged parents reinforce differences by spending more time with normal-weight children. Advantaged parents compensate by spending more time with low-weight children. First, the findings show that the lasting effects of low birth weight may not be entirely due to biology; biosocial interactions both compensate for and reinforce early-life disadvantages. Second, sibling correlation studies may underestimate the influence of family background in determining status attainment because disadvantaged families act in ways that decrease sibling resemblance over time. In low-SES families, shared family background exerts its influence in unexpected ways: producing diverging rather than converging destinies.	Amy	 Hsin
2009	45	Family Influences on Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Prenatal and Infant Health, Family Background and Educational Attainment: Results from the 1966 Northern Finland Birth Cohort Study	We use data from the Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 study to analyze the effects of prenatal and infant health on educational attainment at age 31. Our main contribution to this growing literature comes from the use of several clinically meaningful indicators of health and health behavior. We find that maternal smoking during pregnancy and early problems in neurological development have negative effects. We also find weaker support for negative effects of higher body mass index and anemia during pregnancy. These factors explain only a very small share (less than 5% of the effects of maternal education and parental class on educational attainment. However, maternal smoking explains 16% of the effects of unwed motherhood on educational attainment. This suggests that social differences in maternal smoking behavior can create intergenerational inequalities. We discuss these findings in light of the recent research on childhood conditions and socioeconomic achievement.	Juho	 Harkonen	Hande	 Kaymakcalan	Anja	 Taanila
2009	45	Family Influences on Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Early Life Conditions and Cause-Specific Mortality in Finland	The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of early-life socioeconomic status, place of birth and household structure on cause-specific mortality in Finland during the latter half of the 20th century. We base the analysis on a 10% sample of households drawn from the 1950 Finnish Census of Population with the follow-up of household members in subsequent censuses and death records1970-2005. The results of the proposed project will contribute to the accumulating evidence on the associations of early-life conditions with adult mortality. The Finnish data constitute a unique register-based data set that does not rely on individual recall of early-life conditions, educational attainment, occupations and other life course trajectories.	Irma	T. Elo	Pekka	 Martikainen
2009	45	Family Influences on Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Education of Children and Differential Mortality of Parents: Do Parents Benefit from Their Children’s Attainments?	Contemporary stratification research on developed societies usually views the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage as a one-way effect from parent to child. However, parents’ investment in their children’s education may yield significant returns for parents themselves in later life. Well-educated children have greater knowledge of health and technology to share with their parents and more financial means to provide for parents than do their less-educated counterparts. This paper considers the effects of children’s educational attainment on the survival of parents, net of parents’ own socioeconomic status. We use data from the Health and Retirement Study to examine whether children’s educational attainment affects parents’ survival and how these effects compare with those of parents’ own income and wealth for survival. Preliminary results suggest that one’s own education, income and wealth are associated with mortality. More importantly, we also find that sons’ and daughters’ education have independent effects on parents’ mortality.	Esther	M. Friedman
2009	46	Crime and the Labor Market	Transitional Jobs for Former Prisoners: Who Succeeds in These Programs? Results from a Random Assignment Evaluation of the Center for Employment Opportunities	This paper presents results from a random assignment evaluation of the Center for Employment Opportunities (CEO) in New York City, a highly regarded employment program for former prisoners. In 2004 and 2005, nearly 1,000 individuals were randomly assigned and their employment and recidivism being tracked for three years. Early results show that the program led to large increases in employment in the first year, primarily because of the provision of transitional jobs. Members of the program group also experienced lower rates of recidivism, especially for a subgroup that reported to CEO shortly after release. This paper will present two-year evaluation results.	Cindy	 Redcross	Janine	M. Zweig	Jennifer	 Yahner
2009	46	Crime and the Labor Market	Face Value: Information and Signaling in an Illegal Market	Economists argue that rich information environments and formal enforcement of contracts are necessary to prevent market failures when information asymmetries exist. We test for the necessity of formal enforcement to overcome the problems of asymmetric information by estimating the value of information in an illegal market with a particularly rich information structure: the online market for male sex work. We assemble a rich data set from the largest and most comprehensive online male sex-worker website to estimate the effect of information on pricing. We find that the premium to information is large and that it is due entirely to face pictures. The premium is in the range of premiums to information estimated for legal markets. The findings provide novel evidence that the value of information in illegal markets is similar to its value in legal markets.	Trevon	D. Logan	Manisha	 Shah
2009	46	Crime and the Labor Market	Effect of Employer Access to Criminal History Data on the Labor Market Outcomes of Ex-Offenders and Non-Offenders	Employers express a strong aversion to hiring ex-offenders, but there is likely asymmetric information about criminal records. Since 1997, states have begun to make criminal history records publicly available over the Internet. Wider availability of criminal history records should adversely affect the labor market outcomes of ex-offenders. A model of statistical discrimination also predicts that non-offenders from groups with high rates of criminal offense should have improved labor market outcomes when criminal history records become more accessible. This paper tests these hypotheses with criminal and labor market histories from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY97). Labor market outcomes are worse for ex-offenders once state criminal history records become available over the Internet; however, non-offenders from highly offending groups do not appear, however, to have significantly better labor market outcomes. The sign of the non-offenders estimates are consistent with the predictions of the statistical discrimination model, but the estimates are not significantly different from zero.	Keith	 Finlay
2009	46	Crime and the Labor Market	The Effects of Poverty on the Susceptibility to Crime in South Africa	This paper examines empirically the effects of household-level poverty, measured by household expenditures per capita, on the susceptibility to crime in South Africa. The paper uses an instrumental variables strategy combined with community fixed effects to account for potentially endogenous expenditures and unobserved between-community heterogeneity. Across all model specifications the probability a South African household is robbed increases with expenditures. When using instrumental variables, the positive effect of expenditures on the susceptibility to robbery increases substantially. In addition, the effect of expenditures remains positive and significant for “nonwhite” areas. This suggests that robberies are a problem not only for the rich who live in gated communities and hire private security, but also for the relatively wealthy who reside in poorer neighborhoods. Finally, this paper fails to find a statistically significant relationship between expenditures and the susceptibility to violent crimes such as murder, rape and assault.	D.	Mark Anderson
2009	47	Gender, Labor Force and Earnings	Immigration Selection and the Gender Wage Gap of Immigrants in the U.S.	We analyze the gender wage gaps among several countries that are members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Immigrants from countries where the source country gender wage gap has increased exhibit a decrease in the gender wage gap in the U.S. On the other hand, for immigrants from countries where the source country gender wage gap has decreased, the gender wage gap in the U.S. has increased. Our main hypothesis predicts that increases in the gender wage gap in the source country, where women are worse off relative to men, will generate incentives for high-ability women to emigrate. This in turn will widen the source country wage gap, but narrow the gender wage gap among immigrants from that country. This paper explores how changes in the source country labor market affect the observed distribution of earnings among women who migrate to the U.S. relative to their male counterparts.	Fernando	 Lozano	Mary	 Lopez
2009	47	Gender, Labor Force and Earnings	When Equality Is Not Enough: An Examination of Changes in Relative Earnings over the Duration of Marriage	Relative earnings relationships have long played a central role in theories of the family. This study uses data from the 1969-1997 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine how relative earnings relationships change over time. Using cohort life table methods, I compare the stability of relative earnings across marriage cohorts by following couples forward through time from the first year of marriage. The results show considerable change in relative earnings over the duration of marriage, regardless of initial relative earnings. Earnings relationships in which the wife earns at least 60% of the couple’s earnings are the most likely to change over time, and couples are least likely to enter this type of earnings relationship when their relative earnings change. Differences across relative earnings groups, however, narrowed over time as husband sole-earner earnings relationships became less stable and other relative earnings relationships became more stable.	Tara	L. Becker
2009	47	Gender, Labor Force and Earnings	Modeling the Effect of Children on Women’s Wage Distribution: A Quantile Approach	Pooling data from the 1979-2004 waves of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and employing penalized quantile regression, we test whether the size of the penalty for motherhood differs across the distribution of white women’s earnings. Net of controls for labor supply, human capital, family structure and demographics, we examine variation in the size of the motherhood penalty by age of youngest child, timing of first birth and marital status at different points in women’s earnings distribution. Results indicate that the motherhood wage penalty is largest for the lowest earners: those at the 10th quantile of the earnings distribution. Importantly, the larger penalty found among lower earners cannot be explained by welfare receipt. Among high-earning women, the motherhood penalty is smaller and cannot be attributed to having husbands with reduced work hours. Our findings challenge past research that emphasizes greater difficulty among professional and highly skilled women in combining work and family.	Melissa	 Hodges	Michelle	J. Budig
2009	47	Gender, Labor Force and Earnings	Is Breastfeeding Truly Free? The Economic Consequences of Breastfeeding for Women	Research has clearly demonstrated that income and work status are two strong predictors of whether or not a mother breastfeeds her child: income has a positive effect and work status has a negative effect on the odds of a woman breastfeeding versus formula feeding her child. However, the effect of breastfeeding on women’s employment outcomes is largely unknown. Since breastfeeding is currently less compatible with work than formula feeding, women who breastfeed their children may be more likely to take an extended maternity leave, reduce their work hours after childbirth, or quit work entirely. These strategies will potentially lead to lower earnings in the short-term and may also affect long-term economic prospects by reducing mothers’ prospects for promotions or raises. Using growth modeling and fixed effects techniques, we use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth  to assess whether there are long-term differences in the earnings trajectories between breastfeeding and formula feeding mothers.	Phyllis	L. F. Rippeyoung	Mary	C. Noonan
2009	48	Abortion Prevalence, Measurement and Programs	Rates of Induced Abortion in Denmark According to Age, Previous Births and Previous Abortions	The target of this study is the effect of previous abortions and births on Danish women’s risk of an abortion, as modified by age, calendar time, marital status and urbanization.   We use data on the number of live births and induced abortions by year (1981-2001), age (20-39), county of residence and marital status. We estimate probabilities of having an abortion in a given year for specific combinations of these covariates and use logistic regression analysis to estimate the combined influence of the explanatory variables.    The main findings are that a woman’s risk of having an abortion increases with the number of previous births and previous abortions, and that interesting interactions exist in the way a woman’s risk of abortion varies with calendar year, age and parity.    We are not aware of similar results in the literature, based on national data.	Marie-Louise	H. Hansen	Ditte	 Moelgaard-Nielsen	Lisbeth	B. Knudsen	Niels	 Keiding
2009	48	Abortion Prevalence, Measurement and Programs	Describing Repeat Abortions in Eurasia: A Comparison of Women in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan	We explore the demographic determinants of repeat abortion in Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan using data from Demographic Health Surveys. The outcome variable of interest is the number of abortions a woman had up to the date of the interview. We employ the novel method of generalized ordered logit regression with multiple covariates, which is similar to an ordinal logit model but does not rely on the assumption of proportional odds. We find that while there are significant factors that differ across these countries, being Muslim not only has proportional odds in each country model but is also consistently associated with lower odds of repeat abortion. Years of sexual exposure does not have proportional odds for each country model, but does consistently have a positive effect on the number of abortions a woman has had. Our results suggest that unmet need for contraception remains a serious health problem in Eurasia.	Jamie	L. Trevitt	Nan	M. Astone
2009	48	Abortion Prevalence, Measurement and Programs	The Role of Abortion in Explaining Ethnic Fertility Differentials in Vietnam	Until recently, Vietnam had the highest abortion rate in Asia. Abortion–mostly provided by the government—is believed to have contributed significantly to the country’s remarkable fertility decline over the last three decades. Despite the overall fertility decline, fertility rates vary across Vietnam’s 54 ethnic groups. The majority Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese, who together account for 85% of Vietnam’s total population, have total fertility rates below the replacement level. Meanwhile, other ethnic minority groups such as Dao and Hmong, who are disproportionately poor and live in remote, isolated areas, have the total fertility of 3.6 and 7.1 respectively. Analyzing the 1999 Census and 2001-2002 Vietnam National Health Survey, we examine proximate determinants of fertility across ethnic groups using the model proposed by Bongaarts (1978). We focus on the role of abortion, particularly the variations in access to abortion across various ethnic groups, in describing different fertility levels in Vietnam.	Bussarawan	 Teerawichitchainan	Sajeda	 Amin
2009	48	Abortion Prevalence, Measurement and Programs	Where Does the Mexican Public Stand on Abortion? Assessing Abortion Public Opinion among Mexico City Residents before and after the Passage of the Groundbreaking Legalization of Abortion	Two years ago, the Mexico City Legislature approved a groundbreaking law legalizing elective first-trimester abortions. We conducted public opinion studies with household probability samples of Mexico City residents before (April 2007) and one year after (April 2008) legal reform. We performed bivariate analysis (SPSS 14.0) to assess changes in abortion knowledge and opinion between years and multivariate analysis to assess correlates of favorable abortion opinion post-reform. Pre-reform and post-reform surveys had 800 and 1,010 participants, respectively (+/- 4.2 and +/- 2.33; 95% confidence). There were statistically significant increases in knowledge (73% vs. 82%) and favorable opinions of the new law (38% vs. 63%) post-reform (p      	Sandra	 García	Katherine	 Wilson	Claudia	 Díaz-Olavarrieta	Migel	Angel  Mendoza Melendez	Patricio	 Sanhueza
2009	49	Formal Demography	Prediction and Error Propagation in Cohort Diffusion Models	We study prediction and error propagation in the Gompertz, logistic and Hernes cohort diffusion models. We show that the linearized forms of these models can be modeled as a random walk with drift and that predictions and prediction error estimates can be derived from the random walk model. We develop and compare different methods for deriving predictions from the underlying random walk model. We also develop an analytic variance estimator for the prediction variance and study its accuracy with respect to a Monte Carlo estimator. Simulation studies and empirical applications to first births and marriages show that the analytic estimator is accurate, allowing forecasters to make precise the level of within-model uncertainty that should be attached to their forecasts, a level that should be viewed as a lowerbound of the total uncertainty, which could include departure from the model.	Mikko	 Myrskylä	Joshua	R. Goldstein
2009	49	Formal Demography	The Impact of Disparities on the Age Trajectory of Mortality	This paper proposes a new model for mortality disparities in heterogeneous populations. We define a mortality trajectory for a heterogeneous group with the lowest (or “best-practice”) levels of mortality at every age and model the observed mortality trajectories of two other heterogeneous populations with respect to the best-practice trajectory using a proportional hazard model. Starting with simulations, we assign parameters of frailty to populations with different levels of internal heterogeneity and use them to model disparities in their age trajectories of mortality relative to the best-practice trajectory. We show that this disparity model can produce realistic mortality trajectories for contemporary populations (e.g. the very heterogeneous U.S. and more homogeneous Japan) with relatively high life expectancies and mortality hazards that cross at older ages. Maximum likelihood methods are then used to estimate frailty parameters from empirical mortality data and test the model’s general applicability.	James	W. Vaupel	Michal	 Engelman
2009	49	Formal Demography	When Is Tempo Effect a Tempo Distortion?	Our aim is to clarify the fundamental conceptual difference between a tempo effect and a tempo distortion. We conclude that tempo effects are widespread in period measures, but that the need for adjustment depends on the use to which the indicator will be put. When the objective is to measure current conditions, as is usually the case, two approaches exist. In the classical approach, current event rates are assumed to reflect fully current conditions by rising and falling over time, and tempo effects exist but are ignored. In contrast, we argue that current rates and the tempo effects in measures derived from them do not reflect current conditions when tempo changes are driven by changing conditions that shift event rate schedules to higher or lower ages. In this case, tempo effects are distortions which need to be corrected to get an accurate measurement of current conditions.	John	 Bongaarts	Griffith	 Feeney
2009	49	Formal Demography	On Weak and Strong Population Momentum	This paper decomposes total population momentum into two multiplicative parts: “weak” momentum and “strong” momentum. Weak momentum depends on deviations between a population’s observed age distribution and its stable age distribution. Strong momentum is a function of deviations between a population’s stable and stationary age distributions. This paper provides numerical illustrations and then shows analytically that an initial population with arbitrary age composition, fertility and mortality is asymptotically equivalent (or very nearly so) to its stable equivalent population with respect to replacement fertility and mortality. We calculate weak, strong and total population momentum for 176 countries, the world and its major regions. The paper brings together seemingly disparate strands of the population momentum literature and shows how the various kinds of momentum fit together into a unified framework.	Thomas	J. Espenshade	Analia	S. Olgiati
2009	50	Economic Crises, Natural Disasters and Population Well-Being	Armed Conflict and Schooling: Evidence from the 1994 Rwandan Genocide	To examine the impact of Rwanda’s 1994 genocide on children’s schooling, the authors combine two cross-sectional household surveys collected before and after the genocide. The identification strategy uses pre-war data to control for an age group’s baseline schooling and exploits variation across provinces in the intensity of killings and which children’s cohorts were school-aged when exposed to the war. The findings show a strong negative impact of the genocide on schooling, with exposed children completing one-half year less education, representing an 18.3% decline. The effect is robust to including control variables, alternative sources for genocide intensity and an instrumental variables strategy.	Richard	 Akresh	Damien	 de Walque
2009	50	Economic Crises, Natural Disasters and Population Well-Being	Long-Term Health Consequences of Early Exposure to the China 1959-1961 Famine	Based on unique data from a birth defect intervention study in China, this paper assesses the long-term health consequences of early exposure to the China 1959-1961 famine. We find that the famine has resulted in significantly negative health consequences among women who were born or in prenatal period during the famine years. We also find evidence for the “selective survival” hypothesis that famine survivors may be more genetically robust than others, as the results show that the children of the women born in 1959 were taller and heavier at birth than the children of other birth cohorts. With adjustment for this selection, it is estimated that the women born in 1959 are 1.5 cm shorter, and women born in 1961 have one-fold higher odds of having high blood pressure in adulthood than other birth cohorts.	Cheng	 Huang	Reynaldo	 Martorell
2009	50	Economic Crises, Natural Disasters and Population Well-Being	Breakup of New Orleans Households after Hurricane Katrina	Little is known about the resilience of family and household structure to displacement-inducing natural disaster. Using a survey that traces the outcomes of a population-representative sample of households in New Orleans before Hurricane Katrina, I investigate household breakup in the year after the hurricane struck the city. I compare the incidence and type of household breakup in this survey to that for a national sample of comparable households over a similar period. Overall, 40% of New Orleans households experienced the departure of at least one member in the year following Hurricane Katrina, more than 50% higher than for the national sample. Extended-family households found in New Orleans both more common there than nationally before the hurricane, and experienced a higher rate of breakup in the year following it. The high breakup rates found for households in undamaged housing units suggests major community-wide effects of the disaster for household intactness.	Michael	 Rendall
2009	50	Economic Crises, Natural Disasters and Population Well-Being	Tsunami-Induced Displacement in Sumatra, Indonesia	The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami was one of the most devastating natural disasters in recent human history, but only one of several large-scale natural disasters to strike Asia in the past five years. Given the difficulties in survey data collection in this context, previous studies of the human impacts of natural disasters, including population displacement, have relied largely on small-scale and non-representative data sources. This project draws on a unique longitudinal household survey of 40,000 individuals in Sumatra, Indonesia, who were interviewed prior to the tsunami and each year since. I use this data set and a series of logistic regressions to investigate the effects of tsunami damage on the displacement of surviving adults and how these effects were mediated by individual, household and community characteristics.	Clark	L. Gray	Cecep	S. Sumantri
2009	51	Subnational Estimates, Projections and Forecasts	An Alternative K-12 Enrollment Forecast for Older Neighborhoods	Many school districts’ clients are concerned about enrollment increases in older neighborhoods consisting of SFUs (single family units, or houses). Usually these neighborhoods have stable, low enrollments, but sometimes there are enrollment increases. Can we predict which neighborhoods will experience enrollment increases, when they will experience them and what the magnitude of the increases will be? The traditional cohort survival approach to forecast school enrollments typically misses enrollment increases, because migration trends (expressed through grade progressions and kindergarten/birth ratios) are usually assumed to continue. This paper presents an alternative to the cohort survival forecast method. Our alternative method is a modification of the Housing Unit Method (HUM) and focuses on houses’ length of ownership. The distribution of homes by length of ownership is forecasted, and the number of homes in each category is multiplied by the appropriate student yield in order to forecast enrollments.	Shelley	 Lapkoff
2009	51	Subnational Estimates, Projections and Forecasts	Projecting Smaller Geographies with the Cohort Component Model: Methods and Utility of Clustering	For most municipalities in the U.S., a population projection can inform decisions in a number of areas, including budget estimation, infrastructure investment, school planning, health planning and a whole host of applications related to program planning, policy formulation and program implementation. For all of these applications, age is of critical importance, making the construction of age/sex cohort component projections a preferred route. The problem is that for many places, the small size of age/sex groups precludes the creation of stable fertility, mortality and migration rates. As the size of the base for these rates gets smaller, volatility can increase dramatically, making it impossible to construct useful projections. This paper explores the use of model rates, based on a cluster analysis, for preparing cohort-component population projections for small areas.	Joseph	 Salvo	Peter	 Lobo	Adam	 Willett
2009	51	Subnational Estimates, Projections and Forecasts	Subcounty Population Forecast Accuracy: An Analysis beyond Size and Growth	Population forecasts for subcounty areas are used for a wide variety of planning and budgeting purposes. Given the importance of many of these uses, it is essential to investigate which techniques and procedures produce the most accurate forecasts. In this paper, we describe several trend extrapolation techniques as well as averages and composite methods based on those techniques. Using data from 1970–2005 for subcounty areas in Florida, we evaluate the precision and bias of forecasts derived from these techniques. We also assess the effects of differences in population size, growth rate, and length of forecast horizon on forecast errors, and investigate the impact of adjusting forecasts to account for the effects of annexations and changes in special populations. We believe the findings presented in this paper will help practitioners make informed decisions when they construct and analyze population forecasts for subcounty areas.	Stefan	 Rayer	Stanley	K. Smith
2009	51	Subnational Estimates, Projections and Forecasts	Three-, Two- or One-State Solutions: Israeli-Palestinian Population Projections	The near-term prospects for a peace settlement between Israelis and Palestinians appear remote. Despite the challenges posed by the many contentious issues, this paper offers four general scenarios as possible options providing likely demographic trends and their implications for the future. In addition to a “status quo” scenario, the paper considers population projections up to mid-century for three-, two- and one-state scenarios. Whatever the scenario or solution envisioned, the population projections clearly demonstrate that demography will continue to play a decisive role in the conflict. Over the coming decades the Palestinian population is expected to grow more rapidly than the Israeli population, primarily the result of higher birth rates among the Palestinians. The projected trends also indicate that it will be increasingly difficult for Jewish Israelis to maintain their current dominant majority within Israel. The paper concludes with a consideration of the likely political consequences of the projections.	Joseph	 Chamie
2009	52	Heterogeneity and Selection in Infant and Child Mortality	Reconsidering Infant Age at Death in Mortality Research	One way that the effects of the changing context in health care are evident is in the changing distribution of age at infant death. Traditional classifications of perinatal, neonatal and postneonatal infant mortality are problematic because they mask some of the overall improvements in infant health and survival that have occurred in the latter part of the 20th century, such as improving the odds of survival to older ages for very premature infants. These changes have resulted in a transformation in the socio-demographic profiles of risk at various ages of death. Using vital registration data from Florida, I suggest a modification to the traditional classification of age at infant death in a way that acknowledges that ages at death are associated with etiologies that have been affected by the changing context of health care in the United States.	Jessica	C. Bishop
2009	52	Heterogeneity and Selection in Infant and Child Mortality	Controlling for Attrition Bias in Child Mortality Analysis Using a Two-Stage Semi-Parametric Proportional Hazard Model	All event history analyses make the explicit assumption of independence between censoring and event. If not, then the results suffer from potential bias. This paper presents a way to deal with non-independent censoring. We follow the rationale of two-stage regression models controlling for endogeneity. First, we model the attrition risk using available independent variables, including an instrumental variable. Second, we derive an individual, time-dependent propensity for attrition. And last, we insert this propensity in the main equation, as a time-varying variable. The model is illustrated with longitudinal data on child mortality in two African sites – one situated in Nairobi slums, the other in a South African rural area – where migration is high. The results show high attrition effect and mortality estimates that are more consistent with the poor living conditions in the study areas. This confirms that child migration is often a response to health hazards.	Philippe	 Bocquier
2009	52	Heterogeneity and Selection in Infant and Child Mortality	Appropriately Assessing the Effectiveness of Pregnancy Care in Reducing Infant Mortality: Evidence from China, India and South Africa	Statistical efforts to assess the effectiveness of medical pregnancy care for reducing infant mortality have resulted in mixed findings. We focus on the way that adverse or positive selection can obfuscate the true association between medical pregnancy care use and infant mortality risk. We focus on identifying these biases and exploring the relative effectiveness of different statistical methodologies in reducing the bias. Using data on recent births from China, India and South Africa in the 1990s, we estimate and compare mother-level random effects models, mother-level fixed effects models, joint mother-level random effects models (the multilevel multiprocess model) and propensity score matching. Selection bias is a substantive issue without a single best statistical solution; using the specific example of medical pregnancy care and infant mortality, we compare the performance of these statistical corrections across very different societal contexts and examine the extent to which pregnancy care effectively promotes infant survival.	Sarah	A. Burgard
2009	52	Heterogeneity and Selection in Infant and Child Mortality	Infant Mortality in Rural Bangladesh: State Dependence vs. Unobserved Heterogeneity	Using data from the Health and Demographic Surveillance System (HDSS) in Matlab, Bangladesh, this paper investigates the dynamic of siblings’ death at infancy. Probit models are estimated incorporating survival status of the previous child of the same mother and unobserved mother-specific heterogeneity. The likelihood of infant death is about 32% more if the older sibling died at infancy; estimates suggest that, in the absence of this “scarring” effect, the infant mortality rate would fall by 7.13% among the second and higher order births in the comparison area. There is no evidence of scarring in the ICDDR,B area, perhaps because learning effects play a larger role with the available extensive health interventions. Reducing average distance to the health clinic in the comparison area can lead to a reduction in infant mortality of 17/1,000 live births of the total gap 25/1,000 live births among firstborns between two areas.	Unnati	Rani  Saha	Arthur	 van Soest
2009	53	Interface between HIV and Family Planning Programs and Services in Africa	Contextual Factors in the Integration of Family Planning into  VCT Services in Ethiopia	This paper examines the role of the context of service delivery in shaping the integration of family planning (FP) and HIV services in health care facilities in Ethiopia. Research assistants interviewed health care providers trained in delivering family planning within voluntary counseling and testing (VCT) units in Amhara and Oromiya regions. Interviewers used a topic guide in outline form to guide discussions about their professional background, their training in FP and VCT services and their experiences in providing FP services. The study found that among the 18 health care facilities that had sent personnel for training in integration, only 10 were providing FP in their VCT. The factors that impeded the integration of FP services in VCT units were largely contextual ones: regular rotation of staff from one unit to another, high workloads of counselors leading to the suspension of the integrated service and the lack of adequate work spaces for counseling clients.	P.	Stanley  Yoder	Yared	 Amare
2009	53	Interface between HIV and Family Planning Programs and Services in Africa	Female-Controlled Methods of Contraception and Sexually Transmitted Infections including HIV in Malawi: Examining the Role of the Female Condom and Microbicides	Dual prevention of HIV focuses on vaccines and microbicides at the expense of other female-controlled methods like the female condom. Ongoing research will not produce a vaccine in the near future, and the acceptability of such a vaccine among adult population in Malawi has not yet been documented. A qualitative study on the acceptability of a microbicide called nonoxynol-9 was conducted as part of the ongoing Preparatory AIDS Vaccine Evaluation studies. A desk study on the role of the female condom complemented this study. The study concludes that the female condom will not exert the desired impact as a female-controlled prevention method. This leaves Malawi with the only one option: microbicides, and recommending microbicides, bearing in mind that people will prefer microbicides with viscosity and contraceptive properties.	Thomas	J. Bisika
2009	53	Interface between HIV and Family Planning Programs and Services in Africa	Working Outside of the Box: The Adaptation of Testing Practices by HIV Counselors in Sub-Saharan Africa	The delivery of HIV testing programs, particularly throughout Sub-Saharan Africa where health infrastructures are weak and prevalence is disproportionately high, relies on the work performed by trained HIV counselors. HIV counselors occupy a unique position in their role as intermediaries between international and national policy-makers and the members of the communities in which they live. This paper attempts to explain when, why and how HIV counselors adapt testing guidelines in the course of doing their jobs. Preliminary findings suggest that counselors seek creative ways to maintain the fidelity of testing principles while reducing the harm they perceive may arise as a consequence of strict adherence to them. Data for this study come from 25 semi-structured interviews with HIV counselors in Malawi: a poor, largely rural country of Sub-Saharan Africa. A rigorous inquiry into health processes offers new insights into local concerns about HIV testing.	Nicole	 Angotti
2009	53	Interface between HIV and Family Planning Programs and Services in Africa	Unwanted Pregnancies among HIV-Positive Women: Current Levels of Unmet Need for Contraception and Future Demand for Family Planning and PMTCT Services in a High-Risk Group	HIV-positive women have particular needs for contraception in addition to avoiding unwanted pregnancy: to protect their own health and to eliminate the risk of transmitting HIV to an infant. In 2004, the UN described a four-element strategy that corresponds to health care providers’ four opportunities to prevent mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT); the prevention of unintended pregnancies among HIV-positive women constitutes one of the four elements. While all four elements are essential for meeting the United Nations General Assembly Special Session 2010 goals, little programmatic or policy-related attention has been paid to the prevention of unintended pregnancies among HIV-positive women. This paper uses  Demographic and Health Survey data to assess levels of unmet need for contraception, differentials in unmet need according to HIV serostatus and differentials in unmet need according to various demographic and background characteristics among HIV-positive women. We also explore future fertility desires among women with HIV and their implications for the demand for family planning and PMTCT services.	Kiersten	 Johnson	Priscilla	A. Akwara	Shea	 Rutstein
2009	54	Assimilation of Rural-To-Urban Migrants around the World	Rainbow Nation, Skewed Spectrum: Immigrant Residential Segregation in a Multi-Ethnic Post-Apartheid Inner City of South Africa	Ethnically segregated immigrant neighborhoods make a compelling case for the need to analyze spatial dimensions of social processes and for formulating a more effective engagement with the social meanings of space. Although residential segregation has occupied a prominent research agenda in several Western nations, little attention has been paid to the urban ecology of immigrant segregation in developing countries. This paper attempts to narrow this gap by carrying out a spatial analysis of multi-group immigrant residential segregation in urban South Africa. A unique survey data set provides spatial point data for sampled residential locations linked with a range of socio-demographic characteristics of each person included in the survey. Aiming to engage with the spatial assimilation hypothesis, this paper first develops a point-based spatial measure of nationality-specific residential segregation, and then carries out a multivariate analysis examining individual-level socio-demographic factors influencing co-national clustering of migrant groups.	Gayatri	 Singh
2009	54	Assimilation of Rural-To-Urban Migrants around the World	Integration and Social Mobility of Migrants in an Emerging Metropolis	This study examines the economic, social and cultural integration of migrant workers in Ludhiana, an industrial metropolitan city in Punjab, India. Migrant work history data is drawn from a sample of 365 respondents in two main industries, hosiery and light engineering, and their ancillary units. Various economic, social and cultural indicators are used to determine the level of integration and social mobility of migrants in the city. The benchmarks for assessing the integration of migrants include indicators that reflect the intensity of adjustment and assimilation of migrants into the city. A Composite Index has been constructed to analyze this phenomenon. The findings indicate that, apart from employment, cultural and social integration of migrants in the city is low. Migrants from far off have higher economic integration but low cultural and social integration. Further, there is higher incidence of horizontal social mobility rather than vertical.	Sudesh	 Nangia	Nivedita	 Hansraj
2009	54	Assimilation of Rural-To-Urban Migrants around the World	The Effect of Internal Migration in China on Socioeconomic Outcomes and the Level of Living	Using data from a just-completed 2007-2008 national probability sample of 3,000 Chinese adults that includes an oversample of internal migrants, this paper will use a fixed effects approach to study the consequences of migration for occupational position and the standard of living. Over the last two decades, China has experienced massive internal migration, with about 150 million people, 12% of the population, living in places other than where they are formally registered. While internal migration in China is complex, the bulk is rural-to-urban labor migration, driven by the demand for workers in cities and the lack of economic opportunities in the countryside. But, despite strong incentives to migrate, little is known about whether and to what extent labor migration results in an improvement in the lives of migrants. This paper will compare migrants and non-migrants at origin and destination with respect to a variety of socioeconomic outcomes.	Donald	J. Treiman	Yao	 Lu
2009	54	Assimilation of Rural-To-Urban Migrants around the World	Permanent Migrants in China: Hukou Origin and Economical Integration	The massive rural-urban migration in China since the late 1970s has persistently attracted the attention of social scientists, producing a large number of studies concerning the multiple facets of the migration process. However, surveying the existing literature we find that researchers focus almost entirely on the temporary rural migrants, leaving the permanent rural migrants largely understudied. The integration of this group in their destination, a question important in its own, was rarely touched. Thus in this paper we try to advance the current knowledge on the permanent rural migrants through a systematic analysis of their economic integration in urban China. Our preliminary analysis shows that, among men, permanent rural migrants earn as much as the urban migrants, both exceeding the urban non-migrants. However, controlling age, education and other characteristics, the rural-migrant advantage disappears, whereas urban migrants still enjoy higher income than the rural migrants as well as the urban non-migrants.	Xiaozhou	 Wang	Glenn	 Firebaugh	Sal	 Oropesa
2009	55	HIV/AIDS	Estimates of HIV Incidence Profiles for Sub-Saharan
Africa with Projected Declines in Fertility	In this study we explore the impact of the HIV epidemic on total fertility for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Data on HIV prevalence from the Demographic and Health Surveys are used to estimate age profiles in HIV incidence for several geographic regions using a multi-state cohort-component model for population projection developed by Heuveline (2003), namely CCMPP. This model incorporates important links between the demographic and epidemiological components of population growth and disease spread. In particular, sub-fecundity among HIV-infected women, conditional on time since infection, is explicitly included in the model. This allows us to assess the influence on fertility by comparing population projections to simulations in which no sub-fecundity is experienced by HIV-positive women. It is crucial that CCMPP partitions the population into five-year age groups because fertility, incidence and the age distribution are all dependent on age.	Jason	 Thomas	Samuel	J. Clark
2009	55	HIV/AIDS	HIV on the Move: Sex Differences in Migration Patterns and HIV Risk in South Africa	Research on migration and HIV/AIDS has focused on male labor migration consequences, finding migration to be a risk factor for men and their non-migrant partners, yet often failing to measure the HIV risks of migration for women. This study investigated gender differences in HIV-infection risks associated with migration in a population of 12,098 adults in KwaZulu-Natal and explores causal mechanisms for those differences. The use of innovative measures reveals distinct gender differences in patterns of migration. All of those who are more mobile are at higher risk of HIV infection, not only those who would in conventional approaches be defined as ‘labor migrants’ Women’s involvement in migration exacerbates their disproportionate infection risk relative to men. The influence of higher risk sexual behavior on prevalent HIV infection is modified both by gender and by participation in migration. Aspects of the migration experience render its “behavioral consequences” more hazardous for women.	Carol	S. Camlin	Victoria	 Hosegood	Rachel	 Snow	Nuala	 McGrath	Till	 Barnighausen	Marie-Louise	 Newell
2009	55	HIV/AIDS	Who Is Falling Behind? Is AIDS-Related Mortality Contributing to Increased Income Mobility in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa?	The objective of this paper is to examine the relationship between “income mobility” and AIDS-related mortality in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. As Woolard and Klasen (2005) highlight, income mobility is strongly linked to demographic and employment dynamics. In this paper, we advance existing literature by disaggregating mobility by demographic and economic events: we specifically estimate the contribution of AIDS-related mortality to such mobility and investigate the specific role of such demographic determinants. Income mobility is a controversial concept. We adopt the view of Fields and Ok (1996):“income” is defined as any “real-valued measure of socioeconomic position (consumption) among any well-defined recipient unit (e.g. households)”. We analyse single- and two-stage absolute mobility measures constructed with expenditure data. This is particularly relevant as underlying the root cause of poverty in the province is a skewed pattern of class-based income mobility (Carter and May 2001).	Alessandra	 Garbero	Victoria	 Hosegood	Ingrid	 Woolard
2009	55	HIV/AIDS	Death and the African Family: The Economic Impact of Adult Mortality in South Africa	Using three waves of the KwaZulu-Natal Income Dynamics Study, we examine how adult deaths affect households’ demographic composition, expenditure per capita and wealth, controlling for their initial and fixed characteristics. In 1993-1998 young adult deaths resulted in lower expenditure in poor, but not better-off, households. As the mortality of young adults rose, this pattern reversed; in 1998-2004 such deaths affected the trend in expenditure most adversely in the better-off households. Similarly, all households except the very poor saved less following an adult death. Fostering out children tends to improve the economic situation of both sending households and fostered children. However, we show that, although adult mortality and fostering are associated, this relationship is not a causal one: fostering does not usually result from demographic mishap or economic desperation. The economic implications of adult deaths depend both on who dies and on the household’s characteristics. They vary both within and between countries.	Ian	M. Timaeus	Julian	D. May
2009	56	Author Meets Critics	Sex and War:  How Biology Explains Warfare and Terrorism and Offers a Path to a Safer World		Malcolm	 Potts
2009	57	Contextual Influences on Fertility	Choice or Constraint? Mass Incarceration and Fertility Outcomes among American Men	The rapid growth of the prison system over the last three decades represents a critical institutional intervention in the lives of U.S. families, which may have far-reaching and unintended consequences for demographic processes. In this paper, we investigate how exposure to the criminal justice system affects micro fertility decisions and aggregate fertility patterns. We propose to examine fertility choice and constraint within a counterfactual framework to assess whether and to what extent institutionalization has restricted and lowered the parity of men, and we theorize about how exogenous institutional factors (the penal system) have altered partnership selection in such a way that accounts for observed changes in non-marital, multi-partnered and teenage fertility. Our findings may help to explain growing disparities in fertility patterns by race and class.	Bryan	L. Sykes	Becky	 Pettit
2009	57	Contextual Influences on Fertility	Parenting in Vain? Stepfather Influences on Early Transitions to Parenthood	Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997, we examine the influence of resident fathers’ parenting style on early transitions to parenthood. Results differ by gender and for those living with biological vs. stepfathers. We find, overall, fewer family-based predictors of early parenthood for boys, compared to girls, and for those living with a stepfather, compared to those living with a biological father. For girls, having an uninvolved mother or an authoritarian father is associated with an increased risk of early parenthood, but only for those living with a biological father. For boys, there were no effects of maternal parenting style on early parenthood. However, having an uninvolved biological father was associated with an increased risk in early fertility, while the opposite effect was observed for stepfathers, such that having an uninvolved stepfather was associated with a reduced risk of early birth.	Kara	 Joyner	Julie	H. Carmalt	Rachel	 Dunifon
2009	57	Contextual Influences on Fertility	The Impact of Schooling on the Timing of Marriage and Fertility: Evidence from a Change in Compulsory Schooling Law	This paper estimates the impact of schooling on the timing of marriage and early fertility using the 2003 Turkish Demographic and Health Survey and duration analysis methodology. The source of exogenous variation in schooling is the extension of compulsory schooling in Turkey in 1997. The findings indicate that at age 17, three years after the completion of compulsory schooling, the predicted probability of marriage drops from 15.2 to 10 % and the predicted probability of birth falls from 6.2 to 3.5 % as a result of the new policy. This implies that the impact of increased schooling on marriage and early fertility persists beyond the completion of compulsory schooling for an important duration. In addition, the delay in the timing of first birth is driven from the delay in the timing of marriage. After a woman is married, schooling does not have an effect on the duration until her first birth.	Meltem	 Dayioglu	Murat	 Kirdar	Ismet	 Koc
2009	57	Contextual Influences on Fertility	Re-Examining Women’s Wages and Fertility: Has the Relationship Changed over Time?	The opportunity cost or cost-of-time perspective posits that the higher wages and better employment opportunities of the more educated make time out of the labor force for childbearing and child rearing more costly. Increased options to combine work and family, however, undermine assumptions of this model and may weaken or even reverse the negative relationship between wages and fertility. We use rich longitudinal data from two cohorts of U.S. women to explore change in the relationship between wages and fertility.	Kelly	 Musick	Sarah	 Edgington
2009	58	Access to and the Impact of College Education	Race and the Growing Female Advantage in Educational Attainment: A Trend Comparison	Using data from the Census and the Current Population Survey, we find that the gender gap in college completion has evolved differently for whites and blacks. The relative (to men) educational position of black women has long been more favorable than that of white women, but the female-favorable educational trends of the past 60 years are far stronger for whites than for blacks. Continuing black female gains are due largely to their relatively higher rates of transition to postsecondary education. White female gains also stem from female favorable trends in four-year college completion, given secondary education. Both black and white males were more likely than females to delay completion of college in earlier years, but this gender difference has diminished. The general trend is for the black gender gap to resemble the white gender gap, even as overall rates of college completion by blacks remain far below those of whites of both genders.	Thomas	A. DiPrete	Anne	 McDaniel	Claudia	 Buchmann	Uri	 Shwed
2009	58	Access to and the Impact of College Education	Minority Higher Education Pipeline: Consequences of Changes in College Admissions Policy in Texas	This paper examines whether replacing affirmative action with an admission guarantee for students who graduate in the top 10% of their high school class affects the college-going behavior of young adults. Specifically, we use administrative data on applicants, admittees and enrollees from the two most selective public institutions and Texas Education Agency data about high schools to evaluate whether and how application, admission and enrollment rates changed under three admission regimes. Disputing popular claims that the top 10% law has improved diversification of Texas’s public flagships, analyses that consider changes in the size of graduation cohorts show that both Hispanics and blacks are more disadvantaged relative to whites under the top 10% admission regime at both University of Texas and Texas A&M University. Simulations of gains and losses at each stage of the college pipeline across admission regimes for Hispanics and blacks confirm that affirmative action is the most efficient policy to diversify college campuses, even in highly segregated states like Texas.	Angel	L. Harris	Marta	 Tienda
2009	58	Access to and the Impact of College Education	Rationing Opportunity: The Role of America’s Colleges and Universities in Graduation Trends	The fraction of young Americans earning a BA has barely increased in the last 30 years. Rising returns to advanced education and increases in the fraction of young people whose parents went to college suggest that there should be far more new college graduates. This research shows the major contribution of tight admissions, under-investment in teaching space and rising student-faculty ratios in the BA trend. I characterize this situation as an under-investment in human capital and make a case for increased admissions to and enrollments in public and private four-year institutions. Key to the case for more BAs is recent evidence that the students who benefit most from college are the ones who were initially least likely to be admitted.	Michael	 Hout
2009	58	Access to and the Impact of College Education	Is a College Degree Still the Great Equalizer? Intergenerational Mobility across Levels of Schooling in the U.S.	Twenty years ago, Hout (1984, 1988) demonstrated that there is a strong intergenerational class association among individuals without a college degree, but the association virtually disappears for college graduates. In other words, a college degree appears to fulfill the promise of meritocracy – erasing the advantages of origin in the competition for economic success. This paper examines whether the “meritocratic power” of a college degree persists today, after substantial expansion and diversification of the post-secondary educational system. I use three data sets – the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, the General Social Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics – to analyze the intergenerational association in terms of social class, occupational status, earnings and total family income. Findings suggest that a college degree still weakens the advantages of birth in the early 21st century. Surprisingly, the influence of social origins appears to reemerge among advanced-degree holders. The U-shaped pattern of parental influence is similar across genders.	Florencia	 Torche
2009	59	Improved Methods for Demographic Data Collection and Analysis	Using Census Data to Create a Detailed Database for Fertility Analysis	The authors have used special tabulations from the Australian Censuses from 1981 to 2006 (five-yearly censuses) to create a database of births by single calendar year, by single year of age of mother, single parity and single years since the previous birth. The method also yields the female population with the same characteristics across time. The database provides a powerful vehicle for the analysis of past fertility trends for cohorts and cross-sections of the population. It can be used to generate a more reliable cross-sectional summary measure of fertility than the Total Fertility Rate. It enables a sorting out of tempo and quantum effects. Finally, the authors have used the database to obtain more reliable forecasts of births in Australia. This paper describes the method that is used to derive the database and the applications that can be employed using the database.	Rebecca	 Kippen	Peter	 McDonald
2009	59	Improved Methods for Demographic Data Collection and Analysis	Estimating Discrete-Time Survival Models as Structural Equation Models	Survival analysis is a common tool in the analysis of the timing of events. Survival models have been applied to a vast number of areas of sociological research. In this paper we show how to embed survival models in structural equation models (SEMs) while taking advantage of additional  features possible in a SEM approach. Using empirical examples of time to promotion and timing of intercourse, we show that we can replicate the more traditional survival model results, but more importantly, we show how to control for measurement error and permit mediating variables. By doing so, we provide additional options useful to sociologists who use survival models.	Shawn	 Bauldry	Kenneth	 Bollen
2009	59	Improved Methods for Demographic Data Collection and Analysis	The Lifecycle of Response Propensities in Fertility and Family Demography Surveys	With declining response rates in sample surveys throughout the Western world, demographers collecting sample survey data are increasingly using post survey adjustment via response propensity models. These models assume each sample element has a nonzero probability of participating in the survey that is both conditional on a fixed design and correctly estimated through a multivariate model. However, not all sample persons in fertility surveys receive the same recruitment protocol. Using data from the Wisconsin Divorce Survey and National Survey of Family Growth, we find evidence that response propensities of individuals vary systematically over the course of the data collection in reaction to different features of the recruitment protocol. We find that mode switches and altered incentives move those propensities. We find that those altered propensities are connected to reduce nonresponse bias in key family demography variable statistics.	Kristen	 Olson
2009	59	Improved Methods for Demographic Data Collection and Analysis	A Microsimulation Tool for Reconciling Various Measures of Origin-Destination-Specific Migration Flows	The conceptual and measurement complexity of migration stems from the fact that people move between places in a time-space continuum. The numerous possibilities to discretize temporal dimension of movements lead to diversity of the employed measures of migration flows. They differ not only across countries, but also over time and between sources within the same country. The aim of this paper is to reconcile different operational measures of origin-destination-specific migration flows. We consider both event and transition approach to measuring migration and investigate various time-related constraints (e.g. duration threshold of presence and absence in a country, length of transition interval). Given the availability and quality problems of migration data, the issue is tackled using a continuous-time microsimulation. We generate individual migration histories of persons moving among a closed system of three countries. Different migration measures are derived and compared for the whole virtual population.	Beata	 Nowok	Frans	 Willekens
2009	60	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Considerations for Householder-Based Estimation Processes Using the American Community Survey: A Case Study of the Nielsen TV Ratings	This study is an evaluation of differentiations in householder identification between the Current Population Survey (CPS) and American Community Survey (ACS) with emphasis on impacts this has on householder-based estimation processes using the Nielsen television market section system as a case study. The objectives of this paper are threefold: (1) to provide background and a brief overview of standard demographic estimation processes in the Nielsen Media group and how substitution of sources from CPS to ACS produced unexpected results; (2) to explore differentiations of the sex distribution between the CPS and ACS, determine the source of this differentiation, and analyze how it relates to collection differences between the two surveys; and (3) to validate findings via comparisons to the Nielsen panels. Conclusions follow on how this differential can have an impact on householder-based information extracted from the ACS as well as suggestions to ameliorate these differences.	Jonathan	D. Stringfield	Christine	 Pierce
2009	60	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Deer Hunter Demography: An Age-Period-Cohort Approach to Population Projections	The deer herd in Wisconsin is kept in check by hunters who kill deer each fall. However, hunting license purchases have declined in recent years. This study takes a demographic perspective to analyze this applied problem faced by the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. We analyze hunting participation rates over time by age, gender and type of license. We examine age, period and cohort effects to better understand what might be causing hunter decline and the likelihood that the decline will continue. The intrinsic estimator model for APC analysis (advocated by Yang et al. 2008) is employed to estimate the independent effect of each of these components. Finally, we draw on these APC estimates to generate projections of future hunters and compare this new methodology to projections made using cohort component and share methods, analyzing both conceptual and empirical differences and similarities between the three different projection methodologies.	Richelle	 Winkler	Jennifer	 Huck	Keith	 Warnke
2009	60	Case Studies in Applied Demography	What U.S. Census 2000 Data Tell Us about the Number of Children per Housing Unit	A student yield is the average number of children enrolled in a particular district’s schools per housing unit. Yield measurements are extremely useful in school demography: among other things, school administrators need to understand their district’s yields in order to assure that facilities are adequate to handle future enrollments. In order to explore factors that affect yields, we analyzed special tabulations of Census 2000 Public Use Microdata Sample data. We investigated how and why yields vary over time, how yields vary by the type and age of housing, how yields vary across states and how yields may vary by the population’s ethnic mix. Our measurements are of child yields, the number of children in a particular age group (say 5 to 17 to reflect possible K-12 enrollments) divided by the number of housing units in that area. The findings reported here provide an excellent basis for understanding yields in individual school districts.	Jeanne	 Gobalet
2009	60	Case Studies in Applied Demography	Assessing the Impact of On-Line Application on Florida’s Food Stamp Caseload	In 2005, Florida implemented an Internet-based service delivery system for eligibility determination in public assistance programs. Given the growing importance of the Internet as a service delivery tool for governmental agencies, we conduct an evaluative case study of the effects of the introduction of Florida’s on-line application tool on the Food Stamp caseload. In particular, we consider the impact on the flows onto and off of the program and, ultimately, on the size and composition of the caseload. To answer these questions, we use administrative data from the Florida Department of Children and Families from 2000 to 2008 to understand the broad trends in caseload characteristics and dynamics. While on-line application systems may increase access for some populations such as employed individuals, if they are accompanied by a decrease in services at state-run service centers, they may decrease access for other populations.	Colleen	M. Heflin	Peter	R. Mueser
2009	61	Impacts of Migrant Remittances on Origin	Rural Out-Migration and Smallholder Agriculture in the Southern Ecuadorian Andes	A long-running debate has weighed the implications of rural out-migration for human development and environmental conservation in origin areas of migration, including the implications for smallholder agriculture. Studies of the effects of out-migration on smallholder agriculture have found a mix of positive and negative effects on migrant-sending households, but have not consistently addressed the role of gender or differences between internal and international migration. This study draws on household survey data from the southern Ecuadorian Andes and a series of regressions to investigate the effects of out-migration and remittances on smallholder agriculture, including maize production, agrodiversity, female participation in agriculture and the use of land, labor and chemical inputs. The results indicate that out-migration and remittances tend to have countervailing effects on agricultural activities in the study area, but with distinct effects from male and female out-migration as well as from internal and international remittances.	Clark	L. Gray
2009	61	Impacts of Migrant Remittances on Origin	An Integrated Analysis of Migration and Remittances:
Modeling Migration as a Mechanism for Selection	Prior work models individuals’ migration and remittance behavior separately and reports mixed empirical results on the distributional impact of remittances in origin communities. This inconsistency may result from selection bias. This study controls for this bias statistically and treats migration as a mechanism for selection in a censored probit model of remittances. This integrated model is tested on data from Thai internal migration and Mexico-U.S. migration flows. The findings show that, in both cases, controlling for migrant selectivity dramatically alters our conclusions about the distributional impact of remittances. While a conventional approach of modeling remittances separately leads us to expect declining inequality in the origin as a result of remittances, the integrated model yields the opposite conclusion. The study concludes that migration and remittances are related processes, and it is crucial for an analysis of remittances to control for the selectivity of migration.	Filiz	 Garip
2009	61	Impacts of Migrant Remittances on Origin	Economic Remittance and Ethnic Differences in Its Impact on Children's Schooling in Guatemala	Previous research on international migration has examined impacts of remittances on the inequality level in sending communities. However, most research has not examined whether such impacts differ across ethnic groups. In Guatemala, where ethnic minorities face a much harder socioeconomic situation, it is possible that the level of socioeconomic inequality between ethnic groups increases through international remittances. Using the nationally representative data from Guatemala, I found that children of international remittance recipient households have significantly higher years of schooling than other children. Positive impacts of international remittances on children's years of schooling are considerably larger among indigenous children than non-indigenous children. Nevertheless, even when taking into account relevant socioeconomic factors, indigenous children receive significantly fewer years of schooling than non-indigenous children. Therefore, results suggest that international remittances not only lead to a higher level of inequality in schooling as a whole, but also among indigenous people, endangering the most disadvantaged households’ children.	Hirotoshi	 Yoshioka
2009	61	Impacts of Migrant Remittances on Origin	Migration, Remittances and Asset Allocations of Spanish Immigrants	The popular literature characterizes international remittances as purely altruistic. Migration scholars, however, recognize that remittances are also sent for other reasons, e.g. loan repayment, asset accumulation, or insurance purposes. Yet, few empirical studies document these motives. Specifically, a finding in the literature that remittances rise following currency depreciations has been attributed to the increase in purchasing power of remittances in the home country, which motivates migrants to send more. An alternative explanation may be that migrants re-allocate their assets following a change in relative market returns. Our aim is to distinguish and document these two alternative explanations using a new and representative Spanish immigrant survey to assess the extent, if any, to which migrants reconfigure their asset allocations in response to currency depreciations. The analysis will improve our understanding of factors driving migrant remittances and the reliability of immigrant remittances during economic downturns.	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Susan	 Pozo
2009	62	Nonstandard Work Schedules	A Demographic Profile of U.S. Workers Around the Clock	The nature of work continues to change dramatically; the extension of work operations around the clock is one of the most striking alterations. Approximately two of every five workers in the United States work mostly during nonstandard times—evenings, nights, rotating shifts, or weekends. This paper uses data from the 2006 American Community Survey to assess how the demographic profile of U.S. workers shifts based on when they began their workday. The results show that whites and those with greater socioeconomic resources are more likely to have traditional work shifts (beginning their workday between 7 and 10 a.m.), while persons of color, immigrants and the poor tend to work during less traditional work times. The paper concludes with a discussion of the implications of these patterns.	Rogelio	 Saenz
2009	62	Nonstandard Work Schedules	Food Insecurity and Nonstandard Work among Low-Income Households: A Longitudinal Analysis	Food insecurity refers to a household’s inability to provide adequate food for all adults and children. Much food insecurity research has been cross-sectional; this study is unique in analyzing panel data to model transitions to food insecurity. Discrete time event history analysis is used to identify significant predictors of the transition to food insecurity. Over one-third of households in the sample experience food insecurity at some point during the three years data were collected. The study focuses on how different work arrangements (full-time, part-time, multiple job holding and not employed) relate to food insecurity. The difference in working night or rotating shifts versus daytime shifts is also considered. Distances traveled from home to work and to childcare are also included in the analysis. Variability in income and complex or changing schedules related to nonstandard work may affect budgeting, meal planning and food preparation.	Alisha	J. Coleman-Jensen
2009	62	Nonstandard Work Schedules	Non-Standard Work and Marital Instability: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth	The links between newly married adult employment patterns and marital instability in the first seven years after the marriage were investigated using current data from a sample of 1,657 newlywed couples from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. On average, the key dimension of husbands’ and wives’ employment that predicts marital stability is not being attached to work at all (relative to being employed at a regular daytime job). Among husbands in couples without children, nonstandard work is also associated with marital instability. Among couples with children, fathers’ lack of attachment to work predicts marital instability; whereas in such couples mothers’ lack of attachment to work as well as her non-standard work are associated with marital instability.	Ariel	 Kalil	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest	Jodie	 Levin-Epstein
2009	62	Nonstandard Work Schedules	Opting to Stay: Does a Work-Time Control Intervention Reduce Turnover?	Media and research evidence suggest that escalating and competing work and life demands push some employees to use turnover as a work-family strategy, opting out of even desirable jobs. Allocating employees greater control over their working time could reduce such turnover by reducing some of the time pressures and conflicts they experience. We investigate the turnover effects of a flexibility innovation (at Best Buy) aimed at realigning workplace culture from face time to measurable results regardless of time at the workplace. We drew on survey data (prior to ROWE- Results Only Workforce Initiative) from a sample of employees (N=788) along with institutional records of turnover over eight months. Multivariate Cox modeling shows the odds of turnover were lower for employees in the intervention, even net of work-family spillover, job satisfaction and other predictors. The ROWE effects are moderated by job tenure, family-to-work spillover, physical symptoms and prior assessments of job security.	Erin	 Kelly	Rachelle	 Hill
2009	63	The Dynamics of Social and Economic Well-Being	Implications for Public Policies from Changes in Age-Education Composition	Evidence from studies of the U.S. baby boom (Welch, 1979; Freeman, 1979: and Berger, 1985) has suggested that increases in factor supplies led to the decline in wage rates of the expanding sub-aggregates, confirming the role of negative own-quantity elasticities of factor price. Using data at the micro level from a developing country (Brazil) makes it possible to take a formal model and estimate more precisely how changing cohort size and skill alter relative wage differentials. The core of this paper deals with the implications for public policies originated from the analysis by Amaral, et al. (2007). The decomposition of the impact on earnings of changes in age-education groups of workforce provides important policy insights. Furthermore, an analysis of inequality of income distribution among age-education groups is also performed. Finally, differences in the male population distribution and earnings by race pose some important policy implications.	Ernesto	F. Amaral
2009	63	The Dynamics of Social and Economic Well-Being	Demographic Transition and Rapid Economic Growth: The Case of Taiwan	The aim of this paper is to reconcile the debate between population and economic growth by considering the case in Taiwan. To solve this puzzle I compute a general equilibrium overlapping generation model with realistic demography. The main findings of the paper are twofold. First, the contribution of demography to economic growth, along the demographic transition, is given by the difference between the growth rate of the number of employees and the population. Second, under a steady state equilibrium and assuming a stationary population, the economic growth rate relies on productivity; however, the economic level depends on the population age structure, where greater life expectancies and fertilities have a positive and negative effect, respectively.	Miguel	 Sanchez Romero
2009	63	The Dynamics of Social and Economic Well-Being	You Can’t Always Get What You Want: Inequality in Subjective Labor Market Success at Mid-Life	How should we define labor market success? Standard labor force attainment models assume that income, educational levels, occupational prestige, etc. in various combinations are the best evaluations of success. Yet researchers typically assume the existence of compensating differentials in the labor market, in which lifestyle and work fulfillment advantages make up for pay lower than one’s productivity merits. In this paper, we evaluate labor market success subjectively, using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study to weight several achieved job characteristics using prospective job preferences measured 17 years beforehand. Using this new lens on labor force achievement and distributional, gender, educational and occupational inequality, we explore what it means to have labor force success at the individual level.	Jonathan	 Daw	Jessica	H. Hardie
2009	63	The Dynamics of Social and Economic Well-Being	Panel Conditioning Effects in Longitudinal Social Science Surveys: Implications for Measuring Social and Economic Well-Being	Does participating in one wave of a longitudinal survey affect respondents’ reports of their social and economic well-being in follow-up survey waves? If survey participation does alter respondents’ subsequent answers to questions about their social and economic well-being, then this calls into question the validity of information derived from any number of widely used data resources. In this paper, we estimate the magnitude of what methodologists have called panel conditioning or “time-in-survey” effects. Previous efforts to estimate the magnitude of panel conditioning effects have used methodologically weak designs and have focused on consequences for a limited range of measures. We use a stronger research design and use large-scale survey data on a wide range of measures of individuals’ social and economic well-being to test a series of theoretically derived hypotheses about the circumstances under which panel conditioning effects should be most severe. Preliminary results generally support these hypotheses.	John	R. Warren	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners
2009	64	Arabs Here and Abroad	Gender and Well-Being in Iran and Egypt: An Examination of the Patriarchal Bargain	Gender relations are shaped by the socio-political circumstances in which people live, and so it would follow that determinants of well-being vary depending on the national context in which Muslims reside. This paper uses the patriarchal bargain framework to study the association between gender and well-being in two Islamic countries using unique representative samples: Egypt (N=3,000); Iran (N=2,532).  Building from the patriarchal bargain premise that women negotiate positions of power and influence within structures of oppression, and that women’s status increases with age, we ask the following research questions: What subjective indicators of well-being are most influenced by gender?   Do attitudes about gender norms vary according to age? Are gender differences in well-being influenced by age and gender norms? Findings illustrate that well-being is significantly associated with gender depending on national context:  being a woman is associated with higher levels of happiness and life satisfaction in Iran, but lower self-ratings of health in Egypt.	Kristine	 Ajrouch
2009	64	Arabs Here and Abroad	Differences in Self-Rated Health by Immigrant Status and Language Preference among Arab Americans in the Detroit Metropolitan Area	In this study, we examine self-reported health (SRH) among Arab Americans by immigrant status and language preference. We used data from the 2003 Detroit Arab American Study, a random sample household survey (N = 1,016). Logistic regression models were specified controlling for gender, age, education and income. Our findings reveal that, compared to U.S.-born Arab Americans, immigrants were more likely to report fair/poor health. However, when language is included in the analysis, English-speaking immigrants did not significantly differ from US-born Arab Americans. Arabic-speaking immigrants continued to report fair/poor health at a higher rate. In this paper, a number of potential explanations for our findings are discussed: poorer objective health status, acculturation-related factors that discourage boasting about health and linguistic differences. We conclude by arguing for more studies to unravel the heterogeneity in the health of Arab Americans and to explore the meanings of perceived health status among this group.	Sawsan	 Abdulrahim	Wayne	 Baker
2009	64	Arabs Here and Abroad	Labor Market Outcomes of Middle Eastern and North African Immigrant Women in Germany	Previous research on the economic activity of immigrant women in the U.S. notes the heterogeneity in women’s employment patterns across ethnic groups. In particular, Iranian and Arab women combine high educational attainment with low rates of employment. This paper provides evidence on the education-employment paradox using census data from Germany. First, we analyze the extent to which human capital and family characteristics explain differences in labor market outcomes of immigrant women from Iraq, Iran, Morocco, North Africa and Turkey compared to Germans. Specifically, we analyze labor force participation, unemployment, occupational status and earnings patterns. Second, we study within-group variation in the ability to translate human capital endowments into economic activity. In line with previous research for the U.S., preliminary results indicate an education-employment paradox for Iranian and Iraqi women. In contrast, however, we find that education is not a good predictor of within-group variation in labor force participation for Iranian and Arab women.	Stefanie	 Brodmann	Charlotte	 Moeser
2009	64	Arabs Here and Abroad	Gender Differences in Middle Eastern Immigrant Health	Community-based studies of Middle Easterners point to significant health problems among immigrants, a finding that runs contrary to theories of immigrant selectivity. Whether or how these patterns vary for immigrant men and women has received much less attention, suggesting that the theories and concepts historically used to explain the health of immigrant men (e.g. selectivity, health behaviors) may be less useful for understanding the health profiles and trajectories of immigrant women. Using new questions that identify region of birth in the 2000 through 2007 National Health Interview Surveys, we first compare the self-rated health and activity limitation of Middle Eastern immigrant men and women to U.S.-born white Americans to serve as a baseline. We then examine differences between immigrant men and women and test the extent to which social, demographic and immigrant characteristics account for observed disparities. We conclude by suggesting avenues of future research.	Megan	 Reynolds
2009	65	The Demography of Mental Health	Adult Depression and Chronic Pain: Examining the Relationship between Childhood Family Context and Health in Adulthood	In this study, I examine the extent to which risky family characteristics increase the odds of reporting depression and/or chronic pain in adulthood using data from the National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R). Few sociological studies address indicators of both mental and physical health simultaneously and, beyond research exploring developmental trajectories through adolescence, few studies examine how risky childhood family characteristics are related to adult levels of mental health and physical illness. The results illustrate that adults with depressed mothers had increased odds of reporting adulthood depression with and without chronic pain. Second, among those reporting depressive symptoms, I assess which childhood family characteristics increase the frequency of experiencing adult functional impairment. Among those adults who experience depression, maternal depression also increases the odds of having more frequent and severe incidences of functional impairment. These findings dramatically illustrate the far-reaching influence of childhood family context on adult health and life chances.	Bridget	J. Goosby
2009	65	The Demography of Mental Health	Cumulative Perceived Supportiveness Experiences with Biological Fathers and Maternal Mental Health Problems	Together, increased popularity of the life course paradigm and availability of longitudinal data addressing family relationships have raised important questions about how family processes should be measured to ensure that longitudinal experiences are accurately captured. Using the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study (N=2,158) this paper focuses on trajectories of mothers’ perceived supportiveness from a biological child’s father and mental health problems five years after the birth. A mother’s relationship status with the father is significantly related to her perceptions of supportiveness, with married mothers reporting the highest levels of supportiveness followed by mothers in cohabiting unions, romantic non-residential unions and finally, mothers not in a romantic relationship with the child’s father. Increasing slopes of supportiveness are associated with fewer subsequent mental health problems, controlling for both time-varying and time-invariant maternal and relationship characteristics. The discussion calls attention to alternate ways in which longitudinal experiences can be modeled.	Sarah	O. Meadows
2009	65	The Demography of Mental Health	The Effects of Marriage on Psychological Well-Being 
Focusing on Parental Status Prior to Marriage	It is well known that marriage provides psychological benefits for individuals. However, it is less known whether the beneficial effects of marriage on psychological well-being vary by parental status prior to marriage. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort, we estimate the effects of marriage moderated by parental status on subsequent levels of psychological well-being among the sample of initially never married women. Our results indicate that entering a first marriage is associated with greater improvements in psychological well-being for single mothers compared to childless women. The results are somewhat inconsistent with previous studies about the psychological impacts of marriage for single mothers, partly because our analysis assesses the effects of “first” marriage for “never married women” at the baseline rather than the consequence of marriage among “single women.” Nonetheless, our results clearly suggest that single mothers benefit more from marriage than childless women do.	Hyeyoung	 Woo	Kelly	 Raley
2009	65	The Demography of Mental Health	Aging and Depression in Late Life	The literature indicates that, in comparison with non-senior adults, the prevalence of depression is lower for senior-aged persons. This conclusion is problematic for two reasons. First, the conclusions of most prior studies on late-life depression come from interpretations of cross-sectional data. Second, several other methodological limitations surround the measurement and definition of late-life depression in much pre-existing research, including the exclusion of institutionalized seniors and a lack of controls for dementia patients. This current research resolves these limitations and thus presents improved estimates of age effects on late-life depression. There are two important conclusions. First, physiological decline mediates the age-depression relationship, making late-life depression a largely co-morbid condition. Second, the age-depression relationship for major depressive disorder (MDD) is non-linear and persists after introducing controls for physiological decline. Our findings illustrate that MDD decreases between ages 65-79 and starts to increase around age 80-83.	Zheng	 Wu	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2009	66	Strategies for Achieving Reproductive Goals	Ethnic Fertility Differentials in Vietnam	Vietnam’s total fertility dropped from 3.8 in 1989 to 2.1 in 2005. The remarkable decline was reported to have a parallel in rising contraceptive use and abortion. Despite the overall fertility decline, current rates vary across the country’s 54 ethnic groups. The majority of Vietnamese and Chinese, who together account for 85 % of Vietnam’s total population, have total fertility rates below the replacement level. Meanwhile, minority groups in Northern Uplands such as Dao and Hmong, who are predominantly poor, have the total fertility of 3.6 and 7.1 respectively. This study examines the ethnic fertility differentials using a new approach in ethnic classification. Drawing on the 1999 Census and 2001 Vietnam National Health Survey, we examine proximate determinants of fertility across ethnic groups using the model proposed by Bongaarts (1978). We are particularly interested in addressing the roles of family planning and abortion in describing different fertility levels in a multi-ethnic setting like Vietnam.	Sajeda	 Amin
2009	66	Strategies for Achieving Reproductive Goals	Role of Induced Abortion in Attaining Reproductive Goals in Kyrgyzstan	Abortion is one of the major reproductive health concerns in post-Soviet nations. On average, every woman has had around 1.6 abortions in Kyrgyzstan. In this context, this paper attempts to measure the role of abortion in fertility regulation. The analysis reveals that Kyrgyzstan can attain replacement level fertility without induced abortion by raising the contraceptive prevalence to 70 % at the current level of effectiveness. Also women’s attitude toward becoming pregnant and partner’s thinking that abortion is a problem are significantly associated with the propensity for induced abortion. By ethnocultural background, Russian women are highly determined to seize the full term if any unintended pregnancy occurs in future. Forty-six percent of non-user women who have ever had an abortion do not intend to use any contraceptive method in future, indicating a large proportion of women are at risk of repeating abortion in order to achieve their fertility preferences.	Chander	 Shekhar	Alina	 Sulaimanova
2009	66	Strategies for Achieving Reproductive Goals	Are the Clinical Methods for the Poor in Bangladesh? Evidence from Demographic and Health Survey	This study investigates the differential in uptake of clinical methods and explores the experience of side effects among the clinical method users, with special reference to their economic status, using Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey 2004. A binary logistic regression model was fitted to understand the impact of the economic status of the respondents along with other socioeconomic and demographic variables on clinical method use. About 17% of the respondents were using clinical methods. Clinical method use was high among the poorest clients, and these clients were experiencing more side effects and receiving fewer family planning (FP) visits. Regression analysis revealed that respondents who belonged to the poorest quintile, had no education, had access to FP TV messages, never discussed FP within marital union and were from urban areas were significantly more likely to use clinical methods. This study recommends that FP programs should ensure informed choices for method options.	Mohammad	Amirul  Islam
2009	66	Strategies for Achieving Reproductive Goals	Son Preference, Family Composition and Sterilization among Young Married Women in Bangalore, India	This paper focuses on the relationship between son preference and sterilization behavior among young married women in two slum areas in Bangalore, India. An extensive literature now documents the existence of a preference for sons in India and its effects on demographic patterns. However, a number of studies have suggested that women's reproductive desires and behavior are shaped by more than a simple desire for sons, but rather by a desire for a “balanced” sex composition among children that includes daughters. We use event-history modeling techniques to examine how both a preference for sons and a particular sex composition of children influence the decision to stop childbearing through sterilization. Descriptive statistics suggest that women are more likely to be sterilized if they have sons, but that this is most common among those with both daughters and at least one son.	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Tina	Y. Falle	Suneeta	 Krishnan
2009	67	Aging and Intergenerational Relations in China	Living Arrangement Concordance and Health among Chinese Elders	Many studies have looked at the relationship between living arrangement and overall health of the elderly, but little research takes seniors’ preferred living arrangement into account. This paper uses cross-sectional data from the 2005 wave of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey to examine what factors predict concordance between actual and preferred living arrangements for the elderly in China and how living arrangement concordance influences self-rated health. This analysis focuses on elders who co-reside with children or who live alone/with a spouse only. Covariates predict concordance differently among elders who co-reside with children versus those who live alone/with spouse only. Concordance, net of other factors, predicts better self-rated health among elders who live alone/with spouse only, but does not seem significant among those who co-reside with children.	Melanie	 Sereny
2009	67	Aging and Intergenerational Relations in China	Marital Status Transitions and Patterns of Intergenerational Co-Residence among China’s Elderly	Population aging is proceeding quickly in China and as a result, sizable segments of the population will encounter widowhood in the coming decades. The current study examines whether stability and change in marital status among the very old in China, and in particular the incidence of widowhood, triggers particular responses in co-residence. We analyze multiple waves of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey to determine whether entrance into widowhood influences coresidence. Results of logistic regression analyses suggest that Chinese older adults, including both men and women and those with many children and few, are able to turn to child co-residence as a form of support when they have lost the support and companionship of their spouse.	Kim	 Korinek	Danan	 Gu
2009	67	Aging and Intergenerational Relations in China	Widowhood and Intergenerational Support in Contemporary China	With the rapid aging of the Chinese population, growing attention has been paid to old-age support. Widows and widowers are a particularly vulnerable group because the loss of a spouse can bring financial and emotional challenges. We used the 2002 wave of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey to examine the receipt and sources of multiple dimensions of old-age support (e.g., living arrangements, financial support, emotional support and sickness care) among a nationwide sample of widows and widowers aged 65 and older (N=10,505). We used multinomial and logistic regression for the analysis. Preliminary results showed that Chinese widows and widowers relied heavily on their children for instrumental, financial and emotional support. Parental needs and the number of children were the most significant predictors of old-age support. Remarriage significantly decreased the likelihood of receiving emotional support, sickness care and net financial transfer from children.	Zhenmei	 Zhang	I-Fen	 Lin	Chuntian	 Lu
2009	67	Aging and Intergenerational Relations in China	Son Preference and the Missing Market for Social Insurance:
Evidence from China’s Rural Pension Program	China’s high sex ratio at birth and its dramatic rise in recent years has alarmed policy-makers worldwide. Many argue that the persistence of son preference is driven by greater anticipated old-age support from sons relative to daughters and the absence of formal financial mechanisms for families to save for retirement (Das Gupta et al. 2003). We exploit the introduction of voluntary old-age insurance in rural China in the 1990s to examine whether (1) parents with sons are less likely to participate in pension plans and (2) providing access to pension plans affects parental sex selection decisions. Consistent with the first hypothesis, we find that parents with sons are less likely to participate in the pension program and have less financial savings for retirement. Consistent with the second hypothesis, we find that the 1991 implementation of rural old-age pension programs mitigated the increase in the sex ratio.	Avraham	 Ebenstein	Steven	 Leung
2009	68	Demography with a Gender Lens	The Role of Parental Perceptions in the Gender Bias in Education in West Bengal, India: Results from a Micro Survey	While the causes and consequences of gender disparity in education in India have generated extensive research, some gaps remain, notably in the area of parental attitudes regarding female education and its role in the persistence of gender bias. This study attempts to fill this gap through an analysis of primary data on parental perceptions regarding the education of their sons and daughters. The results show that while there is little evidence of gender disparity at or below the primary level, there is persistent gender bias at higher levels, with significantly higher dropout rates of for girls. There is also a persistent gender gap in the resource allocation for education in favor of boys. These results may be explained partly by the universal awareness of the benefits of some education for both boys and girls, as well as parental perception of education as a tool to pursue traditional gender roles.	Sriparna	 Bose	Sunita	 Bose
2009	68	Demography with a Gender Lens	Exploring the Nature of Gender Equitable Attitudes among Ghanaian Men: Why do Some Men Reject the Patriarchal Dividend?	Gender inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa has far-reaching demographic implications; fertility, mortality, sexual behavior and domestic violence are all affected by men’s traditional decision-making power in the household. However, because the preponderance of research on gender in Sub-Saharan Africa examines women’s perspectives, we do not know the full extent to which African men endorse gender equity, the basis of their resistance and the best approaches to gaining men’s support for greater gender equity. This study uses a mixed-methods approach to examine how some men in Ghana develop more equitable gender attitudes. Using both the 2003 Ghana  Demographic and Health Survey and 33 in-depth interviews with Ghanaian men who were identified as gender equitable, this study examines the quantitative predictors of gender equitable attitudes among men and explores the experiences that can cultivate these attitudes over the life course. Additionally, this study investigates the costs and benefits of holding such attitudes to Ghanaian men.	Ashley	E. Frost
2009	68	Demography with a Gender Lens	Hindrance or Dividend? Changes in Marriage on Women’s Employment Prospects in 21 African Countries	The study of how marital transitions relate to employment is central to demography because of the linkages between marriage, employment and women’s social/economic status, and how all of these affect fertility transitions. Yet no large-scale historical examination of the question using recent African data exists. Employing multiple data sources and a variety of statistical estimations, I decompose the observed change in women’s employment in each country into three different components: changes in aggregate marriage, changes in employment returns to marriage and changes in other contextual factors. Results indicate that in the majority of the 21 sampled countries with historical data, the returns to marriage rather than aggregate marriage or country-specific influences on employment opportunity drive the changes, whether gains or reversals, since 1991. Implications for the fertility transition, women’s position and gender inequality in the region are discussed.	Fatou	 Jah
2009	68	Demography with a Gender Lens	Can Policy Trump Gender? The Impact of Parenthood upon Paid and Unpaid Work and the Gender Division of Labour in Five Countries	We compare how becoming a parent impacts time in paid work, domestic labor and childcare in five countries with different workplace systems, family and social policies and cultural attitudes to family care provision. Research associates the transition to parenthood with higher daily total workloads for fathers and mothers compared to childless men and women and with intensification of the gender division of labor. Using an original harmonized data set from nationally representative time-use surveys from Australia, Italy, France, the U.S. and Denmark, we explore whether/how these outcomes differ cross-nationally. Our harmonization facilitates the first cross-national time-use analysis of actual households (in four of the countries) and of supervisory childcare. A parental workload penalty and an intensified gender division of labor do pertain cross-nationally but are most pronounced in market-oriented care countries Australia and U.S. and least pronounced in “valued-care” Denmark. Masculinization of female behavior is a stronger driver than feminization of male behavior.	Lyn	 Craig	Mullan	 Killian
2009	69	Religion, Sexuality and Fertility	Religion and Sexual Initiation in Brazil	Increasing adolescent fertility and declining age of first sexual intercourse have been accompanied by a transformation in Brazil’s religious landscape, remarked by the significant growth of Protestantism, led by Pentecostalism. Using data from the 2006 National Demographic Health Survey, this paper examines the associations between religion, as measured by religious affiliation and religious attendance, and never-married adolescent sexual initiation in Brazil. Our findings show that even when controlling for demographic, socioeconomic and community variables, never-married adolescent women’s sexual initiation does differ according to religious affiliation and attendance at religious services in Brazil: those who belong to traditional Protestant or Pentecostal churches and attend religious services more often are at lower risk of engaging in sexual activity. Based on our quantitative results and using available ethnographic evidence, we conclude by suggesting that Pentecostalism and attendance at religious services may influence, directly and indirectly, never-married adolescent women’s sexual initiation in Brazil.	Ana	Paula A. Verona	Mark	 Regnerus
2009	69	Religion, Sexuality and Fertility	Religion and Attitudes toward Abortion among U.S. Adults	Previous research has established the role of religion in shaping attitudes toward abortion among adults in the United States, particularly for conservative Protestants. However, less work has examined opinions about abortion policy or specific views about the potential positive and negative consequences of legal abortion. Utilizing a unique, nationally representative data set (1,500) containing information about abortion attitudes and individual religious characteristics, we assess the influence of religion on policy preferences for abortion availability and perceptions of the consequences of legal abortion. We find that regular or frequent religious attendance and affiliation with a conservative Protestant denomination are associated with less support for the general availability of elective abortion and less positive assessments of the consequences of legal abortion, but findings differ depending on religious subcultural self-identification. Our findings broaden the knowledge about associations between personal religiosity and attitudes toward abortion and contribute to clarifying the meaning and social influences of subjective religious self-identification.	Jennifer	B. Barrett	Christopher	G. Ellison	Clifford	 Grammich	Julie	 DaVanzo
2009	69	Religion, Sexuality and Fertility	Religion and Fertility in the UK: Trends and Outlook	Family planning involves a number of personal, cultural and possibly religious preferences that impact on fertility rates. Information is scarce  and little data are available on fertility rates by religious groups, partly because few data is available. Here we report recent trends in total period fertility rates (TFRs) of mothers in the UK belonging to the major religious groups and those with no religion. TFRs are estimated based on the cross sectional Labour Force Survey in the UK, applying reverse survival techniques to obtain robust estimates over the period 1988-2006. Despite a decreasing trend, Muslim fertility remains relatively very high compared to the other groups. Results show much higher TFRs to non-believers compared to other findings in Europe. Cross-analysis of fertility by religious belonging and ethnicity support a non-trivial relationship between geographical ancestry and religion. Future fertility trends and assumptions to project populations by religious groups, including religious transmission, are discussed.	Sylvie	 Dubuc
2009	69	Religion, Sexuality and Fertility	Why Is Congregational Participation Associated with Higher Fertility?	Women who actively participate in congregations have high fertility, but there is no consensus about the causal mechanisms involved. Using data from the 2001 Congregational Life Survey, I demonstrate that congregational group participation and dense congregational friendship networks are more influential predictors of congregant fertility than Biblical literalism, worship frequency, or prayer frequency. Congregational social networks function as fertility reference groups, which encourage childbearing.	Conrad	 Hackett
2009	70	Immigrant Integration in Europe	Acculturation Preferences and Their Correlates of Second Generation Immigrants in Main Cities of Western Europe	Berry's (1997) two-dimensional model of acculturation was applied to recent survey data collected in main cities in six European countries to examine differentials in and correlates of acculturation preferences of second generation Turkish, Moroccan and Former Yugoslavian immigrants in the age range 18-35 years. An ‘ethnic group culture preservation index’ and a “host country adaptation index” were derived to classify respondents into groups favoring integration, assimilation, separation or marginalization. Results show that children of immigrants as well as the comparison group maintain integration preferences. However, a large share of the second generation also believes that norms and values prevailing in the parent's country of origin should be maintained and applied in daily life. This viewpoint is often not shared by members of the comparison group. Cultural integration and preservation preferences appear to vary by city, neighborhood characteristics, descent group, educational attainment, religiosity, discrimination experience and self-efficacy.	George	 Groenewold	Jeroen	 van Ginneken
2009	70	Immigrant Integration in Europe	Class and Ethnic Disadvantages in Educational Attainment of the Second Generation Revisited: Results for the 1991 and 2001 Belgian Census Compared	This study considers the role of migration and group-specific ethnic penalties in minority groups’ life chances. More specifically it focuses on the ethnic and class inequalities in educational achievement in Belgium with second generation young adults and their native peers. Educational attainment is examined by considering dropouts as well as the delay in age when graduating from secondary education and the extent of that delay. The association between social class and educational attainment has long been established. Recent research with the second generation has shown that mechanisms of class disadvantage perpetuate ethnic disadvantage from one generation to the next. Moreover several studies have shown that classic assimilation theory doesn’t suffice in explaining ethnic underachievement. Does an ethnic gap remain when controlling for gender, region and social background? Do different tracking practices in the regions affect educational attainment differently for the second generation?	Vicky	 Bastiaenssen
2009	70	Immigrant Integration in Europe	Patterns of Individual Occupational Histories with Regard to Immigration in France and Gender Specificities	Immigrants’ participation in the French labor market has been a salient research topic, often depicted as a major criterion for assessing the integration process within the host society or as a pointer for various types of discrimination. Based on such conceptualizations, many studies revealed important dissimilarities between immigrants and other population categories (e.g., as natives or “second generation migrants”) regarding their employment/unemployment rates, occupational status, their promotion chances. However, the trajectories leading toward the labor market participation as observed at a single point in time have rarely been studied, due to limited availability of longitudinal data. Therefore, this study uses data from the French “Histoire de vie” survey to compare, by gender, immigrants’ occupational histories to those of natives. It then restricts the analysis to the immigrant sample and examines occupational transitions experienced at migration, comparing the labor market trajectories lived before and after arriving in France.	Alina	 Toader
2009	70	Immigrant Integration in Europe	Immigrant-Native Exogamy in Sweden: A Longitudinal Study of the Determinants of Intermarriage among Immigrants, 1990-2005	Intermarriage with natives is often seen as a key to immigrant assimilation. Previous research has dealt mostly with North America and Australia and has been based on cross-section data. In this paper, intermarriage between immigrants and natives is studied for more than 30 immigrant groups in Sweden using longitudinal individual-level data from the population registers. We analyze the total population residing in Sweden anytime between 1990 and 2005 and born between 1942 and 1989. Data on income and employment status are available on a yearly basis throughout the period. In addition we include standard human capital variables, such as gender, age, level and field of education, and time since immigration, as well as variables reflecting the situation in the local labor market (unemployment rate, employment rate). Preliminary results show that better-educated immigrants who spend more time in Sweden before marriage are more likely to marry natives.	Martin	 Dribe	Christer	 Lundh
2009	71	International Perspectives on Family Structure and Children’s Education	An Exploration of the Female Headship Effect on Educational Participation in Sub-Saharan Africa	Female headship, typically synonymous with single parenthood, in industrialized countries is associated with lower cognitive development and academic achievement of children. In Sub-Saharan Africa however, female headship tends to have a positive association with children’s educational participation, even though female-headed households have fewer economic resources than male-headed ones. The purpose of this paper is to explore the pathways through which female headship influences the educational attainment, achievement and aspirations of children. The expected finding is that greater social capital and more child-oriented allocation of household resources will be the main explanations for this paradox.	Pearl	 Kyei
2009	71	International Perspectives on Family Structure and Children’s Education	Family Structure, Household Resources and High School Enrollment: China 2000	Using the 0.95% data of China’s 2000 Census, this paper investigates the relationship between family structure, household resources and high school enrollment among adolescents ages 17-18. Analytic results show that: (1) children from two-parent families but living with only the mother due to father’s migration are mostly advantaged in school enrollment; and (2) compared with children with two parents, those of divorced families, stepfamilies, widowed families and no-parent families all have a lower likelihood of school enrollment, particularly so for children of father-only families. These findings reflect that family structure remains an important determinant of adolescents’ education beyond the compulsory level, and the person with whom the children co-reside affects their education. Such findings are partly inconsistent with those of relevant studies in developed and developing settings. The disadvantages faced by children of father-only families are likely to have detrimental and long-term consequences for them in particular and for society in general.	Juhua	 Yang
2009	71	International Perspectives on Family Structure and Children’s Education	Orphans’ Mobility and Schooling in Burkina Faso: An Event History Analysis	In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the well-being of orphans in Sub-Saharan Africa. Most of the current literature on that topic is devoted to countries of Eastern or Southern Africa, the areas of the continent most afflicted  by HIV. Far less is known about the living conditions of orphans in other parts of the continent, including West Africa Sahelian countries such as Burkina Faso. This research uses event history data collected in Burkina Faso in 2000,from 8,644 individuals aged 15-64 at the time of the survey. While previous research found that orphans, namely double orphans, are less likely to enter school, the analysis of grade attainment reveals a paradox: orphans, particularly double orphans, perform better than non-orphans. We explore the plausible explanation for this result by examining the fosterage patterns of orphans as compared to non-orphans.	Jean-François	 Kobiané	Richard	 Marcoux	Tukufu	 Zuberi
2009	71	International Perspectives on Family Structure and Children’s Education	Orphanhood, Fostering and Schooling in Sub-Saharan Africa	Much of Sub-Saharan Africa has seen substantial increases in the proportion of children who have lost parents because of HIV/AIDS. Many of these children are taken in by grandparents, aunts and uncles, or other relatives. The increase in orphanhood has occurred within a context in which many non-orphan children normally live with foster parents and cousins. Using recent Demographic and Health Surveys for Zambia, Malawi and Tanzania, this research examines school attendance and grade level in relation to whether the child is an orphan or lives separately from living parents, and compares outcomes for children with different biological relationships to the household head. It is found that children who have living parents but do not live with them tend to have the same negative outcomes as children whose parents have died, and that foster children tend to have worse outcomes than biological children of the household head in the same household.	Thomas	W. Pullum
2009	72	Orphans, Adoption and Fostering	Children Adopted from Abroad and Their Families in the United States: A Demographic Analysis of the Effect of Changing Policies in the Past 20 Years	What are the demographics of children who are adopted from abroad, and what incentives drive families to adopt them? According to the U.S. Census, more than 1.5 million children living in the U.S. are adopted, with 15% of them born abroad and more than 20,000 new adopted orphans from abroad enter the country each year. The families of these adopted orphans are mostly white, wealthy and well educated (see Kossoudji, 2008), yet we know very little about them. In this paper we use a cohort analysis of the 2000 Census determine to what extent international adoptions have changed during the last 20 years. How does policy by other countries change U.S. parents’ adoption behavior? How does policy in other countries and in the U.S. change the demographic characteristics of the children adopted from abroad and the families who adopt them?	Fernando	 Lozano	Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2009	72	Orphans, Adoption and Fostering	Orphanhood and  Schooling in South Africa: Trends in the Vulnerability of Orphans between 1993 and 2005	Using 10 nationally representative surveys conducted between 1993 and 2005, we assess the extent to which the vulnerability of orphans to poorer educational outcomes has changed over time as the AIDS crisis deepens in South Africa. We find that at every point in time orphans are at risk of poorer educational outcomes, with maternal deaths generally having stronger negative effects than paternal deaths. However, despite a significant increase in the number of orphans over the last decade, we find no evidence of a systematic strengthening of these negative effects. Patterns of care-giving for orphans have shifted over time, but changes are taking place within the extended family safety net. There is an increasing reliance on grandparents as caregivers. Up to this point, these changing patterns of care-giving within extended families seem to have averted further worsening in educational outcomes for the increasing number of orphans.	Cally	 Ardington	Murray	 Leibbrandt
2009	72	Orphans, Adoption and Fostering	Children in the Aftermath of the Tsunami: Evidence from Indonesia	Humanitarian crises, whether natural or manmade, have potentially devastating impacts for children. The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami was one of the most destructive disasters in human history. In this paper we investigate the consequences of the tsunami for children in two provinces in Indonesia: Aceh, which bore the brunt of the damage, and neighboring North Sumatra, which suffered far less. We consider the loss of parents and children’s subsequent living arrangements, as well as education and health outcomes for children in both the heavy damage zone and the less damaged areas as a function of characteristics of the children, their parents and their communities. We analyze a unique data set collected as part of the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery, a multiwave longitudinal study that draws on a subset of respondents to the 2004 National Socioeconomic Survey.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Ava	 Cas
2009	72	Orphans, Adoption and Fostering	Competitive or Complementary? The Relationship between Orphanhood and Child Fostering in Sub-Saharan Africa	Sub-Saharan Africa has a long history of child fostering. In countries most afflicted by the HIV/AIDS epidemic, orphanhood has increased dramatically, but many of its consequences have been mitigated by the ability of households to absorb orphans. In this paper, we examine what the rising levels of orphanhood mean for the common practice of elected child fostering. In particular, we ask whether the growing number of orphans is displacing opportunities for other forms of fostering or whether they are complementary and households are able to absorb both. We use the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs) from the 18 countries with at least two surveys to examine changes in fostering patterns over time. We then use fixed effects models to examine how orphanhood and fostering patterns vary by community-level HIV prevalence using the 16 Sub-Saharan countries that included HIV testing on their most recent DHS.	Monica	J. Grant	Sara	E. Yeatman
2009	73	Transition to Adulthood	Vulnerable Youth and the the Transition to Adulthood	The definition of “vulnerable youth” varies. We divide factors into two groups, exogenous factors such as growing up in a low-income family, in a single-parent family, and in bad neighborhoods and endogenous choices such as substance abuse, early sexual behavior, delinquent behaviors and dropping out of school. We use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 to examine trajectories of connectedness to school or work between ages 18 and 24 and identify direct and indirect effects of being in vulnerable populations, accounting for the effect of risk taking and dropping out of school. We find a direct effect of growing up in a low-income family on the likelihood of never being connected to school or work, but no indirect effect operating through risky behaviors. Risky behaviors and not completing high school predict being disconnected; however, youth from low-income families are not more likely to engage in risky behaviors nor less likely to complete high school.	Michael	 Pergamit	Tracy	 Vericker	Daniel	 Kuehn	Jennifer	 Macomber
2009	73	Transition to Adulthood	Socioeconomic (Dis)advantage, Contextual Risk and 
Educational Outcomes in Early Adulthood	A vast body of literature addresses the effects of poverty on adolescent outcomes, yet few researchers have examined how economic disadvantage shapes the transition to adulthood in the U.S. If, as Furstenberg (2003; 2006) argues, family background creates divergent experiences for youth, then young adults from affluent, modest or limited means face different trajectories in the transition to adulthood. Understanding these differences and the factors that contribute to them has important implications for the reduction of inequality as well as for policies to improve children’s life chances. In this paper, I explore the relationship between family income and educational outcomes typically considered as markers in the transition to adulthood. Specifically, I address how family socioeconomic status (SES) and changes in economic position in childhood influence educational outcomes in early adulthood. I also explore the extent to which family, peer, school and neighborhood contexts mediate the effects of family SES on educational outcomes.	Laryssa	 Mykyta
2009	73	Transition to Adulthood	Multiple Caregiver Transitions and Early Union Formation	The link between multiple transitions in caregivers and child well-being is well established, but the extent to which these effects persist into emerging adulthood has been under-explored. Using longitudinal data from Add Health, this study investigates the influence of multiple transitions in caregivers on early union formation (either marital or cohabiting) and early births. These relationships are considered through two perspectives: social stress theory and selection effects. Findings support previous literature in that selection effects exist, but social stress theory dominates this relationship overall. This study also contributes several new findings: direct effects of transitions on both types of early family formation are observed for black and nonblack females alike, and these relationships are mediated by measures of social isolation and acting out behaviors. These relationships are extremely similar across various measures of caregiver transitions (i.e., exits, entries, early childhood transitions, and clustered transitions), suggesting these findings are rather robust.	Jennifer	 Buher Kane	Alan	 Booth
2009	73	Transition to Adulthood	Adolescent Marriage and Cohabitation Expectations: A Focus on Participants in Relationship Education Programs	The U.S. government has attempted to support marriage by providing financial and political resources for relationship initiatives, particularly those that target disadvantaged populations. There are few relationship programs that target adolescents. Programs that seek to improve the quality of adolescent relationships are pivotal. The goal of the current work is to evaluate the marriage and cohabitation expectations of adolescents in an effort to advance knowledge of the factors that influence transition to adult relationships, namely marriage beliefs, socioeconomic disadvantage, relationship status, relationship characteristics, parenthood status, demographic characteristics and peer influence. The life course perspective serves as the conceptual framework by highlighting the occurrence of romantic relationships during a pivotal period of growth. This work utilizes three data sets: (1) existing data from the relationship education program No Jerks, (2) new data from a pilot relationship program Relationship Smarts Plus, and (3) wave one findings from the Toledo Adolescent Relationship Study.	Deanna	 Trella
2009	76	Demographic Aspects of Poverty	Minimum Wages and the Poor: Evidence on the Target Efficiency of the Obama Proposal	Using data drawn from March Current Population Surveys, we examine the effectiveness of minimum wage increases in alleviating poverty in the U.S. Our results show that state and federal minimum wage increases between 2003 and 2007 had no effect on state poverty rates. We then examine whether a newly proposed federal minimum wage increase from $7.25 to $9.50 per hour will be effective in aiding poor workers, and we compare its target efficiency to that of the last federal minimum wage increase from $5.15 to $7.25 per hour. Our simulations show that the newly proposed increase will be even less well-targeted toward poor workers than was the last increase. Only 11.0 % of workers who would be affected by the newly proposed federal minimum wage increase are poor, compared to 15.1% from the last increase. Taken together, our results suggest that raising the Federal minimum wage is a poor anti-poverty strategy.	Joseph	J. Sabia	Richard	V. Burkhauser
2009	76	Demographic Aspects of Poverty	A First Look at U.S. Children in Persistently-Poor Neighborhoods	The number of children living in poor neighborhoods increased dramatically during the 1980s and then fell during the 1990s. However, a subset of neighborhoods has been poor each decade from 1980 to 2000. These neighborhoods are particularly important because they are home to some of the country’s most vulnerable children and families. The goal of this paper is to improve our understanding of the 8.3 million children living in persistently poor neighborhoods (those with poverty rates of at least 20 % in 1980, 1990, and 2000) to investigate the unique social, economic and demographic characteristics of these communities and to provide a first look at how these neighborhoods may have changed since 2000.	Mark	S. Mather	Nadwa	 Mossaad
2009	76	Demographic Aspects of Poverty	An Evaluation of the Bolsa Familia Program in Brazil: 
Expenditures, Education and Labor Outcomes	The Bolsa Familia, created in 2003, is a program of conditional income transfer to families in a situation of poverty and aims to immediately mitigate the poverty by direct income transfer. The purpose of this paper is to present the first results of an impact evaluation of the Bolsa Familia program on various dimensions. Results are presented for household indicators of education, work and expenditures and are based on data of the first round of the survey for the impact evaluation. Some important results are based on retrospective and current educational information, which allowed the estimation of transition probabilities for the construction of a schooling life table. Using the propensity score matching method, there are not many statistically significant results for the differences between our comparison groups. Nevertheless, the significant results are, in general, favorable to the beneficiaries of the program.	Ana	 Oliveira	Julio	C. Sousa
2009	76	Demographic Aspects of Poverty	Afterschool Child Care Subsidies and Maternal Employment Stability among Low-Income Populations	Empirical studies have shown that the high cost of substitute child care pressures parents (especially mothers) to accommodate work arrangements to child afterschool time by reducing work hours, which is regarded as harmful to employment stability. This study hypothesizes that the income eligibility level of child care subsidy influences the likelihood of full-time work among low-income mothers through affecting their use of center-based afterschool child care. Individual data are from National Survey of American Families, 2002. Child care policy data of 13 states are from the Child Care Bureau and 4,401 working mothers are selected into the sample. Using bivariate probit model, the analysis shows that the higher the level of income eligibility set by the state, the higher likelihood of center-based child care use (probit coefficient is .113), as well as the stronger effect of center-based child care on full-time work decision (probit coefficient increases from .583 to .864).	Xiang	 Gao
2009	77	Families and Health	The Relationship between Mental Health and Marital Dissolution: The Prior Depression and the Following Divorce	Among the evidence about the relationship between marital status and psychological well-being, numerous studies have established the social causation explanation, but few studies have examined the social selection effect of mental health on marital dissolution. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, this study uses survival models to examine the relationship between depression as an early adult and subsequent divorce. In addition, this study examines the effect of marital quality on marital dissolution for females. Individuals who have a history of depressive symptoms have significantly higher risk of divorce over the course of their marriage, after adjusting for other predictors. Furthermore, even after adjusting for marital quality, depression still has a significant effect on the risk of divorce, suggesting that prior mental health may be a substantive precursor of negative events over the life course.	Chioun	 Lee	Hyun	Sik  Kim
2009	77	Families and Health	In Sickness and in Health: An Examination of Relationship Status and Health using Data from the Canadian National Public Health Survey	There is an extensive literature suggesting that marriage confers benefits to men and women in the form of improvements in mental and physical health and longevity. In this paper, we use longitudinal data from the Canadian National Public Health Survey to investigate the relationship between relationship status and several health-related behaviors and outcomes. Our work improves on previous research in several ways. First, we consider both marriage and cohabitation. Second, the Canadian data are an improvement over U.S. data because the confounding of marriage and health insurance in Canada is not an issue. Third, we use 12 years of data and a rich array of health outcomes. Our results indicate that married people (and to a lesser extent those who cohabit) are generally healthier and tend to smoke and drink less but they are also heavier and more likely to be classified as overweight or obese.	Susan	L. Averett	Laura	M. Argys	Julia	 Sorkin
2009	77	Families and Health	Is Marriage a Protective State? A Longitudinal Study of Families' Demand for Health Care	Married people show lower mortality, lower morbidity and better health than their unmarried counterparts. However, most of the existing evidence is unconfirmed due to lack of adequate data and limitations of methods. Moreover, the mechanism through which marriage might protect individuals’ health is not clear. The authors try to identify causal pathways for the link between marriage and health by looking at changes of health care use after entry into first marriage. Using data from the German Socio-Economic Panel, the frequency of visits to a doctor and the probability of hospitalization are analyzed in a fixed effects estimation framework. Results indicate that marriage may prevent serious illness by increasing regular contact with the health system. Once they are married, people go to the doctor more often. For women, health benefits arise mainly through childbirth while men may profit more directly from support and control of a spouse.	Valeria	 Bordone	Volker	 Ludwig
2009	77	Families and Health	Single Mothers, Union History and Health at Midlife	Recent policy initiatives emphasize that encouraging marriage can improve the lives of disadvantaged single mothers and their children. Although, on average, married individuals are healthier than the unmarried, little research examines the association of marriage or partnering with the later health of single mothers. We analyze data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 to determine whether marriage or cohabitation following the birth of a child to a single mother has consequences for her health at midlife. We focus on never-married mothers, distinguish unions that endure from those that dissolve and consider whether associations between unions and health depend on the paternity status of the mother’s spouse/partner. Preliminary results indicate that single mothers who marry the biological father of their child report better health at age 40 than those who remain unpartnered, regardless of whether the marriage endures. Subsequent analyses will employ propensity score matching to determine whether results are robust to selection processes.	Kristi	 Williams	Sharon	 Sassler	Adrianne	 Frech	Fenaba	 Addo
2009	78	Economics of Aging and Retirement	How Do Pensions Affect Household Wealth Accumulation?	Most analyses of pension effects on saving behavior use an empirical specification derived from a very simple life-cycle model, with a fixed retirement age, a perfect capital market, isoelastic or quadratic preferences, and a “unitary” specification of household preferences. My empirical analysis relaxes several of these strong assumptions. Estimates of the effects of pensions on household wealth accumulation are somewhat sensitive to specification. For example, the effect of the accumulated balance in defined contribution (DC) plans for women is around .20 and significantly different from zero, while the effect for men is about .02. This difference is obscured when the household DC balance is used. The effects of defined benefit pension wealth and Social Security wealth are estimated to be quite different from the effects of DC balances in some cases. Overall, the results are fairly consistent across specifications in showing very small effects of pensions on household wealth.	David	 Blau
2009	78	Economics of Aging and Retirement	Does Labor Force Retirement Accelerate Mortality? General Considerations and Evidence from U.S. Supreme Court Justices, 1801-2006	Does labor force retirement accelerate death? Previous studies report positive, negative and null effects of retirement on mortality hazard. It is difficult to resolve these inconsistencies because (1) nearly all data confounds unemployment with retirement and (2) often, endogeneity bias is uncorrected. We analyze data that avoid these problems, from an exceptional subgroup, of interest in its own right: U.S. Supreme Court justices, 1801-2006. Using discrete time event history methods, we examine retirement effects on mortality hazard and years left alive. Substantive and methodological considerations suggest several models. Some models specify endogenous effects estimated by instrumental variables (IV) probit, IV Tobit and IV regression methods. Others specify effects estimated by endogenous switching (ES) probit and ES regression. All results are consistent with the hypothesis that retirement increases mortality hazard and reduces years left alive. Retirement effects on mortality hazard compare to the effects of smoking two packs of cigarettes daily.	Ross	M. Stolzenberg
2009	78	Economics of Aging and Retirement	Trends and Correlates of Post-Retirement Employment, 1968 to 2007	The stereotypical retirement experience – the abrupt ceasing of all paid work and commencement of a life of leisure – is the experience of only half of all workers. Yet, despite the prevalence of combining work and retirement in the U.S. and the implications this work-retirement behavior may have both for the labor market and for individual workers, post-retirement employment behavior is understudied. In this paper, we add to the growing literature on retirement and employment processes by examining the trends and correlates of post-retirement employment in the U.S. from 1968 to 2007. Specifically, this paper presents (1) trends in the prevalence of post-retirement employment for the older population as a whole and for subpopulations defined by sex, race, immigration status and other important demographic characteristics; and (2) an analysis of the correlates of post-retirement employment that might help explain the observed trends.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman	Robin	 Pleau
2009	79	Biosocial Investigations of Fertility, Sexuality and Reproductive Health	Does Abstinence Work? Natural Methods Users and Consistency of Behavior	The percentage of couples using natural family planning (NFP) who experienced an unintended pregnancy is 25% (Trussel, 2004). The high percentage of failures in preventing a pregnancy can depend on a misuse of the method, but also on the difficulty of observing the abstinence rule during the fertile days of the cycle. The aim of this paper is to assess consistency of behavior for users. A detailed typology of behaviors of ‘avoiders’, i.e. couples who try not to have intercourse in the fertile window, will be presented, together with an analysis of determinants of temporary interruption of an avoiding behavior. We will consider data on 1,074 couples and 10,508 menstrual cycles, for which acts of intercourse are recorded, coming from a Multinational Study on Daily Fecundability which involves 11 European NFP centers.	Ester	L. Rizzi
2009	79	Biosocial Investigations of Fertility, Sexuality and Reproductive Health	The Association of Positive Sexual Health and Psychological Well-Being in Emerging Adulthood	Sexual health policy documents, sexual script theory, youth development theory and the positive psychology literature all suggest that emerging adults in established heterosexual relationships who experience greater sexual pleasure also experience greater psychological well-being. In this study we explore this heretofore unproven association. Our sample consists of the (N=3,289) 19- to 25-year-old respondents with complete data in the third wave of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) who were still in a relationship of 3+-month duration with their most recent other-sex sexual partner. Using regression analysis, we examine the associations between sexual pleasure (enjoyment of receiving and performing oral sex and regularity of orgasm) and four aspects of well-being (empathy, autonomy, self-esteem and relationship quality) and one measure of the absence of well-being (depressive symptoms). We find some evidence of covariance, although the associations differ according to the measures examined and along gender lines.	Adena	M. Galinsky	Freya	 Sonenstein
2009	79	Biosocial Investigations of Fertility, Sexuality and Reproductive Health	The Intergenerational Transmission of Sexual Frequency	Intergenerational relationships are one of the most frequently studied topics in social demography. Within the area of family, researchers have found intergenerational similarity in family behaviors such as marriage, divorce and fertility, with fertility being one of the most extensively studied intergenerational linkages. Yet virtually no research has examined the intergenerational aspects of a key proximate determinant of fertility: sexual frequency. We use the National Survey of Families and Households to examine the relationship between sexual frequency of parents and the sexual frequency of children when adults. We link parental sexual frequency in 1987-1988, when children were ages 5-18, to the sexual frequency of the children in 2001-2003, when these grown children were ages 18-34. We find significant associations between parental and adult children sexual frequency. A mechanism behind this association appears to be greater transition to marriage among children of parents with high sexual frequency.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Chelsea	 Caloia
2009	79	Biosocial Investigations of Fertility, Sexuality and Reproductive Health	Resource Competition and Reproduction in Karo Batak Villages	Behavioral ecology theory predicts that when wealth is heritable, parents may (1) manipulate family size to optimize the tradeoff between more relatively poor offspring and fewer relatively rich ones; and (2) channel less care into offspring who compete more with their siblings for resources. These hypotheses were tested with 305 Karo Batak boys. The Karo Batak are patrilineal agriculturalists from North Sumatra, Indonesia, among whom land is bequeathed equally to sons. As predicted, the relationships between reproductive rate and parental investment on one hand, and number of sons on the other, was mediated by landholding. Reproductive rates slowed with increasing sons among families with above-average landholdings, but not among the landless and those with small landholdings. Age-five mortality increased with the number of sons more steeply among landowners than among the landless. Finally, immunizations decreased with the number of sons among landowners, but increased among the landless.	Geoff	 Kushnick
2009	80	The Consequences of Immigration for Receiving Countries	Immigrant Labor, Household Services and the Work-Fertility Trade-Off in the United States	The negative correlation between female employment and fertility in industrialized nations has weakened since the 1960s, particularly in the United States. We suggest that the continuing influx of low-skilled immigrants has led to a substantial reduction in the trade-off between work and childrearing facing American women. The evidence we present indicates that low-skilled immigration has driven down wages in the U.S. child-care sector. More affordable child-care has, in turn, increased the fertility of college graduate native females. Although childbearing is generally associated with temporary exit from the labor force, immigrant-led declines in the price of child-care have reduced the extent of role incompatibility between fertility and work.	Heinrich	 Hock	Delia	 Furtado
2009	80	The Consequences of Immigration for Receiving Countries	Assessing and Addressing Brain Waste in the United States	Taking advantage of the unique features of the 2003 New Immigrant Survey and 2005-2006 American Community Survey, we examined employment and occupational trajectories of highly skilled immigrants in the United States. We found that more than 1.3 million or one in five skilled immigrants were either unemployed or working in unskilled jobs such as dish washers, security guards, or taxi drivers. We find that lack of English skills, nonrecognition of foreign credentials and work experience, non-European origin, shorter tenure in the United States and non-employment admission categories are the main factors behind the brain waste. Skill underutilization documented in our paper can be addressed by both immigrant admission and immigrant integration policies.	Jeanne	 Batalova	Michael	 Fix
2009	80	The Consequences of Immigration for Receiving Countries	How Do Very Open Economies Adjust to Large Immigration Flows? Recent Evidence from Spanish Regions	We study the labor market effects of the large immigration wave in Spain between 2001 and 2006. In this period the foreign-born share increased from 6% to 13%, with a total inflow exceeding three million immigrants. We exploit the large heterogeneity in immigration flows across the different regions. To identify causal effects, we take advantage of the fact that immigrants’ location choices were strongly driven by earlier migrant settlements for the main countries of origin. We find that the relatively unskilled migration inflows did not affect the wages or employment rates of unskilled workers in the receiving regions. The increase in the unskilled labor force was absorbed mostly through increases in total employment. This increase did not originate in changes in the output mix, but was instead driven by changes in skill intensity. The key industries responsible for this absorption were retail, construction, hotels and restaurants and domestic services.	Libertad	 Gonzalez	Francesc	 Ortega
2009	80	The Consequences of Immigration for Receiving Countries	Earnings and Occupational Trajectories of Newly-Legalized Immigrants	This paper contributes to the literature examining whether receiving legal status improves the earnings and/or occupations of illegal immigrants. We use data that are newer and different than that of existing research to analyze labor market outcomes of individuals who have received Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) status but previously worked without authorization. The New Immigrant Survey (NIS) gathered detailed employment and migration histories from a cohort of over 8,000 immigrants granted LPR status in 2003, affording a distinction between those who had been in the U.S. legally or illegally prior to earning their green cards. We use a difference-in-difference approach to identify possible labor market effects of receiving legal status. Importantly, the NIS data allow us to categorize different types of illegal immigration experience – e.g., crossing the border illegally or violating the terms of a visa – and to investigate whether there are different impacts of receiving legal status across these two groups.	Magnus	 Lofstrom	Laura	 Hill	Joseph	M. Hayes
2009	81	Child Health and Survival	Income Inequality and Child Survival in Bangladesh	The aim of this study is to examine the socioeconomic causes of inequalities in child survival between poor and better-off children. Data from the Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveys (BDHSs) are used for the study. In this study, quintiles were calculated on the basis of household assets and wealth score by use of principle component analysis. The poorest-richest ratio of infant mortality was 1.3 in 1993-1994, whereas this ratio was 1.6 and 1.6 for 1999-2000 and 2007 BDHSs, indicating that the gap between poor and rich has widened. This is also supported by the values of Concentration Index (CI). All are significantly different from zero of conventional levels. The absolute value of CI inequalities in child survival increased over time. The probit regression analysis indicates that infants mortality of the richest quintile was significantly lower than that of the poorest quintile. Due to existing socioeconomic differentials in Bangladesh, the poor children are more vulnerable to mortality.	Sheikh	M. Giashuddin	Mohammad	 Kabir
2009	81	Child Health and Survival	District Level Inequalities in Child Survival in India: Results of the Reproductive and Child Health District Level Health Survey II, 2002-2004	This paper presents analysis of inequalities in under-5 mortality at the district level in India using the Reproductive and Child Health District Level Health Survey II, 2002-2004. This analysis has two primary goals. The first is to examine the major determinants of inequality in child mortality at the individual level, with a focus on the relative impact of socioeconomic factors, such as household wealth, wealth inequality, education and religion compared to the impact of the provision of important maternal and child health interventions such as antenatal care, the presence of skilled birth attendants and DPT3 vaccination, the third dose of the diptheria, pertussis and tetanus vaccine. The second goal is to examine the factors responsible for inequalities in child mortality across districts in India. This analysis allows us to explore why some districts have been effective at reducing mortality in the poorest groups while others have not.	Jesse	 Abbott-Klafter	Nirmala	 Ravishankar	Paul	 Gubbins	Christopher	J.L. Murray
2009	81	Child Health and Survival	Childhood Mortality Levels and Trends in Kenya: New Estimates Based on the Own Children Method	The Brass technique is widely used to estimate childhood mortality among Sub-Saharan African countries with limited and defective data. However, two fundamental assumptions – of constant fertility and mother-child mortality independence – are violable by the ongoing fertility transitions and the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS observed in many countries. This study provides new estimates of childhood mortality using the own children method based on Kenyan Census data. The technique uses the age distribution of surviving children and does not require any assumptions on the recent fertility patterns. The new estimates are robust because they are purged of biases associated with the contemporary application of the Brass method and give plausible trends across censuses. They suggest that the greatest increase in childhood mortality risk attributable to HIV/AIDS – of about 10 % – occurs at age five and that HIV/AIDS does not have a discernible impact on the age pattern of childhood mortality.	Collins	 Opiyo
2009	81	Child Health and Survival	Does Contracting Out Primary Care Services Improve Child Health? The Case of Guatemala	Around the developing world, policy-makers are searching for new ways to improve population access to health services. In the last 15 years, a growing interest has arisen regarding contracting out health care services to circumvent capacity constraints and to rapidly scale-up the provision of services. Unfortunately, there is little solid empirical evidence regarding whether this type of solution can outperform publicly-provided services. This paper aims to contribute to filling this gap by estimating the impact of a large-scale health intervention in Guatemala on health access and outcomes. NGOs were contracted to provide health services focused on preventive services toward young children and mothers. Data to be used includes the census of births and deaths from 1990 to 2006, full-sample 1994 and 2002 Population Censuses and household surveys. The empirical methodology will tackle non-random selection into the program by estimating impacts using within-region over time variation.	Julian	P. Cristia	William	N. Evans	Beomsoo	 Kim
2009	82	Population and Environmental Change	Mapping the Risks of Climate Change in Developing Countries	This paper examines the climate-related risks that will face the urban populations of developing countries in the decades to come. We base our study on a new and comprehensive database that draws upon city size and growth data for several thousand cities in the developing world and which, for the first time, situates these data spatially, making use of the highly detailed geographic information on both urban and rural populations that has been assembled in the Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project. These data are joined to spatially coded time series on weather-related and other disasters as well as to spatially-specific information on temperature. To show what is involved in connecting global models and data such as ours to country-specific and local-level needs, we carry out a case study of India, whose cities are likely to face mounting risks from storm surges, flooding and episodes of extreme heat.	Mark	R. Montgomery	Deborah	L. Balk	Gordon	 McGranahan	S.	 Chandrasekhar	Christopher	 Small	Valentina	 Mara	Donghwan	 Kim
2009	82	Population and Environmental Change	Understanding the Demographic Implications of Climate Change: A First Look at Localized Population Predictions	Considerable popular and scientific attention has been given to the potential impacts of climate change on the human population. Despite recent technical and conceptual advances in this area, research focusing on human populations and climate change has not intersected to produce meaningful estimates of the demographic implications of climate change. We argue that the failure to connect the two processes on temporal and spatial dimensions undermines the value of data generated from climate and population models. The study objective is to demonstrate the value of examining spatial variability in time-correlated climate and population projections at the sub-national scale. This approach yields estimates of the demographic impacts of global warming due to greenhouse gas emissions for socially and politically significant geographic areas. We demonstrate the methodological approach by focusing on sea level rise and total population size for a select sample of counties in low-lying coastal zones within the United States.	Katherine	J. Curtis	Annemarie	 Schneider
2009	82	Population and Environmental Change	Natural Hazards and Child Health	This paper examines how the occurrence of various natural disasters affects health status of children. Despite a large literature on child health, there is relatively little work on how shocks from natural hazards affect the health of children. With climate change it is likely that more and more households will experience changes and possible increases in the risk of natural disasters. Using three rounds of  data from the Demographic and Health Surveys from Guatemala, combined with a long time series on hazards, this paper controls for both time and area specific effects, while pinpointing when and where a particular shocks occurred. This is done for children between 9 and 59 months with anthropometric information (child health proxied by height for age, weight for age and weight for height) and direct information on recent illnesses. Except for drought, the effect of shocks from these hazards is generally negative and often very large.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2009	82	Population and Environmental Change	Economic Consequences of the 2004 Tsunami for Households and Individuals in Indonesia	On December 26, 2004, the Sumatra-Andaman earthquake occurred. The resulting tsunami wreaked havoc on 10 countries and some 4,500 kilometers of coastline throughout the region. Indonesia was the country hardest hit. Damage to public infrastructure, productive assets and private property is estimated at a value of $U.S. 4.5 billion— 97% of Aceh’s GDP. This paper examines the economic consequences, broadly interpreted, for households in the Indonesian provinces of Aceh and North Sumatra. We analyze a unique data set collected as part of the Study of the Tsunami Aftermath and Recovery (STAR). STAR is a multiwave longitudinal study that draws on a subset of respondents to the 2004 National Socioeconomic Survey. Preliminary results point to substantial changes at the household level with respect to composition (in the heavily damaged zone, the household head was killed in some 25% of households) and with respect to asset positions, which declined in value by millions of Rupiah.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Peter	 Katz	Bondan	 Sikoki	Duncan	 Thomas
2009	83	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health and Mortality	Neighborhood Disorder, Sleep Quality and Psychological Distress: A Model of Structural Amplification	Using data from the 2004 Survey of Texas Adults (N = 1,504), we examine the association between perceived neighborhood disorder and psychological distress. Building on prior research, we also test whether the effect of neighborhood disorder is mediated and moderated by sleep quality. Our specific analytic strategy follows a two-stage theoretical model of structural amplification. In the first stage, perceptions of neighborhood disorder increase psychological distress indirectly by reducing sleep quality. In the second stage, the effect of neighborhood disorder on psychological distress is amplified by poor sleep quality. The results of our analyses are generally consistent with our theoretical model. We find that neighborhood disorder is associated with poorer sleep quality and greater psychological distress. We also observe that the positive association between neighborhood disorder and psychological distress is mediated (partially) and moderated (amplified) by poor sleep quality.	Terrence	D. Hill	Amy	M. Burdette	Lauren	 Hale
2009	83	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health and Mortality	Exploring the Determinants of Stress: An Examination Using Spatial and Multilevel Analysis in Philadelphia	Traditionally, studies of the predictors of stress are focused on the individual characteristics. In our study we also include ecological factors, particularly social and built environment characteristics of neighborhoods. We combine multiple georeferenced data sets with the Philadelphia Health Management Corporation’s Community Health database, a telephone survey of 4,095 respondents embedded in several hierarchical contexts; our results focus on 158 neighborhood areas. Exploratory spatial data analysis suggests a moderate spatial autocorrelation and uncovers a spatial clustering of self-rated stress in Philadelphia County. At the individual level, few social factors appear to matter, though self-rated neighborhood trust and food insecurity have independent effects on stress. At the neighborhood level, the presence of a hazardous waste site and traffic levels are determinants of self-rated stress even after controlling for other individual characteristics. The latter two factors are relevant to public health policy as they are potentially modifiable.	Tse-Chuan	 Yang	Stephen	 Matthews
2009	83	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health and Mortality	Segregation and Cardiovascular Illness: The Role of Individual and Areal Socioeconomic Status	Demographic and epidemiological research suggests that both socioeconomic status (SES) and residential segregation are associated with cardiovascular health. We use the 2005 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey and the 2005 American Community Survey (ACS) to investigate how segregation and SES (individual and areal) impact hypertension. Multilevel analyses indicate that both segregation and hypersegregation are associated with hypertension, net of individual and areal SES. While individual and areal SES have independent effects on hypertension, these effects also seem to differ across segregation type. In segregated and hypersegregated environments, highly educated or high-earning individuals seem to be most protected against hypertension. In extremely hypersegregated areas, areas with very little interaction with non-black residents, SES does not seem to have any protective benefit. These findings reveal that SES has differential effects across types of segregation and that hypertension in disadvantaged (extremely hypersegregated) areas may be a function of structural constraints rather than socioeconomic position.	Antwan	 Jones	Franklin	 Goza
2009	83	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health and Mortality	The Sociospatial Context of Cardiovascular Risk: The Relationship between Neighborhood Crime Rates and Blood Pressure	We consider the neighborhood context of cardiovascular risk, employing data from the 2000-2002 Dallas Heart Study. Developing a model of the link between neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage, crime rates and allostatic load, we test the specific hypothesis that neighborhood assault rates influence blood pressure. We address concerns regarding causality by considering multilevel models estimating the effect of both absolute neighborhood assault rates and changes in the assault rate on short-term changes in blood pressure. Findings indicate that changes in the assault rate between 1999 and 2000 are positively associated with systolic and diastolic blood pressure (including changes in these measures between  Demographic and Health Survey visits), but only for women. Moreover, neighborhood crime rates account for a nontrivial proportion of disparity in blood pressure between African American and white women. Neighborhood assault rates are not associated with blood pressure for men.	Christopher	 Browning	Kathleen	A. Cagney
2009	84	Gender, Sexual Behavior and HIV/STIs	Fishing in Dangerous Waters: Ecology, Gender and Economy in HIV Risk	This paper uses a qualitative case study of the fishing industry in Nyanza province, Kenya, to highlight two perhaps underemphasized aspects of the HIV epidemic: (1) that ecology and the physical environment matter in health outcomes, and (2) that the gendered structure of local economies can have consequences for individual health outcomes. The paper first presents theoretical background, followed by a description of the data, setting and methods. I then discuss Lake Victoria and its physical environment, both as experienced by the Luo, as well as discussed in the ecological literature. I then turn to exploring the fishing occupation and the lives of fishermen and show how their sexual relationships and sexual mixing patterns were as much a function of the changing ecological environment in which they fished, as they were about the gendered structure of the fishing economy.	Sanyu	A. Mojola
2009	84	Gender, Sexual Behavior and HIV/STIs	Male Circumcision and the Female Question: Do Women Matter in the Promotion of Male Circumcision for HIV/AIDS Prevention?	With studies in Africa showing that male circumcision has a more than 53% preventive effect for HIV/AIDS, the World Health Organization and other health agencies are now recommending male circumcision as a strategy for HIV/AIDS prevention. Many promoters of women's rights and sexual reproductive health fear that a male-oriented approach such as circumcision would erode strides made to advance women's participation in sexual and reproductive health. This paper addresses these concerns by showing and discussing results that indicate that women play an important role in the decision-making process about circumcision. Driven by concerns ranging from health to sexual pleasure, women discuss male circumcision with their sexual partners, and young men also consult with non-sexual partners such as mothers and sisters. I recommend that women be involved in male circumcision programs so as to strengthen acceptability and effectiveness of such programs.	Salome	N. Wawire
2009	84	Gender, Sexual Behavior and HIV/STIs	Condom Use among Black Youth in South Africa: Do Relationship Characteristics Matter?	The predictors of condom use have been a focus in South African research addressing the relatively high rates of HIV/AIDS and adolescent pregnancy there. Extant studies have focused mainly on individual- and family-level predictors, but generally have not focused on characteristics of relationships, even though romantic and other sexual relationships are a central context in which sexual activity and decisions about condom use occur. We use two representative samples of youths with detailed relationship-specific information about recent and lifetime sexual relationships. With logistic models we explore youths’ multiple relationship experiences and investigate the importance of a broad set of relationship characteristics for condom use at last sex and consistency of condom use in two different South African contexts, KwaZulu Natal and Cape Town. Findings suggest that heterogamy and commitment influence condom use, but findings differ across samples and depending on the condom use outcome.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Yasamin	 Kusunoki
2009	84	Gender, Sexual Behavior and HIV/STIs	If Your Husband Calls, You Have To Go: Agency in Sexuality and Reproductive Health among Young Married Women in Bangalore, India	We examine whether resources typically considered empowering for women, such as education, increase their sexual agency. We compare the differential effect of resources on different realms of agency: sexual agency, family planning and financial decision-making in the home. We use qualitative and quantitative data from married women ages 16-25 in Bangalore slums. In multivariate analysis, education is not significantly associated with greater sexual agency, though it is with financial decision-making and fertility control. Knowledge of reproductive and sexual health before first sex is strongly and significantly associated with greater sexual agency once married. Our findings suggest that programmers and policy-makers who seek to increase young women’s control over their sexual lives within marriage, either from a rights perspective or one of improving reproductive health and reducing risks of HIV, need to consider the critical importance of providing adequate sexual and reproductive information to young women before first sex.	Rohini	P. Pande	Tina	Y. Falle	Sujit	 Rathod	Suneeta	 Krishnan
2009	85	Immigrant Children and Educational Outcomes	The Structuring of Active Development: Immigrant Youth Participation in School and Community Activities	There is a burgeoning literature on the developmental advantages of youth participation in school and non-school organized activities. However, no studies to date have analyzed participation in extracurricular activities among immigrant and second-generation youth. In this paper, we use two nationally representative data sets, the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS), to explore how youth in immigrant families are incorporated in schools and neighborhoods by examining their participation in extracurricular activities. The contributions of this paper are substantive and methodological: we identify the general patterns and predictors of participation for immigrant youth as well as the larger youth population and uncover interesting life course effects that would not have been discovered had we not compared the two data sets. We also highlight the consistencies and differences between the results from the national data sets, which is likely to have important implications for other studies using Add Health and NELS to understand immigrant adaptation.	Dina	G. Okamoto	Cassie	 Hartzog	Daniel	 Herda
2009	85	Immigrant Children and Educational Outcomes	Family-School Connectivity: Barriers and Oppportunities for Academic Achievement among Children of Immigrants	This paper examines the role of family-school connectivity on the academic trajectories of children of immigrants in U.S. schools and asks the extent to which parental involvement in schools is more effective in some school settings than others. The analyses focus on non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black and Mexican origin families in the United States whose children are in Kindergarten in 1999-2000 (Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten). The analyses examine different domains of family-school connectivity including parents’ activities and motivations for contacting the school as well as the extent to which schools reach out to parents from different linguistic backgrounds. These domains are used to predict children’s progress over their elementary school years with multilevel growth models. Results suggest parental involvement is advantageous for children’s success and is more beneficial when schools reach out to parents from different linguistic origins.	Jennifer	E. Glick
2009	85	Immigrant Children and Educational Outcomes	Fitting in: The Roles of Social Acceptance and Discrimination in Shaping the Health of Latino Youth in the U.S. Southeast	Mental health is essential for the academic success of adolescents and their labor market opportunities in adulthood. Given changing immigration trends, this paper provides insight into how the differing contexts of reception of new and traditional receiving communities influence the daily psychological well-being of Latino youth. Using random effects models, we assess how global and daily acculturative experiences are associated with the daily psychological well-being of Latino 9th graders in North Carolina and Los Angeles. Data came from two companion studies, the Los Angeles Social Identification and Academic Adaptation study and the Southern Immigrant Academic Adaptation study. We found that Latino youth living in North Carolina experienced higher levels of daily happiness, but also experienced higher levels of daily depressive well-being and anxiety. We considered how discrimination, nativity status, social acceptance, ethnic identity, family identification and daily ethnic treatment and family relations contributed to these daily well-being differences.	Stephanie	 Potochnick	Andrew	 Fuligni
2009	85	Immigrant Children and Educational Outcomes	Assimilation or Isolation? The Case of Mainland Chinese Immigrant Students in Hong Kong	Despite disadvantageous home backgrounds, Mainland Chinese immigrant students outperform native Hong Kong students in all academic subjects except the English language, from Form 1 to 3 (grades 7-9). Over time, Mainland students attain achievement growth faster than native students in most subjects. Even though Mainland students perform poorly in the English language, they pick up speed over time and narrow the nativity gap in Form 3. Mainland students’ high performance cannot be explained by their low socioeconomic backgrounds or the low-achieving schools they attend. Many Mainland students are overaged for their grade but they perform just as well as other younger students. Also, Chinese-medium schools, especially medium- or low-ability schools, are more effective in promoting high achievement in Mainland students than are English-medium or high-ability schools. The implications of these Hong Kong results for international studies on immigrant children’s academic assimilation are discussed.	Suet-ling	 Pong	Wing	Kwong  Tsang
2009	86	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Health Lifestyles in the U.S. and Canada: Are We Really So Different?	Some research suggests that social, political and cultural life in the U.S. and Canada are growing divergent. We use health lifestyle theories to extend prior research and compare the U.S. and Canada on population health indicators. The population health indicators include health behaviors, fertility and cause-specific mortality for each of the United States (and Washington, D.C.) and Canadian provinces and territories (N=64). Canada and the U.S. are significantly different on many health lifestyle variables. But levels of the health lifestyle variables converge at the U.S./Canada border, and some U.S. states and Canadian provinces or territories exhibit similar health lifestyle patterns, regardless of whether they share an international border (these are mapped in the paper). Although Canada and the U.S. differ on major population health indicators, some states, provinces and territories exhibit marked similarities. Our paper concludes with a discussion about how a comparative perspective might inform population health policies.	Patrick	M. Krueger	Tajudaullah	 Bhaloo	Pauline	 Rosenau
2009	86	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Cross-National Patterns of Health Inequality: Education and Tobacco Use in the World Health Survey	Spreading tobacco use from the West to other parts of the world, especially among disadvantaged socioeconomic groups, raises concerns about the indisputable harm to global public health and questions about underlying patterns of health inequality. We propose hypotheses based on economic cost and diffusion theories that posit rising educational disparities in tobacco use with higher national income and more advanced stages of cigarette diffusion. Using World Health Survey data for 99,661 men and 123,953 women from 50 low- to upper-middle-income nations, we examine educational disparities in smoking within and across nations. In support of the hypotheses, multilevel logistic regression models of smoking show that national income and cigarette diffusion widen educational disparities among young men, narrow disparities among older women, and have weak influences among younger women and older men. The results suggest that the meaning of educational advantages for health behavior varies widely across national and social contexts.	Fred	C. Pampel	Justin	T. Denney
2009	86	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Estimating the Effects of Smoking and Other Risk Factors on Mortality Slowdowns in Developed Countries	Attention has been directed recently to slowdowns in life expectancy in the United States, particularly for females at older ages, even as gains have continued to be robust in some other countries. Decomposition of changes in life expectancy by cause suggests that previous smoking exposure contributes to these trends. Use of the indirect method suggested by Peto, et al. to measure the mortality effect of smoking, modified and extended here, indicates that smoking accounts for approximately half of the difference in female life expectancy at age 65 between the U.S. and some other developed countries. For the remaining difference, mixed effects models using longitudinal data suggest that dietary factors, in particular animal fat consumption, are the most easily identifiable cause, a conclusion that is similar to previous findings concerning excess male mortality in a previous period. Finally, economic factors do not appear to account for much of the remaining difference in life expectancy.	Brian	 Rostron
2009	86	International Perspectives on Health and Mortality	Paying the Piper: The High Cost of Funerals in South Africa	We analyze funeral arrangements following the deaths of 3,751 people between January 2003 and December 2005 in the Africa Centre Demographic Surveillance Area. We find that, on average, households spend the equivalent of a year’s income for an adult’s funeral, measured at median per capita African income. Approximately one-quarter of all individuals had some form of insurance, which helped surviving household members defray some fraction of funeral expenses. However, an equal fraction of households borrowed money to pay for the funeral. We develop a model in which households respond to social pressure to bury their dead in a style consistent with the observed social status of the household and that of the deceased. Households that cannot afford a funeral commensurate with social expectations must borrow money to pay for the funeral. The model leads to empirical tests, and we find results consistent with our model of household decision-making.	Anne	 Case	Alicia	 Menendez	Analia	S. Olgiati	Anu	 Garib
2009	87	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult Children and Elderly Parents	Family-Friend Care Network among Persons Aged 75 and over in Canada: How Does Marital Status Matter?	Informal caregivers are instrumental in providing care for seniors, and this is unlikely to change in the near future given the social, economic, health and fiscal changes. Most previous studies on caregiving to elderly persons tended to focus on spouses and children. In this paper we examine the relationship between marital status and assistance, taking into account all long-term providers and the extent to which each one has provided assistance. We use data from the 2002 Canadian General Social Survey to test the hypothesis that unmarried persons aged 75 and over are disadvantaged vis-à-vis their married counterparts. We look at how the presence of the spouse affects whether and how often children, other family members and friends and neighbors offer care. We also examine the extent to which the relationship between marital status and care receiving differs by gender, immigrant status and ethnicity (Anglophones vs. Francophones).	Rania	 Tfaily	Claire	M. Noel-Miller
2009	87	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult Children and Elderly Parents	Family Contributions to Elder Support in Korea: Incentive, Repayment, Need and Tradition	The population of South Korea is aging rapidly, and the threat to elderly well-being from the erosion of traditional family care is of much concern. Yet relatively little is known about the actual financial status of elderly Koreans or the circumstances that influence the amount of support elderly Koreans receive from their adult children. This paper addresses these issues using data from the first wave of the Korean Longitudinal Study of Ageing. We estimate that over 60% of Koreans aged 65+ would be poor without financial transfers from their children. Elderly poverty is still mitigated substantially both by cohabitation with children and by transfers from children. The amount of support provided by adult children appears to be influenced by inheritance expectations and investment in child’s education. The traditional importance of the first son as an elder care provider remains. Parents’ financial need also has some influence.	Hye-Won	Erin  Kim	Philip	J. Cook
2009	87	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult Children and Elderly Parents	Intergenerational Transfers within Families of International Immigrants in the United States and France: A Comparison of Latin Americans and North Africans	We examine intergenerational financial transfers made and received by mature (50+) immigrants in the U.S. and France, focusing on Latin Americans and North Africans. Data about France come from the 2002-2003 Immigrants and Retirement Survey, as well as the French component of the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement. Data about the U.S. come from the 2004 Health and Retirement Study. Our findings reveal that the foreign-born in each country were more likely to provide transfers than their native-born counterparts. This differential was driven primarily by the elevated propensity of immigrants to provide to aging parents. Immigrants in both nations were more likely to provide cash gifts than they were to receive them. We conclude that because immigrants must balance the demands of older and younger generations, they face challenges to investing sufficiently in their own well-being.	Merril	 Silverstein	Claudine	 Attias-Donfut	François-Charles	 Wolff
2009	87	Generational Exchanges and Relationships: Adult Children and Elderly Parents	Gender, Work and Family Dynamics of Adult Children’s Time Transfers to Their Widowed Elderly Parents: An Analysis of Married Dyads	This project examines how married adult children’s gender, employment and family dynamics affect the amounts of activities of daily living and independent activities of daily living time transferred to their widowed parents. Using data from the recently released 2006 Health and Retirement Study, multivariate regression analysis indicates that adult children with higher wage rates and longer weekly work hours provide less time. There is no indication that wage rates and work hours influence sons’ and daughters’ provision of support differently. While the transfers of siblings may substitute for adult children in family caregiving practices, assistance provided by the spouses of adult children to the parents complement, but do not replace, adult children’s transfers. Adult children take the needs of their aging spouses and parents into consideration when they allocate transfer resources. Simulation of transfer probabilities shows that daughters’ transfers are more affected by the wages and work hours of their spouses than sons’.	Ching-Yi	A. Shieh
2009	88	International Migration Systems	Determinants of International Migration in Argentina: Differences between European and Latin American Flows	This paper aims to study, with a long-term perspective, the factors associated with immigrant flows to Argentina from Europe (Spain and Italy) and South America, focusing on economic, labor market and political determinants of these flows. Taking into account these economic and non-economic factors, a set of different econometric models is performed and estimates are made for both the first wave of migration during the period from 1870 to 1950, and the second wave during the period from 1945 to 1976. The comparison between the estimates for the first- and second- migratory waves indicates a shift in the order of importance of the determinants of the entry rate, where the income gap, more than opportunities of employment differentials, appears to be the variable that generates the greatest reaction in the regional immigratory flows. On the contrary, European flows seem to have been triggered by the second factor.	Roxana	 Maurizio
2009	88	International Migration Systems	Globalization, Development and International Migration: A Cross-National Analysis of Less-Developed Countries, 1970-2000	It is widely argued that globalization and economic development are associated with international migration. However, these relationships have not been tested empirically. We use a cross-national empirical analysis to assess the impact of global and national factors on international migration from less-developed countries. An analytical framework is developed that uses several modeling techniques to analyze panel data on a set of less-developed countries from 1970 to 2000. Three central findings emerge from these analyses. First, foreign direct investment has a significant, differential effect across sectors of the economy. Second, economic development has a significant, nonlinear effect on net emigration levels (the so-called “migration hump”). Finally, we find a strong cumulative causation effect of migration, meaning that migration has a strong internal momentum once it has been initiated. The implications of the findings are discussed in the context of contemporary migration theory.	Matthew	R. Sanderson	Jeffrey	 Kentor
2009	88	International Migration Systems	China’s Demographic Transition and the Impacts on Migrant-Receiving Countries: Australia as an Example	China is currently experiencing the demographic transition in which the age structure of the population and labour force are at the “optimum” stage. China’s recent rapid economic growth is due partially to its advantageous population age structure, which is described as the “demographic dividend” from which the country has profited in recent years. Migrant-receiving countries have also been benefiting from China’s demographic dividend by importing students and skilled migrants from China. However, as a result of sustained fertility decline in the past three decades, China’s population will soon experience ageing. Using Australia as an example, this paper examines the impacts of China’s demographic transition on migrant-receiving countries. It offers a comprehensive analysis of the impacts of China’s changing age structure, changing domestic labour market and the patterns of intergenerational wealth transfer, on the patterns of skilled and student migration to other countries.	Fei	 Guo	Xiujian	 Peng
2009	88	International Migration Systems	The Transnational Families of Filipino Nurses in Ireland in the Midst of an Emerging Philippines-Ireland Migration System	This study investigates how evolving Irish state policies contributed to the reconfiguration of roles of members of the transnational families of Filipino nurses working in Ireland. Prior to March 2004, Filipino spouses (80% men) of nurses in Ireland were not permitted to work, resulting in delayed family reunification, total dependency on nurse’s income, spousal return migration, engagement in “under-the-radar” side jobs, and entire families leaving Ireland for more “family-friendly” countries. Because they could not work, men took on the roles traditionally handled by women like cooking, washing clothes, minding kids and taking them to school. Others developed a rotating child-care arrangement in which a group of married men would rotate minding each other’s kids while other members worked. These findings were from three group interviews of nurses, in-depth interviews of 26 nurses, 16 spouses of nurses, and other key informants.	Florio	O. Arguillas
2009	89	Demography of Crime and Punishment	An Examination of the Relationship between Cohabitation and Adolescent Delinquency Involvement	This paper draws on the union formation and crime literatures to better understand young adults’ transitions into cohabitation as well as the potential impact of cohabitation experience on delinquency involvement and substance use. The data for this study come from the four waves of the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study (N=1,092). We first examine whether delinquency and substance use lead to higher odds of cohabitation, earlier ages at first cohabitation and lower quality cohabiting relationships. The analysis continues with an investigation of whether cohabitation status and quality of the cohabiting relationship predict decreases in delinquency involvement and substance use. Based on findings from prior research on marriage and crime, the potential mediating role of delinquent peers is also considered.	Robert	A. Lonardo	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2009	89	Demography of Crime and Punishment	Criminal Processing in California: A Multistate Analysis of the Efficacy of Judicial Practices	This paper examines the criminal processing of three cohorts between 1985 and 1995 of persons incarcerated in California state correctional facilities. The work uses the multistate life table and Bureau of Justice Statistics' data from 1985 to 2003. The multistate life table is a device that estimates the frequency of visits and duration in a particular life-state (e.g. incarcerated, paroled, freed from prison). Thus, it facilitates an assessment of California’s judicial system during a period characterized by sentencing transformation such as the “three strikes” policy. The extant literature concentrates on specific deterrence analyses that have dichotomous outcomes (recidivate or do not recidivate) and rarely consider the severity of punishment. Investigating the changes in duration of stay in prison and parole and linking them to the number of visits to correctional life-states for the three distinct cohorts enables the current study to historically contextualize the efficacy of California’s judicial system.	Evelyn	J. Patterson
2009	89	Demography of Crime and Punishment	Imprisonment and Infant Mortality	This article extends research on the consequences of mass imprisonment by considering effects of imprisonment on infant mortality. Using state-level data from 1990 to 2003 and a series of fixed effects models with an AR(1) adjustment, this article finds evidence that state-level imprisonment rates (male, female and total) are positively associated with state-level infant mortality rates. Results suggest that had the imprisonment rate remained at the 1990 level, the 2003 infant mortality rate would have been 5% lower. The final stage of the analysis uses Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System data to consider effects of parental incarceration on infant mortality at the individual level. Results suggest that parental incarceration increases infant mortality risk by increasing the risk of postneonatal (rather than neonatal) mortality. Taken together, results suggest that mass imprisonment may have consequences for population health and should be considered in subsequent analyses assessing variation in health across states, nations and individuals.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2009	89	Demography of Crime and Punishment	The Neighborhood Context of Prisoner Reentry	The number of individuals incarcerated in the U.S. has risen dramatically, from 0.2% of all U.S. residents in 1980 to 0.7% in 2000. As a result, over 600,000 prisoners are released each year. Yet there has been almost no research on the residential mobility and neighborhood contexts experienced by former prisoners. We have assembled a unique data set that contains prospective longitudinal administrative records on a sample of 3,689 returning prisoners who were released on parole in Michigan in 2003. The analysis presented in this paper models the characteristics of the first neighborhood to which parolees move after release. Our preliminary results reveal striking racial disparities in the level of neighborhood disadvantage that returning parolees encounter and provide initial support for both neighborhood attainment and social capital theories of residential mobility in this population.	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	David	 Harding	Amy	 Cooter
2009	90	Global Changes in Marriage and Family	Marriage Formation in Comparative Perspective: Marriage Rates, Marriage Age and the Role of Context	Despite much research on marriage formation, not enough is known about cross-national trends in recent decades and the impact of context on marriage formation in comparative perspective. Using data from four decades and 23 countries, I document trends toward lower marriage rates and delayed first marriage. I examine variation in marriage formation along the lines of economic, gender and family and public policy contexts. Male unemployment depresses marriage rates, but higher GDP is linked to later marriage. Gender inequality seems to make marriage less attractive, yet I find no evidence that age at first marriage is shaped by gender and family context. There are significant differences in marriage formation across policy clusters, independent of other context measures. This study shows that male economic well-being remains an important foundation of marriage. Policies targeted toward family formation will not be effective if economic foundations of marriage are not addressed.	Claudia	 Geist
2009	90	Global Changes in Marriage and Family	Factors Influencing Children’s Risk of Experiencing Maternal Cohabitation: Current Estimates and Trends	During recent decades, cohabitation has increased dramatically. A large portion of these couples live with dependents, thus, more children are experiencing cohabiting parent households. Since maternal cohabitation is associated with many negative outcomes for children, it is important to understand which subgroups are most likely to experience maternal cohabitation to identify who is most at risk of experiencing these negative outcomes and who might benefit most from policy interventions. In this descriptive study, I will use recent longitudinal data (Children/Young Adults of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979) with prospective family structure histories to explore how children’s exposure to maternal cohabitation differs across various factors and how these patterns have changed across recent cohorts. The factors to be examined include race/ethnicity, gender, age (of mother and child), socioeconomic status (household income, poverty status, maternal educational attainment), region, urbanicity, religiosity (of mother) and maternal marital status at birth.	Kristin	 Burnett
2009	90	Global Changes in Marriage and Family	Effects of Family Background upon the Timing of First Marriage in Modern China and Russia	This paper addresses the effects of family background on entry into first marriage during early adulthood in modern China and Russia. China and Russia are historically characterized by nuptial systems distinct from that in Western Europe. During the past century, these two countries have experienced dramatic social changes, which have undermined the social foundations of traditional marriage. Using survey data collected in the 1990s, I examine the extent to which the Western pattern of advantaged family background discouraging early marriage holds for modern China and Russia. Findings from a discrete-time survival analysis indicate that both China and Russia, traditionally non-Malthusian societies, now seem to exhibit the U.S. paradigm: youth from privileged social origins are less likely to marry at young ages. Nevertheless, this delaying effect is not necessarily attributed to intergenerational transmission of social status.	Hongbo	 Wang
2009	90	Global Changes in Marriage and Family	Global Trends in Marital Instability from 1970 to Present	Using newly developed integrated census microdata from Integrated Public Use Microdata Series--International, this paper analyzes global trends in marital instability from 1970 to the present. While the proportion of divorced adults ages 25 to 39 is on the rise in most countries, the proportion who are separated but remain legally married has increased more slowly. Additionally, developed countries experience higher, more rapidly increasing divorce rates than many developing countries. Many factors play a role in a couple's decision to remain separated but legally married, including cultural and social norms and economic opportunities for both sexes to name a few. This paper, following the methodology of Ruggles (1997), analyzes multiple countries over time and identifies factors associated with the probability of being separated or divorced. Preliminary results suggest that while local economic opportunity and local labor market participation rates are associated with the probability of being divorced, the same is not true for separation.	Misty	 Heggeness
2009	91	Family Planning, Fertility and Reproductive Health in Asia	Current Use of Family Planning and Women’s Status in Bangladesh and Pakistan	I use two nationally representative samples of women aged 15 to 49 to model the associations of women’s status with current use of family planning in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In a previous research, I developed a conceptual framework for the study of Muslim reproductive behavior and tested its main hypotheses on older data. The aim of this paper is to replicate the previous study using recent Demographic and Health Survey data. Pakistan and Bangladesh emerged in previous research as theoretically relevant cases for understanding Muslim reproductive behavior.	Hani	A. Guend
2009	91	Family Planning, Fertility and Reproductive Health in Asia	How Equitable Is Access to and Use of Reproductive Health Care and Family Planning Services in Bangladesh? A Review of the Evidence	Compared to her South Asian neighbors Bangladesh is unique in to have achieving considerable improvement in reproductive health outcomes without concomitant resource allocation or poverty reduction. However, aggregate gains hide large socioeconomic inequalities. The persistence and systematic nature of these differences raise the question of inequitable access to and consumption of health care and family planning services. This paper reviews evidence on the Bangladesh experience, providing an opportunity to explore which policies and programs have worked to expand access and utilization of Reproductive Health (RH)/Family Planning (FP) services and which have failed to reach the underserved. The paper finds that even free or subsidized services are not necessarily equitable, since these are not used by all groups of women equally. Moreover, use of RH care is not uniform across all components. Hence, achieving equity in RH outcomes requires service provision to be sensitive to both income and social constraints to demand.	Simeen	 Mahmud
2009	91	Family Planning, Fertility and Reproductive Health in Asia	Family Planning in Iran and the Expansion of Rural Health Houses	As a middle-income country with the most dramatic decline in fertility in the Middle East, Iran’s recent fertility experience has been of keen interest to scholars and policy-makers alike. Interestingly, the decline was most rapid in rural areas. Many have attributed the substantial decrease in rural fertility to the active participation of the government in providing access to family planning through the expansion of rural health houses. In this paper we assess the relationship between having a health house in one’s village at the time of marriage and fertility-related outcomes. We find a robust association between having a health house and number of live births, as well as attitudes on who should make household decisions about method of contraception. To ensure our results are not driven by the endogenous placement of the health house, we control for village-level fixed effects.	Sepideh	 Modrek	Negar	 Ghobadi
2009	91	Family Planning, Fertility and Reproductive Health in Asia	Segmentation of Clients in India on the  Basis of Reproductive Health Welfare Index	This research aims to measure the level of connect between providers of reproductive health services and clients on quality of care parameters and to identify segments of clients on the basis of their perceptions on quality of care parameters with respect to public and private service providers in the reproductive health sector. The research included analysis of data collected by Indian Institute for Population Studies and Johns Hopkins University as a follow-up study to the 1998-1999 National Family Health Survey. The analysis for this study is based upon data collected for 6,303 women. To establish the level of connect between providers and clients, a reproductive health welfare index was constructed based on the perceptual associations on quality of care parameters. To arrive at the segments of clients, cluster analysis was done. Thereafter discriminant analysis was performed to establish the differences among clusters. Four segments emerged out of these analyses which were named as beneficiary, adjusted, neglected and marginalized.	Sandip	 Anand	R.	K.  Sinha
2009	93	Assimilation and Social Mobility	The Intergenerational Economic Incorporation of European Immigrants in Canada, 1970-2000: Is Straight-Line Assimilation Uniform by Ethnicity?	In this paper, we consider the intergenerational economic incorporation of European immigrants in Canada, keeping an eye on ethnicity. Specifically, we examine ethnic differences in (1) the annual earnings of the first generation, relative to those of the mainstream; (2) the shift in relative annual earnings between the first and second generations; and (3) their determinants. Data from the 1971 and 2001 Censuses are analyzed by means of a “lagged generation model,” enabling us to study this longitudinal process from cross-sectional data. Our results challenge the notion that straight-line assimilation characterizes European-origin groups uniformly. Typically, the second generation experiences upward mobility in relative annual earnings over the first generation, consistent with straight-line assimilation. However, the magnitude and mechanisms of intergenerational economic incorporation depend on ethnicity. For some European-origin groups, generational succession does not produce upward mobility in relative annual earnings, meaning that “bumpy-line assimilation” may characterize their intergenerational economic incorporation.	Melissa	 Moyser	Monica	 Boyd
2009	93	Assimilation and Social Mobility	When Race Is not The Issue: Education and Labor Market Outcomes of European-Educated Immigrants in the U.S.	In this paper we study the effects of the education level on the labor force participation and income of European immigrants in the U.S.. Although there are seven million European born currently living in the U.S., they are a rather understudied group, most probably because of the assumption of an unproblematic assimilation in the mainstream U.S. society. Using secondary data from the Current Population Survey and New Immigrants Survey and in-depth interviews with educated immigrants, we compare here the labor market outcomes of the native whites and immigrant European population, focusing on the differences that education makes in the lives of these immigrants.	Cristina	 Bradatan	Laszlo	J. Kulcsar
2009	93	Assimilation and Social Mobility	Racial Differences in the Tempo of Assimilation for 
White and Black African Foreign-Born to the United States	Understanding how immigrants assimilate to the U.S. labor market is important, but measuring the true effect of time in assimilation is difficult. We know extremely little about the effects of time in assimilation on African, an immigrant group that has only just begun to enter the U.S. in large numbers. In this paper, I examine the effect of duration on African immigrant men’s earnings between 1990 and 2000. I use  Public Use Microdata Sample 5% and 1% sample data from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, applying a double-cohort method of analysis (Myer and Lee 1996) that avoids problems presented by trying to measure age-period-cohort effects. Additionally, I examine the differential tempo of assimilation for black and white African immigrant men. I find that while white African-born men’s earnings surpass those of white native-born men over time, black African-born men continue to experience a disadvantage in earnings that cannot be explained by human capital characteristics.	Stephanie	J. Nawyn
2009	93	Assimilation and Social Mobility	A Temporally-Unbiased Summary Measure of Immigrant Advancement in the U.S.	This paper introduces a new method for summarizing the pace of immigrant advancement that enables unbiased comparisons between groups and between decades. Shifts in the duration or age composition of immigrant groups can alter average attainments irrespective of cohort experience. Also observed status attainment can be affected by higher or lower attainments at arrival possessed by different groups. The new method standardizes for all these effects. Increments of cohort advance over a decade in a given status attainment are compiled into expected lifetime attainment. Cumulative lifetime attainments comprise initial attainments following arrival and subsequent advances. The method is applied to Mexican and Asian immigrants in the 1980s and 1990s, and computed separately for status attainments in seven domains. Results show that Mexicans accelerated their advancement in most domains in the 1990s compared to the 1980s; in the 1990s rates of advancement for Mexicans and Asians were similar.	John	 Pitkin	Dowell	 Myers
2009	94	Multiple Contexts of Union Formation	Variations in Divorce and Remarriage by Race, Ethnicity and Nativity: A Focus on Demographic Characteristics	The objectives of this study are to examine race/ethnic/nativity differentials in divorce/remarriage in the U.S. and the influence of group variations in demographic characteristics. Three types of analysis are employed to investigate the relationship between race/ethnicity/nativity, demographic characteristics and the two marital events of interest: divorce and remarriage. First, race/ethnic/nativity differentials are estimated with and without controlling for demographic characteristics to see if group variations in composition influence divorce or remarriage. Second, race/ethnicity/nativity-specific models are run to see the influence of the demographic characteristics for each race/ethnic/nativity group. The final analysis includes interaction terms between the demographic characteristics and the race/ethnic/nativity groups to detect any significant race/ethnic/nativity differences in the influence of demographic characteristic on divorce or remarriage. The results suggest race/ethnic/nativity variations in demographic characteristics influence both divorce and remarriage. Additionally, associations between demographic characteristics and marital outcomes (divorce or remarriage) vary by race/ethnicity/nativity for divorce but not for remarriage.	Catherine	 McNamee
2009	94	Multiple Contexts of Union Formation	The Effect of Younger Marriage on Marriage Stability: Evidence from Exogenous Changes in Vietnam Draft Prioritization	The escalation of the Vietnam War left young men few possible, legal options for avoiding service. One popular and understudied strategy for avoiding the draft was fathering a child. In fact, dependency deferments outnumbered student deferment at the rate of three to one by December 1970. Using Vital Statistics data on fertility and marriage rates, we examine the impact of draft policy on the age at first marriage and age-specific fertility rates. We then use the 1970 and 1980 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series of the U.S. Census to examine the impact of earlier fertility and marriage on the duration of first marriage and the probability of divorce, the total number of children born, as well as men’s and women's education and wages, total household income and poverty status.	Martha	 Bailey	Emily	 Beam
2009	94	Multiple Contexts of Union Formation	The Formation of Same-Sex and Heterosexual Co-Resident Unions: Evidence from Great Britain	The rise of same-sex marriage has brought increased attention to same-sex relationships, but basic demographic knowledge about the formation of these unions is limited. To address this problem, I use data from the 1958 National Child Development Study and the 1970 British Cohort Study to investigate the formation of three couple types: same-sex cohabitation, heterosexual cohabitation and heterosexual marriage. I describe the rates, timing and demographic correlates of entering each union type. I also examine differences between female and male same-sex couples. This paper extends previous research by providing a dynamic, longitudinal perspective, comparing same-sex cohabitation to heterosexual cohabitation and marriage, and linking family background with entry into same-sex cohabitation.	Charles	Q. Strohm
2009	94	Multiple Contexts of Union Formation	Attitudes toward Union Formation at the Intersection of Gender and Sexual Identity	The last several decades have brought significant social changes in the industrialized West that may influence young adults' attitudes about union formation. We use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) (N=14,121) to compare men to women, and sexual minorities to heterosexuals on attitudes toward cohabitation and ratings of the importance of lifelong commitment and marriage. We find that compared to heterosexuals, sexual minorities hold more accepting attitudes toward non-marital cohabitation and report that marriage is less important to them. Regardless of sexual identity, all young adults give high ratings to the importance of lifelong commitment. However, interactions with gender indicate that straight women rate lifelong commitment exceptionally high, significantly higher than straight men and sexual minorities of both genders. We discuss possible reasons for the differences we reveal including the ambiguity of contemporary survey questions on marriage and cohabitation for sexual minorities.	Timothy	 Ortyl	Kathleen	 Hull	Ann	 Meier
2009	95	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Changing Families, Changing Risks?  Cumulative Risk Factors and Family Instability among Urban Children	A concern is that two very different trajectories exist for children; one for children of married parents that is largely advantageous and one for children born to unmarried mothers that is beset with multiple risks. Research finds that the cumulative number of risks to which a child is exposed at birth and early childhood best predicts subsequent development. Additionally, unmarried parent families are much less stable than married parent families, and partnership instability is negatively associated with children’s well-being. It is not clear, however, how a child’s cumulative risk changes as a result of partnership instability. Using data from the Fragile Families Study, I use HLM models to estimate the level of risk to which U.S. children are exposed to between birth and age five, based on the type of family structure into which they are born and how these risks change as a result of changes in maternal partnerships.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2009	95	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Half Full or Half Empty: Half-Siblings and Child Well-Being	As multiple-partner fertility rises in prevalence in the portrait of the U.S. family, there is evidence that these blended families face special challenges in line with their unique family forms. In this paper, I examine the implications of parents’ multiple-partner fertility for the children they have together. That is, for children born into biological-parent households, I ask whether the presence of half-siblings, either inside or outside the household, matters for outcomes in early childhood. Using the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study, I find that father’s children by a prior partner, in particular, are associated with increased likelihood of withdrawal, as well as an increased incidence of food insecurity, even though those children are unlikely to co-reside with the children in question. The mechanisms for such effects are considered.	Lindsay	M. Monte
2009	95	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Family Instability, Childhood Relationship Skills and Romance in Adolescence	The intergenerational transmission of divorce remains a robust finding in the divorce literature. Young people’s lesser commitment to marriage and compromised relationship skills are key mechanisms explaining this link. Most of the research, however, has focused on relationship commitment and skills during adulthood. Given the developmental nature of social competency and skills and evidence that family instability shapes romantic experiences in adolescence, this study shifts the window back in time and examines the interplay between gender, family instability, the development of relationship commitment and skills across middle childhood, and romantic behavior at adolescence. Working with data from the Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development , we use prospective measures of family structure, multiple reporter assessments of children’s social development across childhood and child reports of romantic experiences in adolescence to address this question. Preliminary evidence finds support for these associations. These findings, in turn, can illuminate the social processes that help sort individuals into different relationship trajectories in adolescence.	Shannon	E. Cavanagh	Kate	 Sullivan
2009	95	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Complex Two-Parent Families and  Adolescent Well-Being: Gendered Experiences	This paper brings together recent research on complex two-parent families with existing research on gender differences in family structure effects. We build on previous work by distinguishing between shared children and stepchildren residing in simple two-parent, blended and stepfamilies. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), we examine gender differences in family structure effects across multiple dimensions, including school achievement, delinquent behavior and depressive symptoms. We find that boys and girls respond differently to complex family structures. In particular, boys are more negatively affected in terms of their delinquency, while girls show increased risks of depression. These findings are consistent with previous work on gender differences in the effects of risk and protective factors on adolescent development, suggesting that complex family structures are an important social context in which these factors operate.	Sarah	 Halpern-Meekin
2009	96	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Do Rising Tides Lift All Boats Equally? Lifetime Socioeconomic Status and Health Outcomes among Blacks and Whites in the U.S.	Minority populations in the United States often face stark inequalities in health. The life course perspective offers a unique viewpoint through which racial disparities in morbidity and mortality may be understood as the result of repeated exposures to risk factors during both childhood and adulthood. However, the utility of this approach is limited by its failure to investigate the degree to which minority populations are able to translate gains in socioeconomic status (SES) into favorable health outcomes. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and four U.S. Decennial Censuses, we employ growth curve models to estimate the association between fluctuations in lifetime SES and two measures of physical well-being: self-reported health and disability status. Additionally, we assess the extent to which structural level racial inequalities, such as residential segregation, differential wealth accumulation and labor market segmentation, account for black/white disparities in this association.	Cynthia	G. Colen	Casey	G. Knutson
2009	96	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Understanding the Social Stratification and Diffusion of Health-Related Innovations Using the 20th Century Pattern of Converging, Diverging and Stable Racial Disparities in Mortality in the U.S.	Historical patterns of racial disparities in mortality provide insight about the stratification of social, economic, cultural and technological resources in the U.S. These historical patterns provide a marker of the pace and diffusion of longevity-promoting innovations through different populations, and they entail four possible patterns: divergence, convergence, stability or dynamic progression. I relate these patterns to theory about the pace and stratification of survival and test them using data on relative differences in mortality by race over the 20th century. I consider trends in cause-of-death-relevant age groups that describe disparities in mortality that have occurred through the epidemiological transition in the principal cause of mortality from infectious disease to chronic conditions and a potential recent transition to greater senescent mortality. Preliminary findings support a dynamic progression of disparities in mortality. I relate these findings to a refinement of the “fundamental cause” approach to social disparities in population health.	Margaret	M. Weden
2009	96	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Can Marriage Reduce Risky Behavior for African-Americans?	This paper estimates whether marriage can improve health outcomes for African Americans through changes in risky behaviors. A large part of chronic health conditions are the result of engaging in risky behaviors like smoking and drinking. The literature has shown that marriage has positive effects on addictive behavior. However, what is missing in the literature is whether this is true for African Americans. Using propensity score matching to account for the potential selection bias with a sample created from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), the results show that marriage does lead to lower risky behavior, but cohabitation actually leads to more risky behavior. This question has important policy implications, because if marriage has the same benefits for African Americans as it does for the general population, social welfare programs can be re-evaluated to incorporate marriage promotion and further support can be given to programs that decrease adverse health behaviors.	Olugbenga	 Ajilore	Mir	 Ali
2009	96	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Race Disparities in Early Marriage and Health in the Transition to Adulthood	Although prior research has linked marriage with positive physical and mental health outcomes, little work has specifically focused on the relationship between early marriage and health. This is particularly true for African Americans, despite well-documented racial differences in health profiles and marriage behavior. This paper addresses racial differences in selection into marriage and subsequent changes in health during the transition to adulthood using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). This research examines three categories of negative health outcomes: physical health, mental health and risk behaviors. Discrete-time event history logistic regression models are used to predict transitions to early marriage as a function of early health. Change models are used to examine the subsequent health effects of marriage while taking potential selection into marriage and baseline health into account. Preliminary results indicate that the roles of socioeconomic status and health in predicting marriage differ greatly by race and sex.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Felicia	 DeLeone	Hedwig	 Lee
2009	97	Mobility Decisions and Fertility Decisions	Male Labor Migration and Fertility of Women Left Behind in Rural Armenia	The literature on the influence of migration on fertility in origin areas is scarce, and most studies deal with high-fertility settings. This study addresses the effects of male labor migration on fertility outcomes and preferences among women in low-fertility settings. It is based on data from a survey conducted in 2005 in rural Armenia, a part of the former Soviet Union that saw a dramatic fall in fertility rates and a rapid rise in migration after its independence in 1991. The results of event history analysis indicate that husband’s migration significantly depresses the probability of birth, net of other factors. Migrants’ wives are significantly less likely to desire more children than non-migrants’ wives, but this difference is largely explained by other factors. However, reproductive intentions of migrants’ and non-migrants’ wives are shaped by different factors. We reflect on the implications of our results for the migration-fertility relationship in low-fertility high-migration societies.	Arusyak	 Sevoyan	Victor	 Agadjanian
2009	97	Mobility Decisions and Fertility Decisions	Flowing Wealth, Circulating Labor and Reproduction in Central American Households	International migrants are subjected to numerous influences that may alter their fertility. The act of migration is disruptive to reproduction, while exposure to different societal norms in addition to the transfer of remittance income can generate ideas and opportunities for household family planning. Contemporary data for three Central American countries (Costa Rica, Guatemala and Nicaragua) surveyed by the Latin American Migration Project were analyzed to determine whether migration length and remittance transfers influenced the instantaneous odds of a woman giving birth in given year. The analysis was structured to separate sociological influences on fertility attributable to migration from the income effects that accompany an increase in household wealth through remittance transfers. At the household level, the instantaneous odds that a birth would occur were negatively associated with an increase in cumulative U.S. remittance receipts. However, correlations between cumulative length of migration and household fertility outcomes were not found.	Jason	 Davis	David	 Carr
2009	97	Mobility Decisions and Fertility Decisions	Effects of Sibship Structure on Individual Migration: Evidence from Rural China	Numerous studies have linked sibship structure with intrahousehold resource allocation. However, migration, as a family strategy and a resource-generating activity, is seldom studied in association with sibship structure. This study attempts to examine the effects of sibship structure on individuals’ migration probabilities within the context of contemporary rural China, where internal migration is surging and sibship structure is changing as a result of sweeping socioeconomic reform and declining fertility. Using panel data from the 1989-2004 China Health and Nutrition Survey, the study builds random effect logistic regression models and finds that while the effect of individual birth-order rank on subsequent migration probability is weak, gender-specific sibship size, specifically, the number of male siblings an individual has, significantly increases one’s probability of migration. The result suggests the gender preference in family migration decision-making. This study contributes to a better understanding of the roles of the family demographic situation in individual migration status.	Yingying	 Zhou
2009	97	Mobility Decisions and Fertility Decisions	The Effects of School Quality on Fertility in a Transition Economy	This paper investigates the effects of school quality on fertility in a transition country. It aims to link the slowing fertility and shrinking rural sector of a post Soviet country, Ukraine, through the decline in the quality of public services, in particular, school quality. It builds on earlier work of Rosenzweig (1982), which tests for the effects of a change in the price of child quality, measured here by school quality. Estimates from a generalized Poisson model of fertility show that school quality has a positive and significant effect on household fertility. Specifically, a 10% increase in teacher quality is associated with a 3+% rise in fertility. This positive relationship between education and fertility distinguishes itself from the negative relationship that is commonly observed between these two factors. It also suggests that Ukraine should consider long-term investments into the quality and equality of its education system as policies to promoting fertility.	Kathryn	 Vasilaky
2009	98	Biomarkers in Demographic Research	Life Stressors and Neuroendocrine Allostatic Load in Costa Rica	Allostatic load (AL) theory purports that stress experienced over the life course exacts a cumulative, physiological toll on the body that eventually contributes to poor health. Although mounting evidence indicates that elevated levels of AL is a risk factor for poor health later in life, it is not yet clear whether those same elevated levels are due to stressor exposure. To better understand the connection between stressor exposure and AL levels, we analyze data from the Costa Rican Healthy Aging Study, a new, nationally representative survey of older Costa Rican men and women. This paper focuses on the relation between a variety of stressors experienced over the life course (e.g., economic deprivation early in life, death of children and years widowed) and four neuroendocrine markers analyzed in an index. None of the stressors examined were associated with riskier neuroendocrine biomarker profiles, suggesting that neuroendocrine system dysregulation stems from sources other than stressor exposure.	Omer	 Gersten	William	H. Dow
2009	98	Biomarkers in Demographic Research	Genetic Ancestral Markers, Social and Cultural Context and Race/Ethnicity Identity	Our main objective is to understand how genetic and social/cultural heritage influence racial/ethnic identity. We take advantage of a panel of about 180 ancestral genetic markers in the Roommate Study, which was conducted in the spring of 2008 using a sample of 2,100 college students. Our first hypothesis is that genetic-marker-identified race/ethnicity is largely consistent with self-reported race/ethnicity. The correspondence should be about 90%. This counters to the often-heard claim that race/ethnicity is entirely socially and culturally constructed. The hypothesis has never been tested using a large-scale social science data set. Our second hypothesis is that the correspondence between the two is poor for individuals with mixed racial background. Our third hypothesis is that individuals with mixed racial background tend to identify themselves with ethnic minorities. This is true even for those who are genetically predominantly Caucasians, emphasizing the predominance of social and cultural heritage.	Guang	 Guo	Yilan	 Fu
2009	98	Biomarkers in Demographic Research	Biodemography of Exceptional Survival: Lessons from Longitudinal Data	Maintaining proper levels of physiological variables (body mass index, blood sugar, etc.) is often recommended for having a long and healthy life span. To accomplish this goal, quantitative definitions of the proper or “normal” physiological states are needed. In this paper we show that physiological norms defined as values of physiological states associated with the lowest mortality risk for a given age, as well as effects of allostatic adaptation, can be evaluated from longitudinal data. The case of aging-related changes in blood glucose (BG) level is investigated in detail. We found that average levels of BG increase with age for both gender. We also found that the average levels of BG in the group of exceptional survivors increases with age as well. The use of extended stochastic process model of human mortality and aging confirmed these estimates and allowed us to evaluate a number of other important dynamic characteristics of the BG process.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Alexander	 Kulminski	Liubov	 Arbeeva	Irina	V. Culminskaya
2009	98	Biomarkers in Demographic Research	Minimally Invasive Collection of Plasma in the Field: Evaluation and Early Findings on Adult Health from Malawi	Collecting biomarkers involves balancing ease and cost with specimen stability and assay reliability. In poor countries these concerns are exacerbated because of limited infrastructures for delivering health services and transportation. In this paper we describe a new approach to collecting biologics in Malawi, one of the poorest countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with high levels of HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases. We know little about the health of adults sharing the same environments as those with HIV/AIDS. We evaluate the adult physical health of 1,000 individuals in the  Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project, including 110 persons with HIV/AIDS, in terms of 12 biomarkers of activity in three basic biologic systems: immune (hsCRP), metabolic (lipids and glucose) and renal. We use the Demecal™ blood sampling system that requires but 1-2 drops and uses a patented filter to separate out plasma and cells. Non-HIV adults have elevated pathogen burdens and show evidence of chronic malnutrition and dehydration.	Beth	J. Soldo	Philip	A. Anglewicz
2009	99	Mexican Youth in Mexico and the U.S.	Young People's Barriers to Reproductive Health in Mexico City		Carlos	J. Echarri Canovas
2009	99	Mexican Youth in Mexico and the U.S.	Unintended First Pregnancies: The Experiences of Low-Income Latinas in El Paso, Texas	This study uses in-depth interviews to explore the contraceptive experiences of low-income Latinas and their experiences of unintended pregnancy. We analyze women's experiences with contraceptive use before the first pregnancy, and what contraceptives, if any, they used after the first pregnancy ended. Nearly three-quarters of the 29 first pregnancies in this sample were unintended; women became pregnant for the most part while not using any contraception. All of the unintended pregnancies were to women 23 years old or younger, though three teenagers did have an intended pregnancy. Many women reported barriers to using contraception, like lack of information, fear of being found out by parents, or fear of medical procedures. Contraceptive use increased after the first pregnancy, showing that childbirth allows women access to medical services and information as well as breaks down other barriers such as fears of discovery of being sexually active and/or using contraception.	Kristine	 Hopkins	Deva	 Cats-Baril
2009	99	Mexican Youth in Mexico and the U.S.	Fitting In: The Roles of Social Acceptance and Discrimination in Shaping the Academic Motivations of Latino Youth in the U.S. Southeast		Krista	 Perreira	Stephanie	 Potochnick	Andrew	 Fuligni
2009	99	Mexican Youth in Mexico and the U.S.	Transition to Adulthood in the Mexican Northern Border: The Interrelations between School and Work among Youth in Tijuana		Marie-Laure	 Coubes
2009	100	Population Studies and Experimental Design	Menstrual Cups in Nepal: Preliminary Results from a Randomized Evaluation	This paper presents the results from a randomized evaluation that distributed menstrual cups to adolescent girls in rural Nepal. Girls in the study were randomly allocated a menstrual cup for use during their monthly period and were followed for 15 months to measure the effects of having modern sanitary products on schooling outcomes and time use. While girls were significantly less likely to attend school on days of their period, we find no significant effects of being allocated a menstrual cup on attendance. There were also no effects on test scores, measures of self-esteem, or gynecological health. These results suggest that policy claims that barriers to girls' schooling and activities during menstrual periods are due to lack of modern sanitary protection may not be warranted. On the other hand, sanitary products are quickly and widely adopted by girls and are convenient in other ways, unrelated to short-term schooling gains.	Rebecca	L. Thornton	Emily	 Oster
2009	100	Population Studies and Experimental Design	Nutritional Supplementation of Girls' Influences on the Growth of Their Children: Prospective Study in Guatemala	There is little evidence regarding the impact of improved nutrition in early childhood on growth of the next generation. We studied 1,365 children who are the offspring of 632 Guatemalan mothers, 426 of whom had participated as children in a nutritional supplementation trial. In the trial, two villages were randomized to receive a nutritious supplement (atole) and two to receive a less nutritious one (fresco). We compared offspring anthropometric indicators according to maternal exposure to atole or fresco, using offspring of mothers with no exposure as a reference. Offspring of women exposed to atole had 275 g higher birth weight and as children had 1.91 kg higher weight, 0.95 higher body mass index, 0.88 cm greater arm circumference and 1.38 mm greater triceps skinfold thickness. Child height, head circumference and subscapular skinfold thickness were not associated with maternal exposure to atole. Offspring of women exposed to fresco did not differ from the reference.	Maria	C. Calderon	Jere	 Behrman	Sam	 Preston	John	 Hoddinott	Reynaldo	 Martorell	Aryeh	D. Stein
2009	100	Population Studies and Experimental Design	Using Achievement Tests to Measure Language Assimilation and Language Bias among the Children of Immigrants	We exploit the test language randomization (Spanish or English) in Woodcock Johnson achievement tests administered to children of adults interviewed in the New Immigrant Survey to estimate the causal impact of language on test scores. Randomization allows measurement of the degree and speed of language assimilation and the costs of taking tests in one's non-dominant language. Foreign-born children receive higher scores when tests are in Spanish; U.S.-born children show higher scores in English. However, foreign-born children arriving at an early age or having spent several years in the U.S. do not benefit from taking tests in Spanish.	Richard	 Akresh	Ilana	Redstone  Akresh
2009	100	Population Studies and Experimental Design	Remittances and the Problem of Control:  A Field Experiment among Migrants from El Salvador		Dean	 Yang
2009	101	Disparities in Health and Place Relationships	Running to the Store? The Relationship between Neighborhood Environments and the Risk of Obesity	Previous research on neighborhood environments and the risk of obesity has typically focused on residents' access to healthy food options (energy intake) or on the features of neighborhoods that may influence residents' physical activity (energy output). In this paper, we evaluate both dimensions simultaneously with the aim of developing a more complete picture of the linkages between neighborhood characteristics and obesity risk. The analysis makes use of data from the Utah Population Database that has been linked to neighborhood census data and Dun and Bradstreet local food environment data. We find that neighborhood age, intersection density and walk-to-work measures are related to body mass index (BMI) and the risk of obesity. In addition, more neighborhood food destinations are associated with lower BMI and a lower risk of obesity. These latter effects are strongest for individuals living in poor neighborhoods.	Cathleen	 Zick	Ken	R. Smith	Jessie	 Fan	Barbara	 Brown	Ikuho	 Yamada	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2009	101	Disparities in Health and Place Relationships	Health and Concentrated Disadvantage in Later Life: 
Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study	Not only are adults who live in racially segregated areas exposed to disadvantage on myriad levels over the lifetime, but, in aging, they also may become even more reliant upon the resources embedded in their neighborhoods. This paper uses multilevel analysis to study residential segregation, concentrated disadvantage and the health of adults in mid- to late-life. Using data from the 2004 Health and Retirement Survey, I analyze the extent to which health disparities between black and white adults over age 50 are associated with neighborhood-level concentrated disadvantage. Random intercept models show that neighborhood-level factors are associated with both fair or poor health and chronic illness. Concentrated disadvantage is significant and in the expected direction, although the magnitude is small. Findings are consistent with previously identified connections between education and health, suggesting that improving educational outcomes for students in highly disadvantaged areas may yield enduring health benefits.	Stacie	 Carr
2009	101	Disparities in Health and Place Relationships	Socioeconomic and Neighborhood Context Effects on Health	This study examines the role of residential neighborhood in racial/ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in allostatic load, which is a physiological response to chronic exposure to the neuroendocrine stress response. Data come from 549 respondents in a sub-sample of the Chicago Community Adult Health Study, a probability sample conducted between 2001 and 2003. We constructed a measure of adverse health conditions based on a count of dichotomous measures of the following adverse health conditions: systolic and diastolic blood pressure, pulse, C-reactive protein, HbA1c, waist size, total and HDL cholesterol. The results show that non-Hispanic blacks have significantly more adverse health conditions than non-Hispanic whites. Adding controls for neighborhood context (in a neighborhood fixed effects model) significantly reduces the racial disparity. We found that neighborhood-level measures of disadvantage and affluence were both significantly related to having more adverse conditions for women, but not for men.	Katherine	 King	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	James	S. House
2009	101	Disparities in Health and Place Relationships	Maternal Health and Health Behaviors among Foreign-Born and Native-Born Black Women: The Role of Maternal and Neighborhood Characteristics	This paper contributes to the literature on neighborhood context and race/ethnic disparities in maternal health, health behaviors and birth outcomes among native-born and foreign-born black women. Several studies have shown foreign-born black women to have favorable birth outcomes compared to native-born black women. Relatively few data sets, however, permit detailed analysis of maternal health, health behaviors and birth outcomes among native-born and foreign-born blacks. This study is based on a prospective study of low-income women who sought prenatal care in 2000-2004 in community-based health centers in Philadelphia, PA. The survey data were merged with track-level measures of residential segregation, (index of dissimilarity, exposure and isolation), crime rates and survey-based measures of neighborhood-level social and physical disorder and corresponding measures based on administrative data. Maternal characteristics are available from survey data.	Irma	T. Elo	Jennifer	 Culhane
2009	102	Family Economic Relations	The Relationships between Gender, Significant Relationship Status and Ph.d.-Holders’ Career Outcomes	In this paper, we use new data from a survey of U.S. job seekers in economics to analyze the relationship between gender, significant relationship status and Ph.D.-holders’ career outcomes. Our innovative data set focuses on new Ph.D. economists because most new academics must move to their new job location. The structure of our data set enables pre-post market comparisons of preferences and CV data on the entire invited subject pool (includes non-respondents) allows us to control for selection bias. We test existing theories of family migration and develop our own model to better explain observed outcomes.	Brooke	 Helppie	Marta	 Murray-Close
2009	102	Family Economic Relations	Financial Disagreements and the Stability of Cohabiting Unions	Knowing that financial disagreements are highly related to marital distress (and possibly divorce), this study examines how financial disagreements and perceptions of financial inequity relate to cohabitors' relationship stability. Preliminary proportional hazards models using the National Survey of Families and Households show that financial disagreements positively relate to the hazard of participants separating from their partners as opposed to marrying or remaining together. Interestingly, finances are the only topic of disagreement related to relationship instability. Perceived financial inequity also positively predicts cohabiting unions breaking up. It is the only type of inequity that predicted breakup. Consequently, as for married individuals, financial disagreements can be highly problematic for relationship stability among cohabitors.	Jeff	 Dew
2009	102	Family Economic Relations	The Dynamic Relationships between Role Specialization, Separation and Women’s Post-Separation Employment: A Life-History Analysis of 10 Countries	Women’s work is generally considered an important factor in explaining divorce risk. The specialization theory from Gary Becker is often used to explain this work effect. Women with little work experience are assumed to have higher economic costs to exit marriage. Using the Fertility and Family Surveys, we test in 18 countries to what extent women’s employment increases the risk of separation. We also more directly examine the role of economic exit costs in separation by investigating the effect of separated women’s work history during the union on women’s post-separation employment. The results imply that Becker’s theory has less explanatory power in gender egalitarian countries: The more gender equal a country, the less important economic exit costs (measured by women’s working hours) are in women’s decision to separate and the lower the effect of women’s work history during the union on women’s post-separation employment.	Maike	 van Damme	Matthijs	 Kalmijn
2009	102	Family Economic Relations	How Do Parents' Expectations of Their Own Longevity Affect Inter-Vivos Transfers to  Adult Children?	How do people’s expectations of their own longevity, and their longevity relative to their spouse’s, affect intergenerational transfers? If one motivation for transfers is a “pre-payment” for services needed in old age, then we might expect these factors to be quite significant. Using the subjective survival probability questions included in the Health and Retirement Study, I first examine single (divorced, never-married or widowed) parents to see how, independent of spousal considerations, changes in survival probabilities may affect transfers. Then I look at remarried couples, who provide both a large age difference between spouses and an observable variation in the targeting of children as caregivers (his, hers and theirs) to see how one’s own survival probability relative to that of a spouse might affect transfers. I find that mothers, rather than fathers, display patterns more suggestive of pre-payment for services, although other potential explanations are explored for the intriguing patterns observed.	Megan	M. Way
2009	103	Linking Internal and International Migration	Immigrant Population Change and Skill Profiles in 21st Century Gateways: A Human Capital-Based Typology of Metropolitan Destinations, 2000-2007	In this study, we use microdata from the 2000 U.S. Census and 2007 ACS to examine inequalities in the distribution of immigrant human capital across metropolitan destinations. Motivated by recent endeavors to document the patterning of new immigrant gateways, we develop a typology of medium- and large-sized metro areas that is sensitive to both immigrant population change and labor market skills. Preliminary results demonstrate the considerable diversity across cities in their skill profiles, variation that exists both for old and new destinations. Further developing the conceptual typology and accounting for different patterns of population change and human capital across metro areas is addressed in ongoing research.	Matthew	 Hall	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Gordon	F. De Jong	Shelley	K. Irving
2009	103	Linking Internal and International Migration	The Effects of Migration Experience on Households’ Asset and Capital Accumulation: A Comparative Study in Three Central American Countries	Previous studies show the important role of international migration and remittances in the purchase of household goods, housing and investments in home improvement in less developed countries. Studies also indicate that the use of remittances for the acquisition of productive assets, such as agricultural land, is less prevalent and more closely tied to the local economic context. Based on preliminary results from the Guatemala Migration Survey (GMS), this paper examines the relationship between non-productive and productive asset ownership and migration experience in 26 Central American communities. The study uses data from Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Guatemala (Quetzaltenango region) from the Latin American Migration Project to expand on a previous analysis of data from the GMS in the Quiché region of Guatemala. This analysis uses regression models to estimate the effects of internal and international migration experience on the accumulation of household assets, agricultural capital, as well as business ownership.	Gabriela	 Sanchez-Soto
2009	103	Linking Internal and International Migration	Moving to Own: Mobility and Homeownership among Immigrants and the Native-Born	The purpose of this study is to examine how homeownership factors into locational decisions, focusing on differences between immigrants and the native-born. In particular, we examine the link between geographic mobility and housing tenure for the native- and foreign-born using Canadian data. As immigrants comprise diverse groups with different propensities for homeownership, we also disaggregate immigrant status according to place of birth and timing of arrival. Our analysis focuses on homeownership as an outcome of residential moves and its potential implications for immigrant integration using highly confidential microdata from the 2006 Canadian Census of Population, 20% sample.	Ann	H. Kim	Shervan	 Vafa
2009	103	Linking Internal and International Migration	Did Hispanic In-Migration Lead to Non-Hispanic Displacement in Rural America?	The recent dramatic dispersion of foreign-born Hispanic workers to new rural destinations coincides with considerable population redistribution of non-Hispanic whites and blacks. We contribute to scholarship on linkages between immigration and the socioeconomic position of other rural groups by assessing how redistribution trends among the three groups overlap or diverge. We use the 5% Public Use Microdata (PUMA) Sample  of the U.S. Census 2000 to analyze internal migration for each group with information on place of residence five years prior. We then elaborate on the socioeconomic conditions of out and in-migrant groups in relation to population trends of other minority groups. Finally, we model residential location decisions by racial and ethnic group. Individual-level predictors include socioeconomic characteristics. The models also include as predictor a PUMA typology characterizing residence by demographic composition. We thereby assess impacts of Hispanic residence on non-Hispanic white and black geographic mobility and how such propensities vary with socioeconomic characteristics and location.	William	A. Kandel	Emilio	A. Parrado	Angel	 Bogushev
2009	104	Gender, Power and Reproductive Behavior	Contexts and Vulnerability of Unintended Pregnancy among Young Women in Orissa, India: Does Gender Role Matter?	The present research that attempts to identify the contexts and vulnerability of unintended pregnancy among young women uses a multistage random sampling to select the respondents. Both qualitative and quantitative tools are used for data collection and software packages like SPSS, ATLAS ti and ANTHROPAC have been used for analysis. The findings are based on the data of 250 individual interviews, besides four focus-group discussions, and 22 in-depth interviews with currently married women aged 15-24 in rural Orissa, India, during 2006-07. Nearly three-fifths of the women experienced an unintended pregnancy, and the likelihood of unintended pregnancy is significantly high among those with a low equitable gender role. Gender socialization that restricts women’s function mainly to child bearing, coupled with their economic dependence, and envisaged social criticism of being barren compels young women to adhere to the traditionally expected gender role often resulting in early conception soon after marriage.	Manas	 Pradhan	Usha	 Ram
2009	104	Gender, Power and Reproductive Behavior	Demographic Manifestations of Son-Preference in England and Wales	Male preference in many Asian cultures results in discriminatory practices against females, including sex-selective abortion (SSA), which results in increased sex ratios at birth (s.r.a.b), notably in China, India and South Korea. A significant increase in s.r.a.b. for children born to India-born mothers living in the UK (from 1990), especially at higher birth orders, provided the first indirect evidence for SSA in a Western country (Dubuc, Coleman, 2007), echoed by recent findings in the U.S. Analysis of the fertility rates in the UK shows a less pronounced decline for the Bangladesh- and Pakistan-born mothers compared to the India-born mothers. Parents’ family planning strategy to control for family size while ensuring son(s) may contribute to higher s.r.a.b., since a decrease in family size statistically increases the pressure on women from families with strong son preference to abort female foetuses. Underlying factors of son-preference are discussed, including patrilineal rules and women’s choice autonomy.	Sylvie	 Dubuc
2009	104	Gender, Power and Reproductive Behavior	Demographic Influences on Women's Empowerment: How Reproductive Health Events Shape Women's Mobility, Economic Autonomy and Experience with Violence over the Life Course	This paper explores several dimensions of women’s empowerment over the life course and examines whether reproductive events and experiences over the life course appear to influence women’s empowerment. We use a life course perspective and a rich data set from women in India to investigate the influence of different events and experiences—including the birth of a child or of a son, an unwanted or mistimed pregnancy, and abortion—on women’s freedom of movement, financial discretion, experiences of violence and threats of abandonment. Accounting for the potential cumulative influence of life events, the fact that prior experiences may accumulate to shape women's empowerment in the ensuing period allows us to capture more completely the complex interplay between women’s reproductive experiences and experiences and their empowerment.	Susan	M. Lee-Rife
2009	104	Gender, Power and Reproductive Behavior	Fertility Declines in Developing Countries:  Do They Empower Women?	While gender and demographic literature has focused on fertility decline as a potential outcome of women’s empowerment and shifting gender relations, less attention has been paid to the reverse causation: the transformative potential of fertility declines on women’s lives and gender relations more broadly. We begin to address this research gap by exploring the question: Does reduced fertility create the conditions necessary to transform gender relations and under what circumstances? Our analysis draws on theoretical and empirical literature and a combination of quantitative trend data for 20 developing countries as well as qualitative excerpts from country case studies to assess how our theoretical formulations bear out against the specific countries’ recent historical experiences. We argue that population processes and gender issues are intimately connected and that declining fertility levels have the potential to set the stage for fundamental transformations in gender relations that then have implications for broader development processes.	Anju	 Malhotra	Nancy	E. Riley
2009	105	Blending Macro and Micro Measures of Fertility Impacts on Economic Outcomes	Fertility and Women’s Labor Force Participation in Developing Countries	To estimate the causal impact of fertility on women’s labor supply, we use the occurrence of twins and the gender of first births as measures of exogenous shocks to fertility. Since twins at first birth occur relatively rarely in one country, we use all available Demographic and Health Surveys. We find women in developing countries who are over 25 and had a twin boy and girl in the first birth have more children, but are more likely to participate in the labor force. Results also differ by age and geographic area. Women in Africa and Asia whose first one or two births are boys, have fewer children, and for the most part, are less likely to participate in the labor force. In contrast, women in Latin America and the Caribbean give birth to more children, but are also less likely to participate in the labor force.	Maria	 Porter	Elizabeth	M. King
2009	105	Blending Macro and Micro Measures of Fertility Impacts on Economic Outcomes	Fertility, Female Labor Force Participation and the Multiplier Effect	In this paper we examine the effect of fertility on female labor supply. Using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys, we estimate the effect of fertility on female labor market participation at various levels of aggregation: household, cluster, regional and country level. At the aggregate level the rising employment of some women may change social norms regarding female employment and encourage other women to work, creating a social multiplier effect in labor supply. By estimating at the household, cluster, regional and national levels, we can identify both the household-level direct effect on female labor supply and this social multiplier effect. To identify the causal effect of reproductive health and behavior on female labor supply we use variation in abortion and contraceptive laws across countries and time as an instrument for fertility.	Jocelyn	E. Finlay	David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning	Guenther	 Fink
2009	105	Blending Macro and Micro Measures of Fertility Impacts on Economic Outcomes	Gender, Poverty and Economic Growth: Public Policies for Different Demographic Situations	Much has been written on gender inequalities and how they affect fertility and mortality outcomes on the one hand and economic outcomes on the other. What is not well understood is the role that gender inequalities, embedded in the behavior of the family, the market and/or society, play in mediating the impact of demographic processes on economic outcomes. This paper examines the empirical evidence on possible economic impacts of gender inequalities that work through exacerbating demographic stresses associated with different demographic scenarios and/or reducing the prospects of gains when demographic conditions improve. It defines four demographic scenarios and discusses which public policies are more effective in the different scenarios in reducing the constraints that gender inequality imposes on poverty reduction and economic growth.	Mayra	 Buvinic	Monica	 Das Gupta	Ursula	 Casabonne
2009	105	Blending Macro and Micro Measures of Fertility Impacts on Economic Outcomes	The AIDS Epidemic, Family Structure and Economic Development: The Role of Reproductive Health and Family Planning Policies	How much would the development path of Malawi change in terms of income per capita and years to transit from agriculture to industry, if we implemented integrated Reproductive Health/Family Planning (RH/FP) policies and AIDS-related policies? In order to answer this question I construct a theoretical framework that relies on heterogeneous agents economies whose individual behavior I consistently aggregate to provide macroeconomic outcomes. The largest donor to fight AIDS is the U.S., which provides about 45% of all AIDS-related funds. The U.S. Congress, however, specifies that President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief must allocate 70% of its funds to treatment (mostly antiretrovirals). This leaves very little funding for RH/FP policies mainly focused on prevention. Here, I provide evidence that suggests a major quantitative economic role for RH/FP policies and argue for a reallocation of new AIDS-related funds  toward increasing the number of integrated RH/FP and AIDS policies.	Raul	 Santaeulalia-Llopis
2009	106	Work and Family in Later Life	The Association between Retirement and Emotional Well-Being: Does Prior Work-Family Conflict Matter?	This study investigates whether the association between retirement and emotional well-being depends on prior experience of work-family conflict. Using the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study data from 1993 and 2004, we estimate linear regression models and fixed effects models of positive psychological functioning and symptoms of depression. Retirement is associated with relatively fewer depressive symptoms among individuals who had previously high levels of work-to-family conflict. We find evidence suggestive of a similar association with respect to positive psychological functioning after accounting for unobserved characteristics of individuals. Among individuals reporting high levels of family-to-work conflict at midlife, our results suggest that retirement tends to be associated with better emotional well-being among men than women. Retirement may come more as a relief than a stressor for individuals previously experiencing high levels of work-to-family conflict. However, particularly among women, retirement may not relieve the burdens of family life stressors.	Kathryn	 Coursolle	Megan	M. Sweeney	Jeong	Hwa  Ho
2009	106	Work and Family in Later Life	Who Cares for Which Elderly Parents? Intersections of Race and Gender in Care-Provision for the Elderly	We examine the roles of race and gender in care provision for the elderly. Specifically, we address two research questions: How does the role of child gender in parental care provision vary by race and ethnicity? How do patterns of care provision for mothers relative to fathers vary by race and ethnicity? Distinguishing among continued independence, care provided exclusively by a spouse, care provided by an adult child, formal home health care and institutional care, our analysis focuses on families’ selection of the primary caregiver for an elderly individual across several time periods. We estimate our dynamic model with data from five waves of data from the study of Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) and test whether the role of child or parent gender varies by race and ethnicity, after controlling for demographic characteristics and activity limitations.	Michelle	 Goeree	Bridget	 Hiedemann	Steven	 Stern
2009	106	Work and Family in Later Life	Marriage and the Retirement Life Course:
Working Life Table Estimates for the U.S. Population over Age 50, by Sex and Marital Status	We know little about how the population-level retirement life course differs by marital status, despite the fact that fewer older Americans are married than in the past. Using the 1992-2004 Health and Retirement Study, we estimate multistate working-life tables to document how marriage shapes the retirement life course of men and women. We find that marriage has implications for the timing, length and permanency of retirement, differentiating the experiences of men and women in opposite ways. Married men spend the most time in the labor force and are more likely to exit permanently. By contrast, divorced men exit earlier, are more likely to be disabled and are more likely to reenter. Among women, the married spend the fewest years in the labor force and divorced women the most. Women generally have higher rates of reentry across marital statuses. Widows and widowers have experiences similar to those of their married counterparts.	David	F. Warner	Melissa	 Hardy
2009	106	Work and Family in Later Life	Trends and Determinants of Extended Family Living Arrangements of Hispanic and Asian Elderly in the United States: The Roles of Resources and Assimilation	Extended family living arrangements constitute a major form of social support for elders. Although elders are increasingly likely to live independently, trends differ for immigrants and their descendants from Asian and Latin American origins with strong traditions of extended living. While only 20% of native-born white elders reside in extended households, the corresponding figure for Asian and Latin American foreign-born elders is close to two-thirds. This tendency persists, albeit at a lower level, for native-born Asians and Latin Americans. This paper utilizes 1990 and 2000 Census data to evaluate the sources and stability of extended living among Asian and Hispanic elderly. Three theoretical perspectives – assimilation, family survival and group values - guide the analysis. Findings indicate that all three perspectives shape elderly living arrangements but group values and assimilation are the main sources of differentials between native white, Asian and Latin American elders.	Douglas	T. Gurak	Mary	M. Kritz
2009	107	Indigenous Peoples	Demographic and Socioeconomic Inequalities between Whites and Indigenous in Brazil	This article describes and compares some major demographic and socioeconomic indicators between whites and indigenous populations in Brazil. Using data from the 2000 Brazilian demographic Census, we analyzed the 15 Brazilian municipalities with the highest percentage of indigenous people. Our results show that when compared to whites, the indigenous population is younger: has elevated dependence ratio; has higher fertility level and infant mortality; present unfavorable socioeconomic conditions, such as lower education and income; and live in households with little access to electricity, piped water and sewage. The fact that the indigenous population represents an expressive percentage of the total population in the 15 municipalities analyzed does not mean that it has demographic and socioeconomic conditions similar to those of the white population.	Cláudio	S. Dias Júnior
2009	107	Indigenous Peoples	Tribal Casino Impacts on American Indian Household Well-Being	The Indian Gaming Regulation Act was passed in 1988, and in subsequent years, tribal gaming revenues increased dramatically. However, it has been unclear how tribal casinos impact different types of American Indian households’ well-being. I apply a difference-in-difference methodology to 1990 and 2000 data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series to address this question. When casino effects are split by householders’ sex and education, they are primarily on female-headed households. Casinos significantly increase household per capita income of female-headed households without a high school degree by $891 to $1859. However, casinos reduce per capita assistance income of all female-headed households. Casinos also reduce deep poverty rates of female-headed households with at least a high school degree by seven to eight percentage points and near poverty rates of female-headed households with less than a high school degree by 11 to 14 percentage points.	Robin	J. Anderson
2009	107	Indigenous Peoples	Poverty among the Indigenous People of Chile: An Empirical Analysis	Latin America contains a diverse indigenous population of over 40 million. Empirical studies of indigenous poverty in Latin America are scarce. Despite the size and diversity of the indigenous population, they are studied as an aggregate group. Grouping the indigenous population masks the heterogeneity between distinct groups. Using household data (N=73,720) from the National Characterization Socioeconomic Survey in Chile, the authors analyze variations in poverty between different indigenous groups. Using logistic regression analysis the author shows the factors that account for the likelihood of living in poverty. Employment and education are shown to be strong factors associated with decreased poverty. Variations between different groups are shown and the author concludes that the issue of indigenous poverty needs to be addressed differently to accurately describe the situation.	David	 Ader
2009	107	Indigenous Peoples	A Longitudinal Analysis of the Effect of Bilingual Schooling on the Educational Outcomes of Indigenous Children in Mexico	Indigenous populations in Latin American countries face persistent disadvantages. Previous studies have shown that non-indigenous children are more likely to be enrolled in school and attain higher levels of education than indigenous children. This paper will explore the educational disadvantages that indigenous children face in Mexico and whether bilingual schools help mitigate these disadvantages. In particular, we will go beyond standard measures of education— school participation and highest grade attained—and also look at differences in grade repetition, grade attainment for age and cognitive skills among monolingual, bilingual and non-indigenous children. We will use longitudinal data from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MXFLS) conducted in 2002 and 2005 and from the country’s Secretary of Public Education. The longitudinal nature of the MXFLS allows us to compare children’s progress in school and in cognitive skills between the two rounds as well as explore transitions from being monolingual to being bilingual.	Erica	 Soler-Hampejsek	Kelly	 Hallman
2009	108	Unintended Pregnancies	Exploring Key Dimensions of Pregnancy Intentions	Widely-used simple categorical measures of pregnancy intentions do not well represent the complexity of factors involved in women’s intentions.  We used a variety of exploratory statistical methods to examine measures of pregnancy intention in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (N=3,032 pregnancies). Factor analyses identified two key dimensions of pregnancy intentions: (1) Desire and (2) Mistiming, and two smaller non-dimensional categories (Overdue and Don’t Care). Desire included both affective and cognitive variables, as well as partner-specific factors. Similar pregnancy intention dimensions were found for adolescent and adult women, across socioeconomic status, and among racial and ethnic groups. Both Desire and Mistiming were highly predictive of the decision to abort or continue the pregnancy. These analyses strongly support prior demographic thinking about the importance of both timing of pregnancy and wanting a baby, but call into question the use of simple categorical measures.	John	 Santelli	Laura	 Lindberg	Mark	G. Orr
2009	108	Unintended Pregnancies	Male Pregnancy Intendedness and Children’s Mental Proficiency and Attachment Security during Toddlerhood	Using a sample of biological resident fathers and their children from 9- and 24-month surveys from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort (N=5,300), this study examines associations and the direct and indirect pathways through which men’s pregnancy intentions influence toddlers’ mental proficiency and attachment security. Findings indicate that unwanted and mistimed pregnancies for fathers have negative consequences for toddlers’ mental proficiency and attachment security. Additionally, men’s pregnancy intentions were found to work indirectly through lower prenatal behaviors and father engagement and greater mother-father relationship conflict to negatively influence toddlers’ mental proficiency. Men’s pregnancy intentions also work indirectly through greater relationship conflict and higher father involvement to influence attachment security.	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Allison	 Horowitz
2009	108	Unintended Pregnancies	Does Gender-Based Violence Increase the Risk of Unintended Pregnancy? Evidence from Thailand	Intimate partner violence (IPV) is positively associated with a number of reproductive health problems. However there is lack of knowledge about the relationship between IPV and control over sexuality. This study aimed to examine the relationship between unintended pregnancy and IPV, and to explore the factors influencing unintended pregnancies among Thai women, using secondary data from the study Women’s Health and Domestic Violence against Women. One-third of the respondents reported that their last pregnancy was unintended. About 41% of the respondents reported IPV in their life course, 13% reported only physical, 17 % reported only sexual and another 11-% reported both physical and sexual violence. Results of logistic regression showed the odds of unintended pregnancy for women who experienced both sexual and non-sexual violence was 2.4 times higher, only sexual violence was 2.7 times higher, and only physical violence was 1.5 times higher, compared to non-abused women.	Moshiur	 Rahman	Wassana	 Im-em	Kritaya	 Archavanitkul
2009	108	Unintended Pregnancies	The Unwanted: Underlying Mechanisms for Unfavorable Outcomes over the Life Cycle	Unwanted pregnancies induce negative life-cycle outcomes. Policy changes that enhance women’s ability to avoid unwanted pregnancies can be used to identify the effect of unwanted fertility on several outcomes. We use data from birth certificates to test whether early access to the pill led to significant changes in a particular form of early investment, prenatal care, relying on a natural experiment in early access to the pill induced by policy changes during the ‘60s and ‘70s. We expect access to contraceptive technology improvements to increase the fraction of pregnancies carried to term under adequate prenatal care. We also use pregnancy intention data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to estimate the causal effect of being unwanted on birth weight, an outcome with important long-term consequences and other life-cycle outcomes. Exogenous variation in contraceptive possibilities and abortion legal status can be used to instrument for self-reported unwanted fertility in these models.	Wanchuan	 Lin	Juan	 Pantano
2009	109	Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Reproductive Health	Racial/Ethnic and Gender Variation in Adolescent Sexual Decision-Making Frameworks	Differences in adolescent sexual debut and activity across race/ethnicity and gender are well-documented; however, this research lacks a comprehensive analysis of factors that shape the sexual decision-making framework of adolescents with attention to variation across race/ethnicity and gender. Using the first two waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), we examine race/ethnic and gender variation in attitudes about sex, pregnancy, birth control, reproductive knowledge and parental approval and communication about sex. Adolescent females hold more restrictive attitudes about sex and pregnancy, greater knowledge and motivations for use of birth control, higher levels of parental communication and lower levels of parental approval of sexual activity. Compared to whites, black adolescents show higher motivations for sex and pregnancy and lower reproductive knowledge and motivations for birth control use. Analyses of Mexican American teens show differences across generations with later generations more motivated for sex, pregnancy and birth control use.	Kimberly	A. Daniels	Nancy	S. Landale
2009	109	Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Reproductive Health	Adolescent Perspective on Sexual Debut in the South-West Indian Ocean: A Regional Study	Although more and more reproductive health interventions in the South-West Indian Ocean, including those targeting adolescents, are taken on a regional basis, information on sexual initiation is scattered, dated and difficult to compare. The study uses unique data from 116 focus groups conducted in 2007 among male and female adolescents in urban and rural areas of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Réunion and Seychelles to provide a regional portrait of adolescent perceptions on sexual debut. Data show that adolescent premarital sexual activity is viewed as normal and acceptable in Réunion and Seychelles while it remains stigmatized, especially for girls, in Comoros, Madagascar and, to a lesser extent, in Mauritius. In all five islands, traditional norms of masculinity and double sexual standards prevail. In Madagascar, Mauritius and Comoros, female premarital virginity is portrayed as increasingly in conflict with adolescents’ life and sexually active female adolescents are facing high social and reproductive health risks.	Anne-Emmanuèle	 Calvès	Mariam	 Gopaul
2009	109	Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Reproductive Health	Community Influences on the Sexual Behavior of Young People in Four African Countries	This research investigates the influence of community-level characteristics on risky sexual behaviors of young people (12-19) using data from the Protecting the Next Generation Project’s National Survey of Adolescents in Uganda, Malawi, Ghana and Burkina Faso (2004). The analysis examines several dimensions of adolescent sexual behavior including age at sexual debut, number of sexual partners, condom use, the role of alcohol in sex and transactional sex. The analysis considers several community-level influences such as levels of education, gender norms, dominant religion and ethnicity, ratios of male/female employment, health care infrastructure and presence of sexual education. The results indicate that the community factors shaping the sexual behaviors of adolescents differ by country, gender and age. The results emphasize the need for programs and policies that look beyond individual factors when addressing sexual behavior in young people.	Calleen	 Simon	Rob	 Stephenson
2009	109	Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Reproductive Health	Understanding the Sexual and Reproductive Health of Adolescents in Developing Countries: A Review of the Evidence on Risk-Taking Behaviours and Dual Protection from a WHO Research Initiative	The transition to adulthood poses significant sexual and reproductive health challenges for adolescents. To address research gaps in knowledge about the sexual and reproductive health of young people in developing countries, the World Health Organization Special Programme of Research, Development, and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP) launched a social science research initiative targeting under-researched priority areas. The initiative ultimately comprised over 40 studies conducted in a wide variety of developing-country settings. In this review paper, we synthesize the evidence across countries in two key areas of adolescent sexual and reproductive health: the factors that inhibit or enhance risky behaviours and adolescent perspectives on and practice of dual protection. Drawing on the evidence from the studies, the paper provides recommendations for improving the sexual and reproductive health of adolescents.	Ina	 Warriner	Shireen	J. Jejeebhoy	Iqbal	H. Shah
2009	111	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Family Processes and Changing Educational Gradients in Smoking	This paper describes how families of origin differ by parents' education and smoking status and how this has changed across birth cohorts of Americans. Part one describes trends in assortative mating by education and smoking status for cohorts born between 1930 and 1970. Part two describes cohort trends in parental education and smoking status at first birth. The results show that, across cohorts, men who smoke become more likely to marry women who smoke, especially among couples with less schooling. This alignment of education and smoking status continues between the time of first marriage and first birth. Among couples where at least one spouse smokes, the likelihood of quitting by the first birth is higher among those with more schooling and this educational gap grows across cohorts. This alignment of education and smoking suggests that families of origin are becoming more unequal across important predictors of social status and health.	Vida	 Maralani
2009	111	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Why Is the Educational Gradient in Mortality Steeper for Men than Women in the United States?	It is often documented that the educational gradient of mortality is steeper for men than women in the U.S., yet the explanation remains a matter of debate. We examine gender differences in the gradients within the context of marriage to determine whether they reflect gender differences in health behaviors or a greater importance of men’s education on married household mortality. We use the 1986-1996 National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files. Results reveal that the steeper gradient for men overall reflects a steeper gradient among unmarried men, with low-educated, never-married men exhibiting high levels of mortality. These men are more likely to die from causes for which smoking is a risk factor, supporting a behavioral explanation. No gender difference is observed for married adults. Low education and unmarried status exert a synergistic effect on men’s mortality. These men may disproportionately lack social supports that encourage positive health behaviors.	Jennifer	Karas Montez	Mark	D. Hayward	Dustin	C. Brown
2009	111	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	The Association of Cardiovascular Risk Factors with Education: A Comparison of Costa Rica (CRELES) and the United States (NHANES)	Despite different levels of economic development, Costa Rica and the United States have surprisingly similar mortality rates among women and men. In contrast to the United States, in Costa Rica there are only minor differences in adult mortality rates by education. We used data on adults aged 60 and over from the Costa Rican Healthy Aging Study and from the United States National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to analyze the cross-sectional association between educational level and risk factors for coronary heart disease among men and women. Among the 17 gender-specific outcomes examined, the only association with education that was similar across the two countries was for sedentary behavior among women. We find that there is neither a uniform association of education with risk factors in the U.S. nor a uniform lack of association with education in Costa Rica.	David	 Rehkopf	William	H. Dow
2009	111	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Health Disadvantage and Educational Level in European Welfare States: Longitudinal Results from the SHARE Study	Socioeconomic status is associated with health in many European populations, but the magnitude and pathways of this association may vary across countries. In this paper, we use longitudinal data to explore the impact of educational level on changes in health among Europeans aged 50+ in 11 countries, controlling for potential confounders and mediators. Our analyses are performed separately for Northern, Western and Southern Europe, as these regions broadly represent different welfare state regimes. We find that lower education is associated with higher incidence of poor self-rated health, chronic diseases and disability, but it is less consistently associated with new events of longstanding illness. After controlling for educational differences in wealth, income, consumption, health behaviours, labour force status and baseline health, the impact of educational level on health transitions remains significant for most outcomes in Western and Southern Europe, but it is substantially attenuated and non-significant after adjustment in Northern Europe.	Mauricio	 Avendano pabon	Hendrik	 Juerges	Johan	P. Mackenbach
2009	112	Contraception	Unwanted Pregnancy and Use of Withdrawal among American Women Aged 15–25	Pregnancy rates among young women in the United States are high, and a majority of these pregnancies are unwanted. According to the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), approximately 23% of women aged 15-25 occasionally or always choose withdrawal as a contraceptive method. Withdrawal has a high failure rate, approximately 18-28% in one year of use. Cox hazard model regressions on data from the NSFG indicates that those women that use withdrawal as contraception are at increased risk of pregnancy relative to women who use other contraceptive methods, with a hazard ratio of 1.35 (p = 0.046). Women who never use contraception, however, are at an even higher risk of an unwanted pregnancy (hazard ratio = 2.04, p = 0.00), indicating that withdrawal use may prevent some unwanted pregnancies, but is not as effective as other contraceptive methods.	Annie	 Dude	Amy	 Neustadt	Melissa	 Gilliam
2009	112	Contraception	The Marginal Child throughout the Life Cycle: 
Evidence from Early Law Variation	Do “wanted” children live longer? Our paper examines this question, motivated by recent research on the post-Roe vs. Wade “marginal child” as well as by the Barker hypothesis, which states that early insults to health (in the womb and the perinatal period) reduce life expectancy in adulthood. We test whether wanted children live longer by using legal changes in 19th century birth control and abortion laws. We first demonstrate that limiting access to birth control and abortion increased female fertility in the 19th century. Next, we demonstrate that these laws are not related to other things that might predict either fertility or child longevity. Finally, we use this exogenous variation in the population of marginal (plausibly unwanted) children to demonstrate that, consistent with both the Barker and marginal child hypotheses, children born to women less able to restrict their fertility are less likely to survive through their 60s and 70s.	Elizabeth	O. Ananat	Joanna	 Lahey
2009	112	Contraception	Patterns of Contraceptive Use before and  after an Abortion: Results from a Large Nationally Representative Survey of Women Undergoing an Abortion in France	Abortion is a common reproductive health event in France, concerning about 14.8% of women aged 15 to 49 each year, a rate which is among the highest in Western Europe. We use data from a large national survey of women undergoing an abortion in France (2007), comprising a representative sample of 7,541 women in Metropolitan France to explore their contraceptive situation at the time of conception and after the abortion. Special attention is drawn to possible variations in women's contraceptive profile at the time of conception according to their age, socioeconomic background or geographical origin. We complement this cross-sectional analysis with a longitudinal analysis exploring the women's individual contraceptive paths around the time of the abortion (at the time of conception and the post-abortion contraceptive prescription). Finally, we investigate the factors associated with the use of highly effective methods after the abortion.	Caroline	 Moreau	James	 Trussell	Nathalie	 Bajos
2009	112	Contraception	Does Contraceptive Use Reduce Neonatal and Infant Mortality?
Findings from a Multi-Country Analysis	This study addresses the effectiveness of contraceptive use in reducing infant mortality, from the early neonatal to neonatal through post-neonatal stages. Despite widespread belief that contraceptive use lengthens birth intervals and reduces neonatal and infant mortality, the research evidence is surprisingly thin. We conduct a multi-country empirical analysis of contraceptive calendar data collected in 19 Demographic and Health Surveys. We assess the effect of contraceptive use on neonatal and infant survival in lengthening closed- and open-birth intervals. One month of exposure to contraception and of overlapping contraception and breastfeeding can lead to a significant reduction in the hazard of death during infancy (HR=0.93 and HR=0.94, respectively). This implies twelve months of contraception can reduce infant mortality risk by 46% and by 68% with twelve months of both contraception and breastfeeding. This information is important for evidence-based advocacy to expand family planning care in low-resource settings.	Amy	 Tsui	Andreea	A. Creanga
2009	113	Cross-National Differences in the Influence of Context on Children's Well-Being	The Effects of Living Arrangements with Fathers on Child Health in Lesotho	Fatherhood literature stresses the importance of father-child co-residence for better child outcomes. In an environment where many children live most of their childhood without their fathers due to labor migration, child fosterage and paternal death, it is important to understand whether this relationship holds. If it does, what are the factors that diminish the negative effects of father absence on child outcomes? Specifically, this research aims to understand the effects of non-co-residence with biological fathers on children’s nutritional status, as well as the role that might be played by other adult male relatives co-resident with children on children’s nutritional status. Contrary to Western experience, children with absent fathers fared better than their counterparts with present fathers in Lesotho. These results highlight the importance of using household membership rather than just co-residence to understand children’s connection with their fathers in this context.	Thandie	 Hlabana
2009	113	Cross-National Differences in the Influence of Context on Children's Well-Being	Exploring the Meaning of Context for Health: Community Influences on Child Nutritional Status in South India	Much research attention has been devoted to community effects on health. The work on neighborhood effects defines communities as spatial units, while the work on social groups, such as race or caste, segregates individuals according to shared histories or identities. Using data from a unique “natural experiment” in South India, we use multilevel modeling to examine both neighborhood and caste contexts in an effort to disentangle which of these influences is more important for child health. In the sample, 26% of children ages 1-6 were born with low birth weight and 40% were underweight at age 1. Preliminary regressions show significant variance across neighborhoods in malnutrition and low birth weight. There are no significant effects of caste on either health outcome, which is a surprising finding for India. Future work will investigate how gender of the child interacts with both community types to produce continued sex discrimination in child health.	Nancy	 Luke	Hongwei	 Xu
2009	113	Cross-National Differences in the Influence of Context on Children's Well-Being	Race Disparities in Low Birth Weight in the South and the Rest of the Nation	This paper explores the sources of race disparities in low birth weight by comparing the nature and size of disparities in the South with the rest of the nation. Using the Early Child Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort, this paper examines the extent to which socioeconomic status (SES), demographic characteristics, maternal health and health behaviors explain disparities in birth outcomes by region (South vs. non-South) and by race (black vs. white) within regions and identifies whether the association between SES and low birth weight is similar for blacks and whites in the South, compared with the rest of the nation. Results indicate that race disparities in low birth weight are smaller in the South than in the rest of the nation, which may be explained by worse outcomes for whites in the South, and by a stronger association between SES and health for blacks in the South than in the rest of the nation.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy
2009	113	Cross-National Differences in the Influence of Context on Children's Well-Being	Girls Count: Socio-Cultural Context and Policy Responses to Discrimination against the Girl Child in India and China	India and China have similar social, cultural and historical motivations for son preference and similar policies to address resulting discrimination against girls. Despite opportunities for shared learning, there is limited comparative analysis of the social context and policy experiences across countries. This paper presents such an analysis. We use an innovative combination of individual interviews, published and unpublished research, and information from popular media to examine the similarities and differences in the dynamics, current state and likely future trajectory of discrimination against girls in China and India, and its relationship to other social indicators; the motivations, structure, and effectiveness of policies; their success in addressing the social, cultural and economic context for son preference as well as the resulting discrimination in health against girls; and key lessons learned for each country and across countries. We suggest methodologies for a more systematic evaluation of policies and describe replicable best practices.	Rohini	P. Pande	Priya	 Nanda	Lin	 Tan	Fan	 Wu
2009	114	Health and Demographic Issues in Emerging Markets:  China and India	Economic Development, Urbanicity and Adult Health Changes in China	Economic change occurs in complex ways over space and time. The classic methods of studying health and development within urban/rural residence miss spatial and temporal dynamics and adult health changes. Current theories and methods used to explain urbanization’s health effects need more complex measures of the total process of change. China, with its rapid economic change, allows us to study how a more nuanced, multidimensional examination of urbanicity helps us to understand much more about the role of urbanization in adult health. The China Health and Nutrition Survey, with very detailed systematic surveys on community infrastructure, services, demographics and economic environments in 233 neighborhoods for 17 years, enables development of a scale based on components that are theorized to capture the underlying latent construct of urbanicity. We develop and refine this urbanicity scale and then show how it not only captures heterogeneity, but more clearly shows the urban-rural health relationships.	Jessica	 Jones-Smith	Barry	M. Popkin
2009	114	Health and Demographic Issues in Emerging Markets:  China and India	Has Industrialization Harmed Child Health and Education in China?	Industrialization is often equated to income and job growth, improved living conditions and generally social development. Recent research casts doubt on a straightforward positive relationship between industrialization and development. Since economic reforms began in 1978, China has experienced unprecedented industrialization and income growth. It remains unclear, however, whether this rapid industrialization has improved social outcomes that are important for sustaining long-run development. We examine the impact of industrialization on the development of children’s health and education in China. Our approach is to analyze micro-level data collected in the 1990 and 2000 Censuses from roughly 2,000 counties and the socioeconomic indicators in industrial surveys. We predict individual-level child outcomes using family characteristics, time-varying district characteristics (such as percent manufacturing), year effects and county fixed effects. Regional and time variations allow us to conduct instrumental variable estimations to examine the effects of manufacturing with and without foreign ownership on investments in children.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung	David	I.  Levine	Lingyun	 Nie	Bernard	 Yeung	Yaohui	 Zhao
2009	114	Health and Demographic Issues in Emerging Markets:  China and India	Health and Entrepreneurship in China: Opportunities for the Disadvantaged	Significant returns to health have previously been found in China’s labor market during economic transition in the 1990s. This paper assesses the role of health and health insurance in driving privatization and entrepreneurship from 1991 to 2004 using data from the China Health and Nutrition Survey. Results indicate that health insurance may severely deter labor mobility into the private sector and entrepreneurship. Relatively healthy rural workers (no co-morbidities, better self-reported health status), but relatively unhealthy urban workers (disabled) are more likely to participate in the private sector and in entrepreneurship. Moreover, workers from less-advantaged socioeconomic groups—women, less-educated, less wealthy, elderly—disproportionately supply labor to the private sector in non-wage jobs. Not surprisingly, men and middle-aged workers are more likely to be self-employed owners of a business, but the less-educated are more likely to work in a household business in rural areas. Thus, China’s new entrepreneurs are not as select class of workers as some would imagine.	Jenny	 Liu
2009	114	Health and Demographic Issues in Emerging Markets:  China and India	Out-Of-Pocket Health Payments, Poverty and the Impact of Health Sector Reforms in India	India’s healthcare system has undergone considerable changes in the past one and one-half decades. The analysis of this study suggest that the impact of current market-oriented reforms in the health sector has been contrary to stated objectives, as a significant number of households slip into poverty because of catastrophic health payments. The results indicate that impoverishment due to catastrophic health care expenditure increased during the period 1993-1994 to 2004-2005. More than forty-seven million people fell below the poverty line due to out-of-pocket payments on health care in a single year (2004-2005). The estimates reveal that spending on drugs accounts for more than 70% of OOP payments. The proportion of households becoming impoverished due to out-of-pocket (OOP) health payments varied widely among states. The analyses clearly indicate the need for targeted health financing policies to prevent the large section of population from falling into poverty because of high OOP spending.	Soumitra	 Ghosh
2009	115	Gender, Education and Labor Market Outcomes	Gender, Education and the Labor Market in Kinshasa	This paper provides an overview of the labor market in Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with emphasis on differences in outcomes by gender and education. We use data from a 2004 survey. Data analysis begins with an overview of labor force participation and labor force status (employed, unemployed, out of the labor force), highlighting differences by age and gender. We distinguish employment in the modern sector from employment in the informal sector. Following this overview, we examine differences in labor force participation and labor force status by educational attainment, again with emphasis on gender differences. And finally, we report and discuss results of multivariate analyses of employment status, with emphasis on schooling, age, gender and migration status. Our results highlight the difficulties faced by well-educated individuals in finding employment in the modern sector, as well as gender differences in access to the modern sector.	David	 Shapiro	Roger	 Pongi	Mark	 Gough
2009	115	Gender, Education and Labor Market Outcomes	Educational Differentials in Married Women's Labor Force Participation in Japan during the 1990s	This study examines several potential mechanisms underlying the recent emergence of positive relationship between educational attainment and married women’s labor force attachment in Japan. I use data from a longitudinal survey collected in the 1990s and early 2000s, a period of substantial change in the context of women’s work, to estimate discrete-time hazard models for married women’s labor force exit. Preliminary results indicate that career orientation and job characteristics such as employment type, occupation and public sector employment are key mediators of the positive relationship between women’s educational attainment and labor force attachment. Women’s own income, however, does not explain the positive relationship between education and continuous employment. Also, in contrast to earlier studies, husband’s income and education are unrelated to the higher likelihood of labor force exit. In subsequent analyses, I will reevaluate these preliminary results using more refined measures and analytical techniques and interpret them in comparative perspective.	So-jung	 Lim
2009	115	Gender, Education and Labor Market Outcomes	The (Dis)Advantages of Foreign Education: The Differential Effects of Place of Education on Earnings by Ethnicity, Gender and Their Interaction	Much sociological attention has been given to the topic of immigrant economic assimilation into the labor market. Because of their economics success, Asian Americans are touted to be “model minorities” who have achieved the American Dream. This rosy perception eclipses the finding that they need to overeducate to reach earnings parity with their white counterparts. Recent scholarship has found that once place of education is considered, nativity and race are no longer consequential. However, the Asian American population is marked by considerable heterogeneity within, suggesting that source of education could matter differentially for different ethnic and gender groups. To uncover the variations across different dimensions of stratification, I use the 2000 Public Use Microdata Sample to examine the effects of foreign education on earnings by ethnicity, gender and the intersection of the two. I employ the differences-in-differences strategy in addition to the conventional human capital approach to make a more confident causal argument.	Lulu	 Chen
2009	115	Gender, Education and Labor Market Outcomes	Persistence in Labor Supply Effects of Graduating in a  Recession: The Case of High School Women	This paper explores the impact of graduating high school during an economic recession on the labor supply of women. I develop a simple, dynamic choice model that allows an initial labor demand shock to have persistent effects on labor supply. I then test the implications of the model using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979. For identification, I exploit both temporal and spatial variation in initial labor market conditions by using the national, state and in some specifications, metropolitan area unemployment rates. The results support the hypothesis that women who graduate during a period of high unemployment reduce their labor supply in the short run, with suggestive evidence that they instead substitute into earlier family formation. In contrast with previous studies that have found persistent, negative wage effects to graduating in a recession among college-educated men, I find no significant impact on wages in my sample.	Brad	 Hershbein
2009	116	Environmental Exposures, Social Context and Reproductive Health	Racial Disparities in Sexually Transmitted Diseases in Women: The Role of Individual Characteristics, Sexual Behavior and Environmental Context	The racial and ethnic disparities in rates of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are substantial, and research has demonstrated the link between social determinants and STDs. Data from sexually active women from the National Survey of Family Growth in 2002 were used for this analysis. Multilevel models were used to examine the relationship between individual- (demographics; sexual behavior) and contextual-level (census tract; county) factors and receiving treatment for a bacterial STD. Overall, at the individual-level, adolescents (15-19 years) and women with an income       	Jami	 Leichliter	Anjani	 Chandra	Sevgi	O. Aral
2009	116	Environmental Exposures, Social Context and Reproductive Health	School Quality, the Spread of New Ideas and Transitions in Childbearing Behavior	This paper investigates the complex relationship between school quality, individuals’ attitudes, and childbearing behavior (specifically, contraceptive use). Using data from rural Nepal, I create geographically-weighted measures of exposure to school quality—such as teacher and peer characteristics and financial costs—and investigate (1) the direct relationship between these dimensions of school quality and contraceptive use; and (2) the indirect relationship via attitudes about family members’ household roles. Findings show that increased exposure to these aspects of school quality throughout the study area, but not necessarily at the closest school, is related to higher rates of contraceptive use; that school quality early in the life course can have long-term consequences for individual behavior; and that attitudes about familial roles may be a mechanism that explains at least part of the effect of geographically-weighted measures of school quality.	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2009	116	Environmental Exposures, Social Context and Reproductive Health	Contraceptive Behaviour, Capacity-Building and Environmentalism among Women in Self-Help Groups: Some Policy Concerns	This study provides a first step toward understanding capacity building, environmentalism and fertility of a generic group and examines the impact of capacity building and environmental conditions on use of contraceptives  among women in a self-help group. The data were collected from 340 women in the Faizabad district of Uttar Pradesh February-June, 2006. Independent variables include availability of agricultural land, toilet and drinking water facility within living premises, capacity building about environmental cleanliness, and control variables are age, women’s life experiences, number of currently-living children, previous contraceptives use, standard of living index, and source of contraceptives. Six models of linkages of contraceptive use, capacity building and environmentalism were developed. Capacity building about linkage of reproductive and child health strategy and environment coupled with the availability of a toilet facility within living premises has a significantly effect on  contraceptive use among the women in the self-help group. Illiterate women and  women from scheduled castes are highly likely to adopt environmentalism to change their fertility behaviour.	Niyati	 Joshi	C.P.	 Prakasam
2009	116	Environmental Exposures, Social Context and Reproductive Health	Symptoms of Reproductive Tract Infections and Mental Distress among Women in Low-Income Urban Neighborhoods of Beirut, Lebanon	To examine the association between symptoms of reproductive tract infections (RTIs) and mental distress among women residing in three low-income neighborhoods in Beirut. we used data from a survey of married women (N=1506) conducted in 2003. The dependent variables were: complaining of vaginal discharge, pelvic pain and problems during intercourse. The main independent variable was mental distress measured using the General Health Questionnaire-12. Other variables included: “comfort” with husband, age, education, income, and community, among other relevant variables. The analysis was conducted using logistic regression models on the complaint of any symptom of RTIs and on individual complaints. Forty-two percent of the interviewed women reported at least one symptom of RTIs. Mental distress was significantly associated with all reported RTI symptoms after adjusting for demographic, socioeconomic and health risk factors.  A significant association between mental distress and reported RTI symptoms was established by this study.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Afamia	 Kaddour	Huda	 Zurayk	Faysal	 El-Kak
2009	117	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Children’s Educational Outcomes, Parental School and School Characteristics: Does Parent-Teacher Race Matching Make a Difference?	Based on prior literature we know that minority children overall have less academic success than their majority counterparts. A number of previous studies point to the importance of family characteristics when predicting children’s educational outcomes. While others suggest that school characteristics are of greater importance for determining children’s educational success. However, although the individual effects of families and schools on children’s educational outcomes have been examined, less attention has been paid to the interaction of the two, in particular similarities in parents and teachers. Initial analysis using data from spring of 1st grade from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999 indicate that having a race match between parents and teachers is a significant predictor of both parental school involvement and math scores. Future analysis will include multilevel growth curve models with in-depth measure of family-school interactions for predicting both parental school involvement and children’s educational achievement.	Littisha	A. Bates
2009	117	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Minority Student Academic Performance under the Uniform Admission Law: Evidence from the University of Texas at Austin	Administrative data from students enrolled at University of Texas at Austin (UT) between 1990 and 2003, are used to evaluate claims that students granted automatic admission based on top 10% class rank underperform academically relative to lower-ranked students who graduate from highly competitive high schools. Compared with white students ranked at or below the third decile, top 10% black and Hispanic enrollees arrive with lower average standardized test scores, yet consistently performed as well or better in grades, first year persistence, and four-year graduation likelihood. Similarly, top 10% graduates from Longhorn high schools also arrive at UT with much lower average test scores, yet through 2001, their academic performance was comparable or above that of lower-ranked students who graduated from highly competitive feeder high schools. Finally, multivariate results reveal that high school attended rather than test scores is largely responsible for group differences in college academic performance.	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu
2009	117	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Is Racial Discrimination an Equal Opportunity Health Risk? Racial Discrimination, Social Class and Health Status among Black and White Adults	Racial differences in health have only begun to account for the influence of discriminatory treatment. Prior studies show that perceiving treatment as racist has a deleterious effect on health for racial minorities, possibly representing the missing link in racial health disparities. Using data from the 2004 wave of the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, we assess whether perceived racial discrimination explains black-white racial disparities in self-rated health. We find that measures of discrimination in combination of social class variables explain disparities; however, does this reflect the influence of discrimination has for blacks? Surprisingly, analyses reveal that the effect of discrimination appears to be more detrimental to the health of whites than to blacks. Our analyses reveal this arises due to the complicated relationships between race, social class and racial discrimination where whites report more discrimination at the lower end of the socioeconomic spectrum while blacks report more discrimination at the higher end.	Jenifer	 Bratter	Bridget	K. Gorman
2009	117	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Race/Ethnicity, Life Course Capital and Health Trajectories	Racial/ethnic disparities in health levels are well-documented, yet less is known about racial/ethnic differences in age-trajectories of health (i.e., long-term, intra-individual rates of stability and change in health with age). This study integrates demographic and developmental perspectives by utilizing seven waves of panel data from the Health and Retirement Study, hierarchical linear models, and life course theory to investigate racial/ethnic differences in trajectories of chronic conditions and functional limitations between the ages of 51 and 73. In addition, this study examines the extent to which racial/ethnic inequalities in various forms of life course capital (e.g. human, economic, social capital) account for health disparities between blacks, Hispanics, and whites. Results show that health levels and rates of change vary by race/ethnicity, and that controlling for individual-level measures of life course capital reduces but does not eliminate racial/ethnic disparities in health trajectories.	Tyson	H. Brown
2009	118	Military Service, Work and the Life Course	Military Service and Later Labor Force Outcomes: A Life Course Approach	In this paper, we study the labor market outcomes of veterans and nonveterans from birth cohorts that span a broad and continuous range of historical periods. We combine data from the 1978 through 1996 National Health Interview Surveys to construct synthetic panels of veterans and nonveterans for the cohorts born in each year from 1931 to 1971. Then we employ an instrumental variables (IV) approach to estimate the effects of military service on a range of labor market outcomes using measures of the economic incentives and constraints faced at age 18 in each cohort as instruments for military service. We find that military service has a deleterious effect on labor market outcomes later in life.	Coady	 Wing	Douglas	A. Wolf	Andrew	S. London	Janet	 Wilmoth
2009	118	Military Service, Work and the Life Course	Not Just a Job: Combat Positions and Work	Previous research has shown that combat veterans tend to have worse health and to be less able to work than people who did not experience combat. Yet little is known about how later health and socioeconomic success are affected by simply serving in a combat occupation. This paper will examine how veterans who served in combat positions without experiencing combat fared in their later work lives relative to other veterans and to non-veterans according to three competing accounts: (1) skill mismatch, (2) cumulative advantage, and (3) turning point. It will also consider the possibility that any observed association between combat position and work life outcomes stems from selection. It will examine these competing accounts using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, which contains data on military occupational specialty. The analyses will take advantage of the longitudinal nature of the data to estimate multilevel, growth curve models.	Alair	 MacLean
2009	118	Military Service, Work and the Life Course	Women's Work after War	In the more than 30 years following the all-volunteer force (AVF) the proportion of women serving in the military has increased from 1.8% just before the AVF to 16.5% in 2004. Yet the majority of women do not stay in the military for a 20+ year career; like men, most women only serve a few years before transitioning to the civilian workforce. Although there has been a continued rise in the number of female veterans, little research informs how female veterans of the AVF fare economically after leaving service or whether military service benefits minority women who serve in such disproportionate numbers.  This paper investigates the civilian employment experiences of female veterans of the AVF by analyzing Census data to evaluate the employment experiences of female veterans. An audit study of civilian hiring practices provides additional insight into the experiences of women veterans transitioning from military to civilian work.	Meredith	A. Kleykamp
2009	118	Military Service, Work and the Life Course	Being All They Can Be? Earnings and Employment Status Outcomes of Immigrants with U.S. Military Experience	Though hundreds of thousands of immigrants served the U.S. military since its inception, this study is the first to examine socioeconomic outcomes of immigrant veterans outside of a historical context. An analysis of the 2006 American Communities Survey examines the earnings and employment status of immigrants with previous U.S. military experience (veterans) and those without (non-veterans). This study provides limited support for predictions from human capital theory gains for immigrant veterans. Immigrant veteran employment odds do not differ from non-veteran peers. However, immigrant veterans have greater earnings than non-veteran immigrants after controlling for race/ethnicity, age and human capital factors such as education, work disability, years in the U.S. and English ability. Veteran status benefits the earnings of immigrants. Further analyses demonstrate that working for the public sector mediates the effect of veteran status on earnings, indicating that veterans' preference laws and job-specific human capital gains may underlie the advantage.	Catherine	N. Barry
2009	119	Cohabitation	Economic Factors and Relationship Quality among Young Couples: A Comparison of Cohabitation and Marriage	Are economic stability and instability related to relationship quality among young couples, and to what extent does this vary by relationship type? To answer these questions, we estimate regression models predicting respondent reports of affection and conflict in cohabiting and married partner relationships using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 and the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). We find that economic factors are an important predictor of affection and conflict for both married and cohabiting couples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the relationship between economic factors and affection operates largely through its impact on the level of conflict in a relationship.	Amy	 Lucas
2009	119	Cohabitation	Race/Ethnicity, Cohabitation and Marital Wealth Accumulation	Although marriage is associated with wealth accumulation, recent research explores whether all married households have the same financial gains (Vespa and Painter 2008). This proposal extends this work by considering an important source of variation for cohabitation and marital wealth: race and ethnicity. We argue that race and ethnicity are associated with qualitatively different cohabitation experiences due to marriage markets, attitudes and non-marital childbearing. We use multilevel models for change to analyze a sample of 4,205 black, white and Hispanic married households from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979. Since cohabitation often acts as an intermediate step for white households, we expect that these cohabitors will enjoy a wealth premium over the directly married. In contrast, if black and Hispanic cohabiting couples view cohabitation as a substitute for marriage, we may observe a non-significant or negative relationship. Finally, we will use the patterns identified within-racial/ethnic groups to inform our discussion of between-racial/ethnic group differences.	Matthew	A. Painter II	Jonathan	E. Vespa
2009	119	Cohabitation	Nonmarital Childbearing in Europe: Convergence or Divergence in the Educational Gradient?	This study takes a cross-national comparative approach to study the development of nonmarital childbearing in Europe. Using the Generations and Generation Survey or similar nationally representative surveys, we focus on 12 countries: Bulgaria, France, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Romania, Russia, Switzerland and Sweden. Initially, we analyze descriptive statistics, focusing on the distribution of births and conceptions by union status (marriage, cohabitation and single) and how this distribution changes over time. Next, we develop a system of classification that looks at the meaning of cohabitation with respect to childbearing. We then compare changes in the educational gradient for union status at first birth. Taken as a whole, this study shows multiple pathways to family change in Europe, but it also demonstrates that nonmarital childbearing is largely indicative of a divergence in family formation strategies between the most and least educated strata of the population.	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris	Paola	 Di Giulio	Katja	 Köppen	Dora	 Kostova	Michaela	 Kreyenfeld	Trude	 Lappegard
2009	119	Cohabitation	Class Differences in Cohabitation Processes	Contemporary understanding of the functions cohabitation serves, and how these vary by social class, is limited. Our paper explores the process of forming cohabiting unions, examining how rapidly couples progress into shared living, reasons for doing so and plans discussed prior to moving in. Data are from in-depth interviews with 30 working-class and 31 middle-class cohabiting couples from the Columbus, Ohio metropolitan area. Working-class cohabitors in our sample moved into their living arrangements more rapidly than their middle-class counterparts. Reasons for cohabiting are generally similar across social class, with convenience and housing needs most often mentioned. But financial necessity and considering cohabitation “the next step” are linked to social class. Middle class couples were more likely to have discussed future plans prior to moving in, and to become engaged shortly after. Social class differences differentiate the ways cohabitation is experienced and the function it serves for contemporary young adults.	Sharon	 Sassler	Amanda	J. Miller
2009	120	Historical Demography	Household and Farm Transitions in Environmental Context	Farm operators’ management of resources is dynamic, and offers a meaningful way to evaluate important theories about how households develop and how population and environment are related. The role of household and family in this process has received attention but remains difficult to understand without a long series of data that link family, farm and environment. Taking a household lifecycle approach, we model change in land-use practice as a function of household composition in historical and environmental context. We use data from rich, linked individual-level population and farm Census records for 1860-1940 from 25 representative Kansas townships. Using multilevel mixed growth models, we find that environmental conditions are closely allied to the size of farms and acres of crops. Investment in increasing farm land is better explained by head’s life course, while investment in cropping is better explained by labor availability and household lifecycle.	Susan	 Hautaniemi Leonard	Glenn	D. Deane	Myron	P. Gutmann
2009	120	Historical Demography	Dissolution of Extended-Family Households in Northern Orkney, Scotland, 1851-1901	Historical demographers usually identify extended households as those in which more than one married couple occupy a single domicile. In some rural areas, however, it may be more important that they co-reside on a single farmstead and share the minimal resources needed to run the farm, even if living in separate houses. By this definition, we have found frequencies of household extension in Orkney, Scotland (1851-1901), ranging from 3-38%, depending on island and period. Why are extended households common in Orkney and, if household extension is advantageous, why is it not even more common? We consider Hammel’s suggestion (Proc Nat Acad Sci 102:7043-6, 2005) that household extension may dampen unfavorable fluctuations in household consumer/producer ratios by combining nuclear families at differing phases of their life cycles, but include another important limiting factor: as households become more extended, they become larger and need more land.	Julia	A. Jennings	Corey	S. Sparks	James	W. Wood	Patricia	L. Johnson	Timothy	M. Murtha	Stephen	 Matthews
2009	120	Historical Demography	Detecting Evidence of Deliberate Fertility Control during the Pre-Transitional Period in a Sample of German Villages	The aim of this paper is to search for evidence of deliberate control before the fertility transition by analyzing the fertility response to short-term fluctuations in grain prices. In the analysis we use longitudinal data from six German villages together with aggregate price series from nearby towns in a continuous-time event history analysis. The data allow us to both distinguish the response in different socioeconomic groups, and to look at the response by quarter of a year during the 18th and 19th  centuries. The timing of the response will be studied in great detail in order to identify the causal mechanisms. Lowered fertility very soon after the economic downturn – within six to nine months – is evidence of deliberate control as a result of families foreseeing bad times. If, on the other hand, the response lags for more than nine months, several factors, both intentional and unintentional, could be at work.	Francesco	 Scalone	Martin	 Dribe
2009	120	Historical Demography	Culture Strikes Back: A Geographic Analysis of Fertility Decline in Prussia	In this paper, we re-introduce geography into the analysis of fertility decline in the first demographic transition. In a reanalysis of Galloway, et al's Prussian data, we find evidence of both the predictive effect of economic variables and the unexplained geographic clustering of fertility decline found by the Princeton European Fertility Project. Our methodology is to fit structural models similar to those of Galloway, et al. to the Prussian data and to map the residuals. We find that unexplained fertility decline is geographically clustered beyond what one would expect from chance. Indeed, adjacency to an area of large fertility decline and location along communication and transport corridors seem to be important predictors of fertility decline beyond what one would expect from structural models alone.	Sebastian	 Kluesener
2009	121	Impact of Demographic Change on Organizations	Demographic Change: A Security Risk for Germany? 
Projection of the Quantitative and Qualitative Military Manpower Supply in the Year 2030	With demographic aging, the German military faces severe recruitment challenges due to an overlap of civilian and military manpower demand and increased job requirements for soldiers. The objective of the present study is to estimate the quantitative and qualitative military manpower supply in the year 2030. The underlying theoretical perspective is multifaceted; it draws upon the economic framework of military manpower supply and demand, standard occupational choice and random utility theory. Based on data from federal statistics, surveys and the German Department of Defense, preliminary results suggest a significant negative relationship between educational attainment and both enlistment propensity and actual enlistment. The odds of military propensity and actual enlistment are lower for females; they also decrease with age. Youths from economically weaker regions have high odds of considering a military career and enlisting. These results indicate various recruitment challenges and a potential gap between qualitative manpower supply and demand.	Wenke	 Apt
2009	121	Impact of Demographic Change on Organizations	Librarian Retirements Loom Large	Librarians are on the cusp of a critical demographic transition. The aging of Baby-Boomer librarians looms large, as do issues of technological change and potential deprofessionalization. About 5,000 librarians will turn 65 every year from 2010 to 2020 out of a workforce of only 105,000. While not all librarians will retire at 65, transition is inevitable. Drawing on the Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) from the 1980-2000 Censuses and the 2005-2007 American Community Survey, we will estimate recent retirement activity and project future retirement patterns and their effect on the American Library Association (ALA). Census survival rates as well as work-life table analysis will be explored as potential methods for projecting librarians. The demographic analysis of all librarians with PUMS will be augmented by analyses of ALA membership data. We will report results to the ALA Board of Directors in January 2009. Our presentation will describe quantitative methods and results, policy implications, and Board concerns.	Tom	E. Godfrey	Stephen	J. Tordella
2009	121	Impact of Demographic Change on Organizations	How the 2006 Special Attrition Package Reshaped General Motors	In response to reduced sales and consequent declines in production volumes, domestic automakers have leveraged their demographic structure to reduce their workforces. Since 1999, when the workforce population was over 100,000, General Motors’ hourly population dropped to about 62,000 at the end of January 2009. Most of that decline occurred as the result of two successful Special Attrition Programs (SAPs). The 2006 SAP, far more successful than anticipated, saw 34,000 hourly employees leave the workforce in less than one year. This paper describes the innovative, corporate-wide 2006 Special Attrition Program, which included retirement incentives. How did the demographic composition of the workforce change? How did the company maintain production?	Katharine	A. Frohardt-Lane	Hallie	J. Kintner	Dana	B. Kamerud
2009	121	Impact of Demographic Change on Organizations	The Impact of Diversity on Organizational Performance	This paper offers an organizational perspective on the impact of levels and trends in demographic diversity. Empirical evidence from several disciplines has shown how diversity can affect organizational performance, especially at the work-group level. Specifically, unmanaged diversity can lead to costs in terms of conflict and decreased engagement, while well-managed diversity can increase creativity and innovation, in certain contexts. Demographic changes in the U.S. labor force mean that the nature of demographic diversity is changing in U.S. work places. The paper documents some of those changes in particular settings and reports findings regarding their potential impact on performance.	Martha	 Farnsworth Riche
2009	122	Impact of Return Migration on Origin Areas	U.S. Policy of Massive Migrant Removal: Impacts on Salvadoran Migrants	The enactment of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) in 1996 dramatically increased the number of formal removals (deportations) from the country. After the passage of IIRIRA, deportations went from about 50,000 annually before 1996 to 272,000 in 2006. Department of Homeland Security officials claim that deportations are removing criminals and other dangerous elements from the country. A random survey of deportees from the United States conducted in El Salvador finds that the majority of Salvadoran deportees had legally-resident spouses and children in the United States, spoke English, had held U.S. jobs for over five years and were deported for non-criminal reasons. The U.S. policy of massive deportations has spurred a new pattern of international migration, as deportee variables of being younger than 42, having a spouse in the United States, having U.S. children younger than 18 and having been previously deported increase the odds of planning to re-migrate.	Nestor	P. Rodriguez	Jacqueline	 Hagan
2009	122	Impact of Return Migration on Origin Areas	Return of International Female Domestic Workers and Their Reintegration: A Study of Six Villages in Kerala, India	The present paper, based on primary data collected from six villages in Kerala, focuses upon return migration and reintegration of women domestic workers who migrated internationally. The analysis reveals that the major reason for return was related to health. While a substantial proportion had returned because of unfavourable conditions they had to face abroad such as non-payment of salary, and verbal, physical and sexual abuse, some others had returned because of other familial reasons such as children’s education and other family responsibilities. About three-fourths of the migrants had faced financial stringency after return and some of them faced some kind of tensions in the family because of their return. A large proportion of them wanted to migrate in the future and the intention of future movement was found to be higher among women who had faced some kind of problems in the family because of their return.	Reshmi	 R.S.	Sayeed	 Unisa
2009	122	Impact of Return Migration on Origin Areas	Husbands' Labor Migration and Wives' Autonomy	Labor migration leads to significant changes in origin areas. The separation of migrants from the family unit, whether it is nuclear or extended, has profound implications for family organization and for individual family members. We examine the relationship between men's labor migration and the decision-making autonomy of women who stay behind. Although previous studies have examined the association between men's labor migration and non-migrating women's autonomy, we go beyond prior research by testing multiple mechanisms by which men's migration may lead to higher decision-making autonomy of their wives: female employment outside the home, lower fertility, and residential independence from extended family members. The data for our analyses come from a 2006 survey of 1680 married women from 56 rural villages in southern Mozambique. We find that both men's cumulative migration history and current migration status are positively associated with women's autonomy and reflect on the mechanisms behind this relationship.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Victor	 Agadjanian
2009	122	Impact of Return Migration on Origin Areas	From Sea Turtle to Seaweed: Changing Images of Returned Overseas Students and Skilled Migrants to China	Since the late 1970s, a large number of Chinese students and skilled migrants moved overseas. In the mid to late 1990s when China’s economy started to take off, many returnees were treated as a privileged class  and were often regarded as “sea turtles” (hai gui), which was different from “land tortoise,” referring to locally-educated professionals. Many returnees landed privileged jobs. Recently, an increasing number of students and skilled migrants returned to take advantage of the opportunities associated with China’s rapid growth. However, the image of returnees has changed remarkably, due to a number of factors. Unemployment problems among returnees has also been concerning. The term “seaweeds” (hai dai) was often used to refer to those jobless returnees. This paper reviews the recent patterns of returned students and skilled migrants to China, changing policies and public perceptions toward returnees and labour market conditions in China.	Fei	 Guo
2009	123	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Black/Irish: How Do Americans Understand Their Multiracial Ancestry?	In recent years, studies examining the racial identification of mixed-race individuals on surveys and the U.S. Census have proliferated. The majority of these studies either use parental racial information or a comparison of answers to the race question in different contexts to identify a multiracial population. This paper proposes another method for identifying a multiracial population that is broader and potentially more historical in its understanding of its multiracial heritage, by comparing the ancestry responses on the 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census. The analysis clearly demonstrates that the identification patterns of multiracial individuals vary in systematic ways depending on which groups are involved that correspond to historical evidence on the dynamics of racial boundaries.	Aaron	 Gullickson	Ann	 Morning
2009	123	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Changing Answers but Not Identities: A Qualitative Investigation of Race Responses in a Longitudinal Survey	We seek to understand why people change their race responses over time. We use longitudinal survey responses to selectively recruit individuals for in-depth interviews about the reasons behind their changing responses to questions about their race(s) and primary racial or ethnic identities between 1988 and 2007. We find a wide variety of changes in 33 individuals’ answers to questions about their race, ancestry and Hispanic origin. To date, we have completed in-depth interviews with nine of these individuals. In many cases, respondents do not remember changing their answers and do not consider themselves to have changed their identities. Respondents’ post-hoc accounts of varied answers often focus on events or thoughts near the time of the survey and on details of question-wording. Many also report a rationalized process for selective reporting of their race(s), depending on the purpose of the form (e.g., job application versus social club).	Kelsey	 Poss	Carolyn	A. Liebler
2009	123	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Latino Immigrants and the U.S. Racial Order: How and Where Do They Fit In?	According to recent population projections, the non-Hispanic white population will no longer constitute the majority of Americans in the near future. These forecasts have touched off a series of debates over the future of the U.S. color line. We address a two-part question regarding racial boundaries and the place of the Latino immigrant population therein. First, we investigate where Latino immigrants place themselves along the U.S. color line in terms of racial self-identification. Second, we evaluate the way the U.S. color line affects outcomes of Latino immigrants. Using data from the New Immigrant Survey, we find that while Latinos do not conceptualize racial categories in terms of skin color alone, they suffer an earnings penalty for darker skin. These findings suggest that even if Latino immigrants are challenging the supremacy of racial phenotype, the prevailing U.S. racial order based on skin color is still exerting powerful effects on their outcomes.	Reanne	 Frank	Ilana	Redstone  Akresh	Bo	 Lu
2009	123	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Recognition or Invisibility? Comparing First- and Third-Person Measures of Race and Ethnic Identity in the University of Washington Beyond High School Project	Race is most often conceptualized as a characteristic that defines populations based on shared physical appearance, but in social research, race is measured by self-reported identities, which are subject to political and cultural forces as well as personal preferences. Since external measures of race are not included in most data sets, the consequences of relying on self-reported data to determine the size and characteristics of race/ethnic sub-populations have not been examined. We take steps toward addressing these limitations by presenting findings from a recently collected, first-of-its-kind data set that contains independent, third-person measures of “observed race” for nearly 10,000 high school seniors in Washington State. In this introductory paper, we examine the overlap and divergence between expressed and observed race for every major race/ethnic group as well as detailed Asian/PI and Hispanic sub-populations. Results reveal considerable heterogeneity in the “visibility” of race/ethnic identities, both within and between major population groups.	Anthony	D. Perez	Charles	 Hirschman
2009	124	Family Instability	Family Instability and the Home Environment	Accumulating evidence suggests that family instability shapes young people’s lives. Theory that motivates much of this work posits that family transitions set in motion changes in the home that are stressful and increase the likelihood that children’s development is disrupted. Data limitations, however, have precluded scholars from mapping out the link between family transitions, especially multiple transitions, and changes in the home environment. This paper explores this dynamic association. Using latent growth modeling, we examine how changes in family structure factor into trajectories of parental stress and investments, parent-child closeness, and household organization over time. We use data from the Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development, a prospective study that follows children from birth though 5th grade, contains 25 reports of family structure and includes gold standard measures of the home environment over time. This research can inform theory development in this emerging field and improve our operationalization of family instability.	Shannon	E. Cavanagh	Michael	E. Foster
2009	124	Family Instability	Partnership Instability and Changes in Mothering Behaviors with Young Children	Increasingly, children live in unstable family arrangements. Prior research suggests that each maternal partnership change a child is exposed to has a negative effect on child well-being. Social stress theory posits that partnership transitions are associated with changes in resources and family processes which alter the mother’s capacity to care for her child, thus leading to negative outcomes for children. No study, however, has directly tested whether these child outcomes are driven by changes in mothering behaviors, as theory suggests. Using data from the Fragile Families Study, we estimate HLM models to determine the effect of partnership transitions on changes in mothering behaviors between the child’s birth and age five. Additionally, we examine the extent to which changes in mothering behaviors may be due to changes in economic resources and emotional support from the exiting or entering biological or social father. The results will further our understanding of why family instability negatively affects children.	Cynthia	A. Osborne	Lawrence	M. Berger	Katherine	  Magnuson
2009	124	Family Instability	The Importance of New Marriages and Children for Cooperative Coparenting between Resident Mothers and Nonresident Fathers	Prior research has noted that although cooperative coparenting between resident and nonresident parents is beneficial to children, this positive form of shared parenting is relatively uncommon. Relying on nationally representative data from two waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (N=628), we examine the importance of nonresident fathers’ and resident mothers’ new marriages and new children for levels of cooperative coparenting and test whether changes in coparenting are linked to changes in parents’ marital or fertility statuses. Consistent with prior studies, our data suggest that cooperative coparenting does not occur in most nonresident father families. Results suggest that changes to the nonresident father’s family structure are of primary importance for cooperative coparenting, but that mother’s family structure is relatively unimportant.	Juliana	M. Sobolewski	Valarie	 King
2009	124	Family Instability	The Family Structure Experiences of Children in Single Mother Families	Using merged mother-child data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, we examine the family structure experiences of children born to single (unmarried and not cohabiting) mothers up to age 10. Specifically, we examine the probability that such children remain with a single mother vs. entering one or more cohabiting or marital unions. For those children whose mothers do enter unions, we examine whether the union was marital vs. cohabiting, as well as distinguish between unions with children’s biological fathers vs. those with step-fathers. Finally, we consider the duration of such unions. We perform all analyses separately by race and ethnicity. In doing so, we take a child-based perspective, over a long period of time, to examine stability and change among children born to single mothers in the United States.	Claire	 Kamp-Dush
2009	125	Research Design and Methodological Issues in Migration Studies	Cross-National Comparisons of Internal Migration in Asia-Pacific Region	Cross-national comparisons of internal migration can contribute significantly to understanding of mobility, but are hampered by differences in measurement and definition. A study from Bell et al. (2002) examined the obstacles to such comparisons and proposed a battery of 15 migration indicators (i.e. intensity, distance, impacts and connectivity) which were tested using British and Australian data. This paper provides the foundation for wider comparisons by analyzing a comprehensive inventory of the internal migration data derived from censuses data in Asia-Pacific regions compiled by Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Minnesota Population Centre and Regional Statistics offices. The paper reports key findings from the cross-national comparisons of internal migration in the countries under-studied, including Australia, China, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Vietnam. The study also identifies commonalities and differences in practice between these regions.	Salahudin	S. Muhidin	Martin	 Bell
2009	125	Research Design and Methodological Issues in Migration Studies	Making Use of the Consistency of Patterns to Estimate Age-Specific Rates of Inter-Provincial Migration in South Africa	This paper uses a multiplicative component approach and the related log-linear model to present and compare interprovincial migration in South Africa by province of origin, destination, age, sex and race for three periods (1991-1996, 1996-2001 and 2001-2007). This, inter alia, shows a consistency of pattern of migration by age, sex and race with the exception of children under age five (which are prone to undercounting and data scanning errors) which may extend back some 30 years. This consistency permits the estimation of the number of migrants born in the five years prior to the Census from the numbers at older ages. These numbers of migrants are then converted to annual rates of migration and Rogers-Castro multi-exponential curves fitted to these patterns. The paper ends with a discussion of the implications of these results for projecting future interprovincial migration rates and the generalisability of the findings to other environments.	Rob	 Dorrington	Tom	A. Moultrie
2009	125	Research Design and Methodological Issues in Migration Studies	Tracking beyond Borders: Experience of the Mexican Family Life Survey	There is little evidence of the existence of longitudinal study designs that incorporate following-up movers once they cross national boundaries; tracking international movers has been considered to this date too expensive and the potential success rates far too unclear to attempt any follow-up. In this paper, we present some evidence on how tracking was possible in the Mexico-U.S. case, based on the experience of the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS). We assess the usefulness of tracking in survey designs and introduce the protocols implemented by the MxFLS team to track respondents who immigrated to the United States.	Erika	 Arenas	Graciela	M. Teruel	Luis	 Rubalcava	Christian	 Herrera
2009	125	Research Design and Methodological Issues in Migration Studies	Multi-Country Surveys on International Migration: An Assessment of Selection Biases in Destination Countries	Studies on international migration are hampered by specific methodological issues that are unknown in other fields of demographic research. The most salient is that international migration is, by nature, a phenomenon that involves several countries. As a result, to study seriously the causes and consequences of international migration, a multi-country design is an option recommended by several specialists. This requirement, joined to an objective of representativeness, raises tremendous sampling issues. A possible method to select migrants at destination is to use contacts collected in origin countries. This method is used in the project, Migration between Africa and Europe. In this paper, we attempt to assess the selection biases of migrants’ samples that use snow-balling techniques starting from the country of origin.	Cris	 Beauchemin
2009	126	Maternal Mortality in Asia	Levels and Causes of Maternal Mortality in Pakistan: Results from the Demographic and Health Survey 2007	This study presents the data on maternal mortality from the Demographic and Health Survey of Pakistan, 2007. We designed a nested case-control study comparing the maternal deaths reported during three years preceding the survey (cases) with the women who survived a pregnancy during the same time period in the same sampling clusters (controls). The overall maternal mortality ratio (MMR) was 276 per 100,000 live births. The MMR was significantly higher in the rural areas and in remote provinces. About 85% of maternal deaths were attributed to direct maternal causes. Postpartum hemorrhage was the leading direct cause of maternal deaths, followed by puerperal sepsis and eclampsia. The effect of biological risk factors of maternal mortality (such as age and parity) was significantly greater among women residing in the underserved areas. We conclude that improving the access to emergency obstetric care is the key to saving mothers’ lives in Pakistan.	Farid	 Midhet	Nap	 Hosang
2009	126	Maternal Mortality in Asia	Does Safe-Motherhood Programme Reach the Poor in Uttar Pradesh, India?	This paper examines the trends and changes in medical assistance at delivery, a key strategy under the safe motherhood promotion programme, among poor and non-poor in the populous state of India, i.e. Uttar Pradesh, using data from three rounds of National Family Health Survey, 1992-2005. It further examines the relative role of public and private providers, social and economic correlates and reasons for non-use of natal care. Poor and non-poor are estimated for rural and urban areas using state-specific poverty line cut-offs. Preliminary results show that medical assistance at delivery has increased modestly during 1992-2005, largely from private healthcare providers, whereas, public health services has stagnated. The safe motherhood services largely benefit the non-poor clients. The majority of mothers not seeking medical assistance for delivery reportedly don’t perceive the need for medical-assisted delivery. Residence, prenatal care visits, age and parity of mother affects likelihood of skilled delivery.	Sanjay	 Mohanty	Praveen	Kumar  Pathak
2009	126	Maternal Mortality in Asia	Demographic, Programmatic and Socioeconomic Correlates of Maternal Mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh	We investigate the association between maternal mortality and demographic, programmatic and socioeconomic factors using longitudinal data on nearly 143,000 pregnancy outcomes during 1982-2002 from the Matlab Demographic Surveillance System. Among the four “too’s” that are commonly believed to increase maternal mortality risk – too young, too short an interval, too many children and too old -- only too old is found to be a risk factor. Controlling for gravidity, women under age 25 have the lowest risk of maternal mortality, and then it increases sharply with age. We find evidence of one additional “too” -- too long; interpregnancy intervals of five years or longer have nearly double the maternal mortality risk of intervals of two-five years. First pregnancies and non-live-births pregnancies also have high risks as do women with a history of child deaths and pregnancy losses, low levels of education, low socioeconomic status, and living in the Matlab Comparison Area.	Mizanur	 Rahman	Julie	 DaVanzo	Abdur	 Razzaque	Kapil	 Ahmed	Lauren	 Hale
2009	126	Maternal Mortality in Asia	Maternal Mortality Estimation at Sub-National Level with Empirical Bayes Method: An Illustration of District-Level MMR Estimates in Bangladesh	National estimation of maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is notoriously difficult in developing countries, and few countries have attempted ever to estimate MMR at sub-national levels. Maternal mortality is more pronounced among poorer segments of population, in rural areas and in areas where maternal care service availability and utilization are lacking Exploiting such a priori knowledge about the determinants of maternal mortality, we use empirical Bayes prediction method to estimate maternal mortality at sub-national levels from the spatial distribution of such factors in the area. We illustrate an example of MMR estimation in 64 districts of Bangladesh with the data from Bangladesh Maternal Morbidity and Mortality Survey (BMMS), 2001. BMMS estimated MMR of 382 per 100,000 live births, and our empirical Bayes estimates show that MMR ranged from 160 to 1055 per 100,000 live births at district levels in Bangladesh. The results will help in prioritizing and targeting the high mortality areas.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2009	127	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Western World	Fertility Response to the Tax Treatment of Children	One of the most commonly cited studies on the effect of child subsidies on fertility, Whittington, Alm and Peters (1990), claimed a large positive effect of child tax benefits on fertility using time series methods. We revisit this question in light of recent increases in child tax benefits by replicating this earlier study and extending the analysis with an additional 20 years of data. We find that their results suffer from the spurious regression problem, and are not robust to differencing. We find evidence of a statistically significant fertility response to a change in the real value of child tax subsidies occurring with a one- to two-year lag, but a much smaller and statistically insignificant total effect after several years, suggesting that a change in the child tax subsidy most strongly affects the timing of births.	Gopi	Shah  Goda	Kevin	J. Mumford
2009	127	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Western World	New Partners, New Children in Sweden	The increasing incidence of childbearing with more than one partner is a feature of the Second Demographic Transition with perhaps the greatest implications for family life. It is a phenomenon that may be significant in the maintenance of fertility levels very close to replacement. In this paper, we use data from the 2000 Swedish Level of Living Survey to update research on stepfamily childbearing. We model parity-specific birth risks as a function of the union status of prior births to test the hypothesis that birth risks are elevated if the child is the first in a new union. We consider differences in stepfamily childbearing by whether prior children were born in a prior coresidential partnership or to couples who did not live together. We also show how the age of the youngest stepchild alters differentials in birth risks between couples with and without stepchildren.	Jennifer	 Holland	Elizabeth	 Thomson
2009	127	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Western World	Fertility Following an Unintended First Birth	Research on unintended fertility tends to focus on single births. This article expands previous research by examining the relationship between early unintended childbearing and subsequent fertility dynamics. Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth show that 32.5% of mothers report an unintended first birth. We use event history methods to show that these women are significantly more likely than women with an intended first birth to have an unintended second birth than to either have no second birth or an intended second birth, net of socio-demographic characteristics. (Future analyses will explore more sophisticated methods for accounting for selection into unintended fertility.) An unintended first birth also increases the risk of having an unintended third birth relative to no birth or an intended birth, independent of the intendedness of the second birth. We conclude that early unintended fertility is a strong signal of high risk for subsequent unintended fertility.	Karen	B. Guzzo	Sarah	R. Hayford	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith
2009	127	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Western World	Fertility and Happiness in the  21st Century: Institutions, Preferences and Their Interactions	In this paper, we develop a macro-micro theory of fertility in contemporary advanced societies and we present a first empirical test based on comparative data. In line with the “cultural” approach and with the economic theories of fertility, we argue that, nowadays, individuals have children only as long as this is compatible with their self-fulfillment (happiness). However, what counts in decisions is the expected increase, and this is shaped by the institutional environment individuals live in.   We argue that this macro-micro theory of fertility accounts for some general differences among the developed world, answering to the call of Caldwell and Schindlmayr (2003) for a common framework in the explanation of below-replacement fertility.  We develop empirical tests of this hypothesis based on comparative European data from Generations and Gender Surveys.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2009	129	Work and Family Issues	Control over Work Time and Work-Family Conflict: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in a White-Collar Workplace	There are almost no longitudinal studies that provide strong causal evidence about whether the adoption of new “family-friendly” policies or initiatives reduces employees’ work-family conflict. We use data collected before and after the implementation of a workplace initiative called Results-Only Work Environment (ROWE) to investigate its effects on work-family conflict and work-family fit. We ask: (1) do these changes in the work environment increase employees’ control over the time and timing of their work? (2) does the initiative reduce work-family conflict and improve other measures of work-family fit? and (3) do changes in work-time control mediate the effects of ROWE on the work-family interface? We find strong evidence that ROWE increases employees’ control over their work time, that ROWE improves employees’ sense of fit between work and personal life, and that the effects of ROWE on work-family conflict and fit are mediated by control over work time.	Erin	 Kelly	Phyllis	 Moen	Eric	 Tranby
2009	129	Work and Family Issues	The Use of Family-Friendly Benefits	We assess the take-up of employer-provided family-friendly benefits in Canada using data from the Workplace and Employee Survey (1999-2002). We distinguish between availability and actual use of benefits to account for worker selection into firms according to benefit availability. Accounting for take-up of benefits is important in understanding the effect that family-friendly benefits may have in alleviating work-family conflict. In general, we find that the provision of these benefits helps workers relatively little to manage the so called family-work conflict and that benefits are often unavailable to those who need them most. Our findings suggest that the market fails to help employees balance the demands of paid work and family responsibilities.	Ana	 Ferrer	Lynda	 Gagne
2009	129	Work and Family Issues	Public Policies and Women’s Employment after Childbearing	This paper provides new evidence about how public policies in the United States affect work by mothers during the first months and years following childbirth. We use data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort and simultaneously examine the effects of multiple policies (state parental leave laws, welfare work exemptions, transfer payment generosity, and child care subsidies) using a difference-in-difference (DD) strategy that exploits the fact that each policy we examine is likely to strongly affect some women but not others. We find that the policies providing strong or weak work incentives can have strong effects, particularly when changed in combination and for disadvantaged mothers. Policy packages designed to maximize the choices available to mothers have weaker effects, since some such policies promote early work while others operate in the opposite direction. Some policies, such as parental leave entitlements, have different effects immediately after birth and at later child ages.	Wen-Jui	 Han	Christopher	 Ruhm	Jane	 Waldfogel	Elizabeth	 Washbrook
2009	129	Work and Family Issues	Maternity Leave in Russia: Policies and Effects on Labor Market Transitions and Childbearing	This study focuses on maternity leave in Russia during a period of rapid social and economic change. By analyzing retrospective employment and reproductive histories from 1985-2000, we examine whether maternity leave led to an increase in second birth rates or influenced women’s labor market transitions. The results show that women on maternity leave were one-third less likely to quit employment and nearly twice as likely to change jobs compared to women who were currently working. In the post-Soviet period, women on maternity leave had a hazard of reentering employment twice as high as those who were unemployed and a hazard of layoff only about one-third of otherwise similar women who were actively working. Women who took maternity leave also had higher second conception rates than women who did not. Thus, maternity leave provided women with a way to maintain a foothold in the labor force and led to higher fertility.	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris	Theodore	P. Gerber
2009	130	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Mortality Measurement at Advanced Ages	Estimation of hazard rates at extremely old ages poses serious challenges to researchers. Using data from the Social Security Administration Death Master File allowed us to estimate hazard rates for a set of very large single-year extinct birth cohorts (1884-1889) on a monthly basis. We found that mortality at advanced ages follows the Gompertz law up to the ages 102-105 years without a significant deceleration. Additional measures of quality control demonstrated that population subgroups with better age reporting do not show mortality deceleration (deviation of mortality from the Gompertz law). Earlier reports of mortality deceleration at ages below 100 appear to be artifacts of mixing together several birth cohorts with different mortality levels and using cross-sectional instead of cohort data.	Leonid	A. Gavrilov
2009	130	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	At What Age Does Mortality Start to Decelerate?	Throughout most of the adult lifespan, mortality increases linearly on a logarithmic scale. At advanced ages, though, mortality levels often result in overestimating mortality if a Gompertzian shape is assumed. Most commonly this mortality deceleration is measured by the life-table aging rate, introduced by Horiuchi and colleagues, but also other methods that were used previously. In this paper we present two alternative approaches to determine the age when mortality deceleration starts: (1) the age when mortality acceleration is at its maximum, and (2) the age when observed mortality deviates significantly from the exponential increase. After a theoretical justification, we show with empirical data that these two new methods are not only intuitively but also practically appealing. In a concluding empirical case study, we show that one of these new methods is well suited to detect trends in mortality deceleration over time.	Roland	 Rau	Magdalena	 Muszynska	Annette	 Baudisch
2009	130	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Aggregate versus Individual Change	Heterogeneity within a population can produce dynamics at the population level that are very different from the dynamics within homogeneous subgroups or dynamics at the individual level. Therefore, conclusions about individual characteristics can very often not directly be drawn from observations made on the aggregate population level (Vaupel and Yashin 1985, Am. Stat., 39, 176-185). We present a straightforward and simple approach to decompose the observed change at the aggregate population level into parts with clear meaning, namely the individual change and the change due to selective mortality. Our approach not only provides information about whether there are individual and compositional changes, but also makes it possible to quantify how much of the change observed on the population level is due to a compositional change and how much is due to an actual change in the individuals. The approach can be extended to account for new individuals entering the study.	Maren	 Rebke	Zhen	 Zhang
2009	130	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Modeling the Evolution of Age and Cohort Effects in Social Research	It is well known that the conventional linear age-period-cohort model suffers from an identification problem: If an outcome depends on the sum of an age effect, a period effect and a cohort effect, we cannot distinguish the effects of age, period and cohort because cohort = current year - age. Less well-appreciated is that the model suffers from a conceptual problem: It assumes that the influence of age is the same in all years, the influence of present conditions is the same at all ages and cohorts do not change over time. We argue that these assumptions fail in most applications, and we propose a model that relaxes them. Our model operationalizes Ryder's (1965) concept of cohort effects as an accumulation of age-by-period interactions. The additive model is a special case; except in special cases, our model is identified. We apply our model to analyze mortality rates in Sweden.	Sam	 Schulhofer-Wohl	Yang	 Yang
2009	131	Comparative Perspectives on Sexuality, Family Planning and Fertility	Levels, Trends and Implications of Unintended Pregnancy Worldwide	The outcomes of unintended pregnancies are rarely positive. Estimates of the distribution of all pregnancies according to the intention status and outcomes (wanted, mistimed or unwanted births, induced abortion, and spontaneous abortion) for major regions of the world were developed for 1995. Using information from various sources, we present updated estimates of the numbers, rates and distribution of pregnancies by their outcomes for 2008. We assess cross-regional patterns and trends in the context of fertility rates, contraceptive prevalence and unmet need. Preliminary findings indicate that over 40% of pregnancies in Europe and North America are unintended, as are over half of pregnancies in Latin America and one-third of pregnancies in Africa. In the developed world, the proportion of pregnancies ending in induced abortion has declined and the proportion ending in wanted births increased. There has been relatively little change in pregnancy outcomes in the developing world.	Gilda	 Sedgh	Susheela	D. Singh	Rubina	 Hussain
2009	131	Comparative Perspectives on Sexuality, Family Planning and Fertility	Social Interactions and Fertility in Developing Countries	There is strong evidence that, in addition to individual and household characteristics, social interactions are important in determining fertility rates. Social  interactions can lead to a multiplier effect where an individual’s ideas and fertility choice, can affect the fertility decisions of others. We merge all existing Demographic and Health Surveys to investigate the factors that influence both individual and average group fertility. We find that in the early phase of the fertility transition the impact of a woman’s education and experience of child death, on her group’s average fertility are more than three times as large as their direct effect on her own fertility decision.	Isabel	 Gunther	Sebastian	 Linnemayr	David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning
2009	131	Comparative Perspectives on Sexuality, Family Planning and Fertility	A Comparison of Contraceptive Use Trends in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua	This paper considers trends in contraceptive use in Central America, with an emphasis on determining whether changes in prevalence can be attributed to changes in such factors as women’s education, economic status and urbanization. Within the context of Latin America, Central America is one of the last regions to experience fertility decline with much of the decline being attributable to greater contraceptive use. This decline has taken place against a backdrop of improvements in women’s educational attainment and household economic status. A primary goal of this paper is to determine whether the changes in contraceptive use can be largely attributed to these social changes. A secondary goal is to compare the four countries in terms of whether differences between the countries in contraceptive use can be explained by differences in these social and economic factors. We also consider changes over time in contraceptive method mix and sources of contraception.	Paul	 Stupp	Daniel	 Williams	Danni	 Daniels
2009	131	Comparative Perspectives on Sexuality, Family Planning and Fertility	Adolescent Sexual Activity, Substance Use and Attachment to Conventional Institutions in Three Western Nations	In the U.S., adolescent sexual activity is typically framed as a problem behavior associated with substance use and unconventionality. Despite similar levels of adolescent sexual activity, Western countries vary widely in adolescent pregnancy and STI rates; therefore, adolescent sexual experience may be differentially related to other outcomes as well. Data from 15-year-old participants in the 1997-1998 Health Behavior in School-Aged Children Survey (Finland and Scotland) and the 1996 U.S. Add Health survey were utilized (N=3,377). After controlling for family socioeconomic status, living arrangement and country fixed effects, sexual initiation was similarly negatively related to school attachment among boys and girls across nations; however, maternal communication was negatively related to sexual initiation only among U.S. females. Sexual initiation was positively associated with substance use among boys and girls across nations, although associations were stronger in Scotland and Finland than the U.S. Findings partially support the cross-cultural applicability of Problem Behavior Theory.	Aubrey	L. Spriggs	Tilda	 Farhat	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern	Saoirse	 Nic Gabhainn
2009	132	Education Policy and Child Outcomes	Middle School Operating Levies and Eighth Grade Mathematics and Reading Achievement: Evidence from Minnesota, 1998-2005	Does the increased funding that an operating levy brings to a school district raise the academic achievement of students in that district? Extensive previous research has considered the connection between school funding and student achievement, but surprisingly little research has focused on the efficacy of this widely-used policy mechanism for funding schools. We regress annual school-level measures of Minnesota 8th graders’ reading and mathematics achievement between 1998 and 2005 on indicators of the level of support that those schools received from publicly-approved operating levies over that period. Our models include measures of district-level funding provided via operating levies, school-level measures of 8th graders’ math and reading achievement, and time-vary covariates indicting schools’ resource allocation and their students’ social, economic, and demographic characteristics. We estimate a series of school and year fixed effects models, with careful attention to the timing of resource availability.	Peter	 Wruck	John	R. Warren
2009	132	Education Policy and Child Outcomes	The Structural Attributes of Low- and High-Performing High Schools: Success Rates in High Stakes Testing in Washington State	The beginning of the 21st century saw a refocusing on the productivity of U.S. public education. The focus has been both in terms of demanding that schools produce learning and that this production leave no child behind. Such focus has pushed for a new set of high-stakes testing and a general concern for the observed wide variation in the rates of success across schools. In this study we use data from the state of Washington to explore what structural features of schools explain the variation in success rates in passing the state’s Washington Assessment of Student Learning exam (WASL) among 10th grade students. Several school characteristics are correlated with WASL success, but almost half of the between-school variation in WASL success is explained by an index of poverty of students. The negative sanctions of high-stakes testing will reinforce the very high correlation between socioeconomic status and high school completion.	Nikolas	D. Pharris-Ciurej	Charles	 Hirschman
2009	132	Education Policy and Child Outcomes	Dosage Effects of Classroom-Based Interventions on Children's School Readiness: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Head Start Settings	The variations in program compliance, or dosage levels, of social interventions and their effects on program outcomes have received increasing attention, yet remain poorly understood. This study examined the dosage effects of the Chicago School Readiness Project, a randomized, multifaceted classroom-based intervention in Head Start settings. Using a principal score matching method to address the issue of selection bias, this study found that compared to intention-to-treat estimates, high-dosage levels of teacher training and mental health consultant (MHC) class visits had larger effects on children’s school readiness while low-dosage levels of treatment had smaller or statistically nonsignificant program effects. Moreover, individual MHC services for high-risk children also had significant effects on their school readiness. Implications of these findings for research and policy are discussed.	Fuhua	 Zhai	Cybele	 Raver	Stephanie	 Jones	Christine	 Li-Grining	Emily	 Pressler	Qin	 Gao	Darlene	 Jones-Lewis
2009	132	Education Policy and Child Outcomes	SES vs. Sex: Where Should Education Policy-Makers Invest in Sub-Saharan Africa?	Recent evidence suggests that concerted efforts to reduce gender inequality in schooling globally have begun to payoff, especially in the case of Sub-Saharan Africa. Given these improvements however, some researchers have questioned whether there should be a continued focus on gender at the expense of other aspects of educational disadvantage, such as that associated with family resources, or socioeconomic status (SES). The question is one that will depend at least partially on the magnitude of disadvantage that stems from both sex and SES. Moreover, given the limited resources of most Sub-Saharan governments, such a decision will be guided by the payoff associated with funneling resources to particular groups. This paper uses Demographic and Health Survey data from eight Sub-Saharan countries to estimate the contribution of SES and sex to overall educational inequality countries. We then evaluate the impact of various policies that would raise enrollments of specific groups and the relative cost of these options.	Sarah	 Giroux	Anila	 Rehman	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	Habidou	 Ouedraogo
2009	133	The Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Optimizing Residential Segregation and Urban Crime	Research consistently finds that racially segregated communities experience higher levels of crime and social disorganization. Yet the 1990s crime decline was unaccompanied by a notable change in the residential segregation levels of many cities between 1990 and 2000, suggesting a possible decoupling of the relationship between segregation and crime. In this paper we investigate when, whether and how racial segregation structures disadvantage among minority communities. Our analysis will optimize residential segregation and homicide rates by finding the maximum level of racial integration (or isolation) that minimizes (or maximizes) homicide between 1980 and 2000. Segregation thresholds are identified to illuminate “tipping points” in homicide rates, and segregation inertia/stability during this period is used to test causal arguments that homicide (or crime more generally) is caused by growing inequality in residential segregation.	Bryan	L. Sykes	Jacob	 Young	Kevin	 Drakulich
2009	133	The Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Ethnic Residential Segregation, Social Contacts and Prejudice in European Societies	The research examines the complex inter-relations between residential segregation, inter-ethnic social contacts and prejudice within the context of European societies. It examines the following hypotheses: (1) ethnic residential segregation restricts opportunities for establishment and development of inter-ethnic social contacts; (2) positive inter-ethnic contacts are likely to reduce prejudice and social distance; and (3) contact mediates the relations between residential segregation and prejudicial attitudes. The data for the analysis were obtained from the 2003 European Social Survey for 21 European countries. A series of multilevel regression models are estimated to examine the hypotheses, within a cross-national comparative framework. Although the findings generally support the theoretical expectations, they also underscore the complex ways through which residential segregation interacts with social contacts and prejudicial attitudes. The findings are discussed in light of sociological theories.	Moshe	 Semyonov	Anya	 Glikman
2009	133	The Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Racial Diversity, Minority Concentration and Trust in Canadian Urban Neighbourhoods	Using a sample of 42,329 respondents nested within 4,254 Canadian urban neighborhoods, this study demonstrates the conceptual and empirical importance of making a distinction between neighborhood racial diversity and minority concentration, and examines how each is uniquely associated with trust. Our analysis shows that at a given level of racial minority concentration, whites are more trusting when their minority neighbors are more evenly distributed across racial minority groups. Meanwhile, whites are less trusting as the neighborhood share of racial minorities increases. Overall, the effect of racial minority concentration tends to prevail over that of racial diversity.	Feng	 Hou	Zheng	 Wu
2009	133	The Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	The Spatial Dynamics of Stratification: Metropolitan Context, Population Redistribution and Black and Hispanic Homeownership	Racial and ethnic inequality in homeownership remains wide, even net of variation in household sociod-emographic characteristics. This paper investigates the role of contextual forces in structuring disparate access to homeownership. Specifically, we combine household and metropolitan level census data to assess the impact of metropolitan housing stock, minority composition and residential segregation on black and Hispanic homeownership. The measure of minority composition combines both the size and growth of the co-ethnic population to assess the impact on homeownership inequality of recent trends in population redistribution, particularly the increase in black migration to the South and dispersal of Hispanics outside of traditional receiving areas. Results indicate remarkable similarity between blacks and Hispanics with respect to the spatial and contextual influences on homeownership. For both groups, homeownership is higher and inequality with whites smaller in metropolitan areas with an established co-ethnic base and those in which their group is less residentially segregated.	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2009	134	Statistical Demography	Estimating the Total Fertility Rate from Multiple
Imperfect Data Sources and Assessing Its Uncertainty	We develop methodology for estimating and assessing the uncertainty about the total fertility rate over time, based on imperfect estimates from different data sources. Measurement error is decomposed into bias and variance, and estimated by linear regression on data quality covariates. We estimate the total fertility rate using a local smoother and assess uncertainty using the weighted likelihood bootstrap. Based on a data set of seven West African countries we found that estimates with a recall period of more than five years tended to overestimate the total fertility rate, while direct estimates and observations from longer ago underestimated fertility. The measurement error variance was larger for observations with a one-year time span, for observations that were collected before the mid 1990s, and for one Demographic Health Survey. Cross-validation showed that taking into account differences in data quality between observations gave better calibrated confidence intervals and reduced the widths by about 40%.	Leontine	 Alkema	Adrian	 Raftery	Patrick	 Gerland	François	 Pelletier
2009	134	Statistical Demography	Sampling Weights for Analyses of Couple Data in Demographic and Health Surveys	In demographic and health surveys sometimes both women and men are interviewed in selected households allowing matching of partner information and analyses of couples. Typically, individual data from such sample surveys have sampling weights which incorporate factors for both the sampling probability and non-response. For analyses of couple data neither the weights for females nor the weights for males are appropriate. We present a formula for estimating the appropriate weights for couples. To see how results vary when using male or female weights instead of couple weights, we analyze couple data from one Demographic and Health Survey, The Dominican Republic Survey of 1996. Utilizing women’s weights, results for means, standard errors, and regression coefficients and their standard errors were within 2% of the values using couple weights in 43 of 52 comparisons, and 43 of 52 were within 2% using men’s weights. Calculation and use of couple weights is straightforward and desirable.	Stan	 Becker	Bryan	 Sayer
2009	134	Statistical Demography	Consistent Projection of Mortality for Subnational Areas Using a Logistic Curve	Ensuring consistency in projected future mortality between subnational and national populations is one of the challenges involved in making subnational projections. This paper discusses the use of linear and logistic extrapolation of life expectancy at birth (e(0)), and the use of two methods based on the logistic, for ensuring consistency in projected mortality across subnational areas and between subnational and national projected mortality. Reported under-5 mortality from Demographic and Health Surveys is used to estimate e(0) at three points in time, and estimated regional e(0)s for the third time period are used to assess the relative goodness of fit of projected regional e(0)s based on estimates from the two prior time points. Comparisons are made using alternative projection models for regions in 12 developing countries not seriously affected by HIV/AIDS. A fixed-slope logistic model performs better than alternatives considered.	Thomas	M. McDevitt
2009	134	Statistical Demography	Multivariate Decomposition for Hazard Rate Models	We develop a regression decomposition technique for hazard rate models, where the difference in observed rates is decomposed into components attributable to group differences in characteristics and group differences in effects. The baseline hazard is specified using a piecewise constant exponential model, which leads to convenient estimation based on a Poisson regression model fit to person-period, or split-episode data. This specification allows for a flexible representation of the baseline hazard and provides a straightforward way to introduce time-varying covariates and time-varying effects. We provide computational details underlying the decomposition method and demonstrate the technique with a decomposition of the black-white difference in first premarital birth rates into components reflecting characteristics and effect contributions of several predictors, as well as the effect contribution attributable to race differences in the baseline hazard.	Daniel	A. Powers	Myeong-Su	 Yun
2009	135	Determinants of Migration and Immigration	Bargaining Power and Emigration: Evidence on Migration-Related Decision-Making in Mexico	A prevailing model of migration in transitioning countries depicts the decision to migrate as one made by a risk-diversifying household – a unit in which members share a single coherent set of preferences with respect to the decision to send one or more members to work elsewhere. While ethnographic evidence raised questions about the applicability of this model several years ago, it continues to be both emphasized and debated in recent migration research. In this study, I build upon rich ethnographic literature by testing the relevance of these household models using longitudinal nationally-representative survey data from Mexico. With information on social background, asset ownership, intergenerational transfers and decision-making, I first assess the relative bargaining power of Mexican women and men within partnerships and then consider whether variation on these measures is predictive of subsequent migration behavior, thereby revealing characteristics of the underlying decision-making dynamics in Mexican households.	Jenna	 Nobles
2009	135	Determinants of Migration and Immigration	The Emotional Cost of Migration: An Examination of Video Information Content between Families in North Carolina and Guanajuato	This paper draws on video communication between migrants in North Carolina and their family members in Guanajuato, Mexico shot during the summer of 2008. The paper has a two-fold purpose. First, I outline the main themes that emerged from the family videos. Second, I then focus on how migrants and their family members make sense of the emotional costs of family separation. The findings suggest that the costs associated with the decision to migrate, while embedded in the household or family, are highly contested. Moreover, I argue that the costs of migrating are an ongoing contestation process among migrants in the U.S. and family members abandoned in Mexico.	Sergio	 Chavez
2009	135	Determinants of Migration and Immigration	Betting on Life and Livelihoods: The Role of Employment and Assets in the Decision to Migrate during Armed Conflict	This study examines how employment and household assets moderate the relationship between armed conflict and migration. Using event history models and data from the Maoist insurrection in Nepal, I empirically test a new multi-dimensional theoretical model of individual migration decisions during conflict. Results indicate that location-specific, non-saleable assets such as working a salaried job and owning farmland decrease the likelihood of migration after violent events. This provides evidence that individuals likely make cost-benefit calculations, weighing the expected danger of staying where they are against the likelihood of losing their employment or assets from migrating. On the other hand, results show that saleable assets, such as livestock and household goods, provide the financial ability and thereby increase the likelihood of migration. Because individuals with financial means are more likely to migrate away during conflict, rural communities are likely experiencing capital flight as a result of the conflict.	Nathalie	 Williams
2009	135	Determinants of Migration and Immigration	Social Networks and Migration: The View from Places of Origin	Although a large body of work addresses social networks and migration, it focuses almost solely on social contacts in places of destination. Neglecting social networks at origin is unfortunate given that the characteristics of the origin set the conditions within which migration decisions are made. Our paper introduces an explicit origin perspective. The data come from a unique prospective, longitudinal data set for Nang Rong, Thailand with complete social network information at origin measured in 1994 and information about out and return migration between 1994 and 2000. We focus on kin networks. Using survey information on spousal and parent-child ties, various measures are derived. Results are preliminary but show, for example, that individuals with many ties (path length two) to kin below the age of 10 and above the age of 60 are less likely to leave, and if they do, more likely to return than individuals with few such ties.	Ashton	M. Verdery	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Katherine	 Faust
2009	136	Indigenous Peoples: Asia	How Much the Indigenous Women of Jharkhand, India Are in Disadvantageous Condition: Finding’s from India’s National Family Health Survey	Indigenous populations are the most marginalised and vulnerable communities in India which constitutes 8.2% of India’s total population, four times higher than the total population of Australia. The state of Jharkhand accounts for 27.7% of the total indigenous population of India. This paper compares the health and socioeconomic indicators between indigenous and non-indigenous women in Jharkhand in terms of “disadvantage ratio” by exploring data of 1,614 ever-married women from National Family Health Survey–2. Our analysis revealed a highly disadvantageous situation for  indigenous women in socio-demographics, fertility, family planning and in the important aspects of health, nutrition and health care indicators when compared to non-indigenous women. Indigenous women of Jharkhand are not only backward from indigenous women of all India in different parameters; they are also disadvantageous when compared to other women within the state itself. The finding calls for urgent implementation of special health care strategies for reducing health and socioeconomic-demographic disparities among the indigenous population of Jharkhand.	Praween	Kumar  Agrawal
2009	136	Indigenous Peoples: Asia	Demographic Dynamics of Indigenous People in India	India has the second largest concentration of indigenous population in the world. The objective of this paper is to outline the demographic scenario of this vulnerable group of people by using data from Census of India 1981, 1991 and 2001. For the present study, in order to have a better understanding of the demographic situation of the tribal communities, the state and territories are grouped into seven regions. There are 577 tribes in India located in five major tribal belts across the country. Indian tribes constitute about 8.2% of the national population and mostly they inhabit the central belt and the north eastern part of India. The study reaffirmed that illiteracy, higher level of dependency and poor access to the outer world makes the tribal population socially vulnerable. Nevertheless, sex ratio and work participation rate especially for women are quite high in the indigenous people of India.	Sharma	 Lokpriy
2009	136	Indigenous Peoples: Asia	Reaching Reproductive Health for the Indigenous people in Bangladesh	Almost one million indigenous people live in the Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh, a hard-to-reach post-conflict region with virtually no access to Reproductive Health (RH) services or general health care services. The United Nations Development Programme initiated a health pilot initiative to improve the RH situation of the indigenous people of the areas through mobile medical teams, community based female health workers and partnerships. Capacity building of the local government and stakeholders and joint collaborative programmes were established. Maternal and child deaths recorded were lowest compared to the averages of the last 10 years. 43% of deliveries were attended by skilled attendants compared to only 13% in the previous year. One hundred seven Emergency referrals were provided to District Hospitals. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation increased to 85% from 54% in a year. Providing logistics support to Government Health staffs helped to increase program effectiveness. Health Structures of partner organizations were utilized, thus pooling resources and maximizing utilization of resources and services.	Shariful	 Islam
2009	136	Indigenous Peoples: Asia	Impact of Traditional Cultural Values on Acceptance of Health Care Systems among the Santhals of Orissa	Acceptance of the modern health care system and medicines among tribal people is continued to be a matter of debate among social scientists, planners and policy-makers. The foundation of entire tribal beliefs and practices stand on their parochial perception of and reaction to natural and supernatural entities. They find themselves closely knit with these two entities in every sphere of life. Thus, the perception about health and health-seeking behaviour of the tribal people obviously is the fusion of these two basic entities. The present study reveals that lack of emotional content and spiritual security in the modern health care system mainly stands as a barrier to its acceptance among the tribal people. In such an environment, the traditional health care system continues to dominate; the traditional healer, who is considered as the guardian of tribal society, acts as the medium between man, nature and supernatural entity and provides spiritual security to the tribal people.	Purujit	 Praharaj
2009	137	Biomarkers, BMI and Socioeconomic Differentials in Health	Socioeconomic Status and Obesity among Mexican Adolescents	Numerous studies conducted in developed countries have found an inverse relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and adolescent obesity. It is not clear whether the inverse relationship between SES and obesity observed in developed countries holds in the context of developing countries. To shed light on this issue this study aims to examine the relationship between SES and obesity in a sample of Mexican adolescents. The present analysis draws from the Mexican National Health Survey 2000. Age and sex-specific body mass indices (kg/m²) were calculated and thresholds for adolescent obesity developed for international use by the International Obesity Taskforce were used to define obesity. SES was measured by parental education (disaggregated into maternal and paternal education), housing quality, and household asset ownership. Household asset ownership and quality of housing were found to significantly increase the odds of obesity. The effect of parental education on the odds of obesity was more complex.	Heidi	 Norbis
2009	137	Biomarkers, BMI and Socioeconomic Differentials in Health	The Effect of Neighborhood-Level Poverty on Perceptions of Weight among Adolescents	This analysis uses the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to examine the effect of neighborhood context on adolescent weight perception. Results support the idea that individuals living in neighborhoods with high levels of poverty, which generally have higher rates of overweight/obesity, are less likely to perceive themselves as overweight. Specifically, the results illustrate that as levels of neighborhood poverty status increase, the effect of body mass index on perception of weight decreases. This finding is important, as it may suggest that people in lower socioeconomic status neighborhoods are less likely to perceive themselves as overweight, and thus may be less likely to do anything about excess weight. Limitations and avenues for future research are discussed.	Rhiannon	A. D'Souza	Christopher	 Browning
2009	137	Biomarkers, BMI and Socioeconomic Differentials in Health	The Influence of Access: Longitudinal BMI Change and Socioeconomic Status in the Health and Retirement Study, 1992-2006	This research employs latent growth curve modeling to estimate body mass index (BMI) trajectories using data from the Health and Retirement Study, 1992-2006. Focusing upon socioeconomic variables which indicate access to and acquisition of health-enabling resources, we seek to determine whether differentials in later-life baseline BMI and longitudinal BMI change are influenced by socioeconomic position. Results indicate that at baseline measurement, men have greater BMI scores than women, but over the 14-year measurement interval, female BMI surpasses male BMI. Black females are disproportionately affected by BMI, having initial BMI scores 2.2 units higher than non-black females. Females in less prestigious jobs are found to have greater BMI increases over the 14 years of measurement than those in more prestigious jobs. Our results indicate that BMI outcomes in later life are influenced by practices of discrimination based on gender and race.	Nicholas	J. Bishop
2009	137	Biomarkers, BMI and Socioeconomic Differentials in Health	Neuroendocrine Biomarkers, Subjective Social Status and Health in Taiwan	Both objective and, more recently, subjective measures of low social status have been linked to poor health outcomes. It is unclear, however, through which precise physiological mechanisms such standing may influence health, although it has been proposed that those of lower status may have biomarker profiles that are more dysregulated (and hence pose greater risk for poorer health). The paper here, then, investigates whether lower subjective social standing is associated with riskier neuroendocrine biomarker profiles. For our paper we analyze data from the Social  Environment and Biomarkers of Aging Study, a nationally representative survey of Taiwanese men and women conducted in Taiwan in 2000. We focus on five neuroendocrine markers (cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine) in relation to self-reported levels of social status in Taiwan and in the community. Our main finding is that we find little connection between measures of status -- either measured through self-report or objective indicators of socioeconomic status -- and riskier biomarker profiles.	Omer	 Gersten	Tom	 Boyce	Paola	 Timiras
2009	138	Public Health Implications of Health in Late Life	Gender, Living Arrangements and Social Circumstances as Determinants of Entry into and Exit from Long-Term Institutional Care at Older Ages: A Six-Year Follow-Up Study of Older Finns	We study the socio-demographic factors that affect the rate of entry into and exit from long-term care, with a 40% sample from the population registration data of Finns aged 65+ at the end of 1997 (n = 280,722) and followed them until the end of 2003. Being female, old, living alone and of low socioeconomic status increased the risk of entering long-term care. Women’s higher risk of entry was due to age and greater likelihood of living alone. The effects of living arrangements and socioeconomic factors on entry were stronger among men, and were attenuated after adjustment for each other and for health status. Exit was affected by the same factors, but the associations were weaker and, with the exception of age, in the opposite direction. Women and those living alone are likely to spend a longer time in institutional care because of higher rates of entry and lower rates of exit.	Pekka	 Martikainen	Heta	 Moustgaard	Michael	 Murphy	Elena	 Nihtilä
2009	138	Public Health Implications of Health in Late Life	Preventive Health Care in Contemporary Japan: Innovative Solutions to the Challenges of an Aging Population	Population scholars have long analyzed governments’ attempts to revitalize aging populations through pro-natalist policies that raise a nation’s birthrate. The Japanese case shows, however, that more attention must be paid to the pursuit of pro-longevity policies, which focus on maximizing the health of older citizens. This paper explores the rise in significance of communal leisure activities as a measure for boosting the health of Japan's senior citizens. It examines the significance of communal leisure from both the perspective of a national government seeking to reduce the burden of age-related debility and from the perspectives of men and women in their 60s. Drawing on in-depth qualitative research conducted with senior citizens in Tokyo, it analyzes gendered differences in senior citizens’ approaches to attaining health in old age. Reducing the burden of aging has become a national fixation in a nation where over 20 % of the population is over age 65.	Katrina	 Moore
2009	138	Public Health Implications of Health in Late Life	Can Food Stamp Receipt Improve Diabetes Control and Reduce Medicare Costs for Elderly Diabetics? Evidence from Biomarker Data	Rapid growth in diabetes prevalence rates raises concern about the medical and financial burden of caring for elderly diabetics. Survey data on older Americans from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) merged with respondent biomarker and Medicare administrative data are used to examine the relationships among participation in the U.S. Department of Agriculture Food Stamp Program, diabetes management and Medicare spending on older, low-income diabetic adults. Two waves of the HRS collected bloodspots, providing clinical indicators of whether respondents’ blood sugar and cholesterol levels were adequately controlled. Food stamp recipients are less likely to have blood sugar and cholesterol levels within recommended ranges. Fixed effect regressions of Medicare spending on food stamp receipt and other characteristics will be estimated for a sample of elderly diabetics observed between 1996 and 2005. Results will provide preliminary evidence of the role of the Food Stamp program in mitigating the burden of diabetes.	Lauren	H. Nicholas
2009	138	Public Health Implications of Health in Late Life	Disaggregating Risks Profiles for HIV/AIDS Exposure, Infection and Survival among Those Aged 50 and Older: Interpreting Bimodal Infection Models	This paper looks at the growing prevalence of late life exposure and contraction of HIV/AIDS among people aged 50 and older. Studies have shown that the incidence of HIV/AIDS among the mid-life and aging populations has represented 10% of the HIV-positive population and is now increasing at an alarming rate. This paper expands on the existing research that examines only one aspect (prevalence, knowledge) or single time-periods and looks comparatively at specific measurement issues and outcomes. We examine three specific risk populations: (1) pre-existing HIV/AIDS infections representing persons with health maintenance issues and a high degree of disease knowledge; (2) persons 50 and older who have recently been diagnosed as having HIV/AIDS infection and the treatment and behavioral modification they will address to maximize longevity,: and (3) those midlife and elderly individuals who are not infected but who engage in behaviors that place them at risk of infection.	James	W. McNally	Martha	 Sayre	Voon	Chin  Phua
2009	139	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Trends in Minority Suburbanization in American Metropolitan Areas, 1970 to 2000	In this paper we examine trends from 1970 to 2000, in rates of minority suburbanization in American metropolitan areas. We use Census data and Hierarchical Linear Modeling techniques to estimate levels and determinants of suburbanization for non-Hispanic blacks and Asians and Hispanics of all races in 2000, as well as change from 1970 to 2000. We test two hypotheses regarding the causes of variation in minority suburbanization: that variation is related to the socioeconomic characteristics of minorities and that variation is related to the relative supply of housing in the suburbs. Our findings indicate that minority suburbanization has been driven largely by changes in the U.S. housing market—principally the rapid increase in suburban housing stock during the period under consideration. However, we also find that rates of minority suburbanization in 2000 and rates of change from 1970 to 2000 are strongly related to levels of suburbanization in 1970.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake	Aaron	J. Howell	Amanda	J. Staight
2009	139	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Race, Class and Residential Preferences for Urban Neighborhoods	Racial and economic segregation are persistent problems across American cities, though both have declined in recent decades. One possible reason that levels of racial and economic segregation are declining is the redevelopment and gentrification occurring in many American cities. Redevelopment and gentrification have begun to blur the stark boundaries between central cities and surrounding suburbs along which segregation was long-maintained. Little is known, however, about what makes urban neighborhoods popular and the potential for their popularity to create more integrated metropolitan areas. This paper begins to fill the void by examining who would consider living in Chicago neighborhoods among a sample of metropolitan residents. Based on the evaluations of 16 Chicago communities by 756 respondents and an extensive array of community characteristics, I investigate what attributes of urban neighborhoods metropolitan residents find attractive. I also explore whether these preferences present the possibility for greater racial and economic integration.	Michael	D. Bader
2009	139	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	The Stability of Mixed-Income Neighborhoods	The landscape of urban poverty in America has changed dramatically as public housing projects have been demolished and replaced with mixed-income housing, yet there is little research on mixed-income neighborhoods outside of project-specific policy evaluations. In this paper, I examine the extent and stability of income-mixing within neighborhoods using Census data from 1970 to 2000. I find that economic diversity within neighborhoods is both common and fluid. At the same time, there is almost no complete neighborhood economic succession because economic change is slow and nonlinear. Mixed-income neighborhoods are difficult to sustain because the forces that increase diversity in low-income neighborhoods also decrease diversity in high-income neighborhoods. Majority black mixed-income neighborhoods are particularly unstable. In contrast, neighborhood economic diversity is higher and more stable in areas with lower crime rates and more immigrants.	Laura	M. Tach
2009	139	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Distinguishing between the Effects of Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change on Children's Well-Being	Although the quality of a child’s neighborhood can fluctuate because of either his own migration or the movement of those around him, these two processes do not necessarily influence children in the same way. Despite this, researchers rarely examine the influence of each process separately. Identifying the independent influence of each, if it exists, is an important step toward fully understanding how much and how characteristics of neighborhoods influence children. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and its Child Development Supplement, we develop a method for separating the effects of residential mobility and neighborhood change on children’s well-being, and report the results of an analysis using that method.	Margot	I. Jackson
2009	140	Aging in Developing Countries	Socioeconomic Success and Health in Later Life: Some Evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Surveys	The paper looks at the inter-relationships between education, income and wealth and health with a particular emphasis on the health of the elderly, using data from four waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS), IFLS1 (1993), IFLS2 (1997), IFLS3 (2000), and the new IFLS4 (2007). Using longitudinal data allows us to incorporate some dynamics into our analysis of the two-way relationship between socioeconomic success and health. The approach helps us avoid many difficulties faced by studies that rely only on contemporaneous associations. We explore the relationships between socioeconomic variables and health outcomes across four survey waves spanning over 14 years. Recognizing the multi-dimensionality of health, we look at a number of health measures collected in the IFLS, including both subjective measures and biomarkers including general health status, nurse-reported health status, activities of daily living (ADL and IADL), the short CES-D measure of depression, hemoglobin levels, body mass index, waist circumference, blood pressure and cholesterol levels.	Firman	 Witoelar	Bondan	 Supraptilah	John	 Strauss
2009	140	Aging in Developing Countries	Socioeconomic Gradients of Health Using the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study, Pilot	In this paper, we use data from the newly collected China Health and Retirement Longitudinal Study (CHARLS) pilot to study health of the elderly in China, specifically the gradient of health measures with respect to socioeconomic status (SES). CHARLS is the first publicly-available data set (it will be public by PAA 2009) on the elderly in China that is so broad in its content and designed explicitly after the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and its offshoots (English Longitudinal Study of Ageing; Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe; and Korean Longitudinal Survey of Ageing). This paper will be the first study of SES and health using the new CHARLS data. We have just finished collecting the data, covering 1,563 randomly selected households in two provinces, Zhejiang and Gansu. We sampled one person age 45 and over, plus their spouse if one exists, in each household with an age-eligible person. We have data on 2,951 individuals 45 and older and their spouses.	John	 Strauss	Yaohui	 Zhao	Albert	 Park	James	P. P. Smith	Yan	 Shen
2009	140	Aging in Developing Countries	Obesity, Mortality, Disability and Aging in Costa Rica	We study aging and obesity and their effects on mortality and disability in a middle-income country using longitudinal data from the Costa Rica Longevity and Healthy Aging Study. Obesity prevalence is higher among women and it clearly declines with age after about the 70th birthday. The decline comes from generation effects (younger cohorts are less obese) but there is also a genuine effect of weight loss with aging as longitudinal data show. There is a complex relationship between obesity and risk of dying, which increases with body mass and, especially with abdominal girth, but only in individuals younger than 75 approximately. After this age the relationship reverses and body mass is a protective factor against death, which somehow neutralizes the catastrophic effect on life expectancy that some predict from increasing obesity trends. The impact of obesity on disability is clearer than on mortality, although it disappears at very old ages.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Gilbert	 Brenes-Camacho	Ericka	 Mendez
2009	141	Family Change in Developing Countries	How the Timing of Marriage for Young Men Is Affected by Their Labor Market Trajectories: Evidence from Egypt	There has been a great deal of concern in recent years about the rising age at marriage for young men in the Middle East and North Africa. Using detailed retrospective data from the Egypt Labor Market Panel Survey of 2006, this paper analyzes the economic determinants of the timing of marriage for men. The key explanatory variables we examine using a discrete-time hazard model are variables that indicate the onset of first employment and the incidence and timing of a “good job,” defined in relation to a job quality index. Our findings indicate that while there is no delay in marriage if the onset of employment is delayed from 19 to 21 for a reference male, any further delay significantly delays marriage. The hazard of marrying shifts up steeply within a year of getting a good job.	Christine	 Binzel	Ragui	 Assaad
2009	141	Family Change in Developing Countries	Is Marriage Here to Stay? Educational Attainment, Labor Force Participation and the Transition to First Marriage among Women in Mexico and Costa Rica	In Latin America marriage still occurs relatively early despite the steady rise in women’s educational attainment and labor force participation. Is marriage immune to demographic and socioeconomic transformations occurring in the region? The objective of this paper is to investigate the role of educational attainment and labor force participation on marriage timing among early and late cohorts of women in Mexico and Costa Rica. I hypothesize that the importance of education and labor force participation for marriage formation has remained constant regardless of the increase in their levels, reflecting the priority of family formation in women’s lives. Therefore, the slight delay in marriage observed in Mexico—and to some extent in Costa Rica—is a result of an extended period of enrollment in school, not an indication of ideational change. This paper contributes to the current debate on the effects of educational attainment on marriage timing across societies and within societies.	Julieta	 Perez Amador
2009	141	Family Change in Developing Countries	The Gender Division of Household Labor in Vietnam: Cohort Trends and Regional Variations	We address the extent of change and regional differences in gender roles in the family in northern and southern Vietnam. The similarities and differences in political, economic and social histories between the two regions provide a compelling setting to investigate the impact of socialist policies and the recent shift from a centrally-planned to a market economy on gender stratification in the domestic spheres. We assess determinants of the gender division of household labor among marriage cohorts that underwent early marital years during (1) the Vietnam War, (2) socialist collectivization, and (3) market reform. We find that Vietnamese wives still do the majority of housework. Therefore, government efforts to change gender roles have had limited success. Husbands in the most recent marriage cohort, however, are more involved in household-budget management and childcare than those in earlier cohorts. Contrary to prior claims, evidence does not suggest that gender equality in the Vietnamese household has deteriorated after the market reform.	Bussarawan	 Teerawichitchainan	John	 Knodel	Vu	Tuan  Huy	Vu	Manh  Loi
2009	141	Family Change in Developing Countries	Love or Arranged: Is Marriage Type Associated with Autonomy in Marital Relations?	This paper explores the relation between marriage type (self-arranged versus parent-arranged) and its association with the extent of gender autonomy in marital relations. In particular, it asks whether self-arranged or love marriages are more gender-egalitarian than parent-arranged marriages. Preliminary results using the India Human Development Survey (2005) suggest that women in arranged marriages have lower autonomy than their counterparts in self-arranged ones.	Manjistha	 Banerji	Reeve	 Vanneman
2009	142	Educational Trends and Trajectories	Why Not Science? Career Choices of Talented Americans	In a larger project, we attempt to address the following question, using data from a variety of sources: Why has there been a marked decline during recent decades in the proportion of native-born American youths who pursue scientific careers? In this paper, we study career trajectories of talented American youth using national, longitudinal education data for three cohorts: National Longitudinal Study of 1972 (high school seniors in 1972), High School and Beyond (high school sophomores in 1982), and National Education Longitudinal Study (8th graders in 1988).	Yu	 Xie	Alexandra	 Achen
2009	142	Educational Trends and Trajectories	Education Reversal: Attainment Trends in the United States	Examining educational trends since 1940 in the United States, this paper finds that the familiar monotonically-increasing percentage of high school graduates in the adult population (25 and older) stalls in recent years, although the percentage completing at least four years of college continues to rise. Using Census and American Community Survey data, we find that the age structure of education has changed strongly with the 15 to 20 percentage point advantage in high school graduation among young adults aged 25-34 compared to their seniors aged 45-64, then began to shrink in about 1990 and has now reversed. There are striking state differences. No state had a reversal in 1990. By 2000, 11 states, mostly western, had reversals. By 2006, reversals continued in all the western states, and emerged across much of the Midwest and in scattered eastern and southern states as well.	Mariah	 Evans	Nate	 Breznau	Jennifer	 Lowman	Thomas	 Harris
2009	142	Educational Trends and Trajectories	Demographic Dynamics and Educational Inequality in Mexico	The goal of this study is to analyze the relationship between education and population dynamics in Mexico. According to the theoretical tradition on population and development, the pace of population growth, family size and migration affect human capital accumulation among the school-age population. Within the context of fast demographic change and persistent regional inequality, this study explores how three demographic dimensions affect educational outcomes at municipal level: youth dependency, teenage fertility and international and internal migration. We use data from the 10% sample of the Mexican Census 2000 and administrative records from the Ministry of Education. Different from prior research on the demography of education, this study includes three educational outcomes: enrollment, educational gaps and attainment. It also includes indicators of schooling supply and quality. The preliminary analysis shows the importance of demographic variables, their spatial dimension and the interaction with the degree of urbanization at the municipal level.	Silvia	 Giorguli-Saucedo	Eunice	D. Vargas Valle	Viviana	 Salinas	Celia	 Hubert	Joseph	E. Potter
2009	142	Educational Trends and Trajectories	Health and Educational Trajectories in Elementary School for Racial and Ethnic Minority Children	This paper examines whether children’s health conditions affect their academic achievement during the first six years of elementary school, a critical period for children’s cognitive development. We document the co-occurrence of health and academic achievement trajectories, focusing on children of different racial, ethnic and immigrant statuses. Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort we show that poor health conditions are associated with lower academic achievement throughout children’s elementary school years and for children of all groups of interest. This association holds even when comparing children within the same schools, through a school-fixed effects model. Despite the detrimental effect of poor health, health plays a minimal role in accounting for racial and ethnic disparities in test scores. We discuss further extensions of this work, in particular the dynamic co-occurrence of health and achievement trajectories, dependent either on the persistence/variability of health conditions or on the persistence/variability of health effects.	Carolina	 Milesi	Aly	 Turner
2009	143	Intergenerational Mobility	Cumulative Advantage in the Intergenerational Transmission of Education: Quantities and Qualities	The transmission of educational attainments has drawn interest in the sociological and economic literatures since at least the early part of the last century. Both disciplines have neglected major changes in the U.S. postsecondary educational system potentially related to intergenerational educational inequalities, however. Beginning in the 1960s, the postsecondary system experienced increased institutional differentiation. In tandem with these changes, scholars note differential economic and social returns to individual’s education, not only by years of education but by the kind of education. I use national data for mother-child pairs from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 to explore how these different dimensions operate in the intergenerational transmission of education. Specifically, I use stereotype and other discrete outcome models with latent variables to explore the effects of various types and levels of mother’s education on the various types and levels of their children’s education and how these relationships may vary across time and by key social groups.	Megan	 Andrew
2009	143	Intergenerational Mobility	Parental Wealth and Children's Life Chances: An Assessment of the Mechanisms Underlying the Intergenerational Effects of Wealth	Research on intergenerational mobility typically conceptualizes and measures family background as any combination of parental education, parental occupation and family income. One important feature of economic circumstances that is often overlooked or unexamined in these studies is family wealth, or net worth. Wealth is a dimension of economic well-being that suffers particularly stark inequalities, and thus its neglect is troubling. Severe inequalities in familial wealth may well create unequal opportunities for children over and above other socioeconomic characteristics of families. Recent research has begun to document the effects of parental wealth on children's educational opportunities. This paper extends this research by documenting the role of wealth for the entire status attainment process, i.e., not only educational but also occupational attainment. More importantly, however, this paper goes on to empirically assess the social mechanisms that underlie the association of wealth and opportunities, an important question that remains unanswered so far.	Fabian	T. Pfeffer
2009	143	Intergenerational Mobility	International Migration of Mexicans and the Reproduction of Education from One Generation to the Next	Our goal is to assess how Mexican migration to the U.S. affects the distribution of schooling in the next generation by influencing mechanisms of population growth and intergenerational transmission of education. To do so, we first identify how women's education and migration influences components of population growth and intergenerational transmission of education. Based on these findings, we then construct a demographic model demonstrating how Mexican migration influences the distribution of schooling in the next generation by changing family formation and within-family characteristics that determine children's well-being. Lastly, we use this model to simulate the partial and combined effects of hypothetical changes to women's education, marriage, migration, fertility and intergenerational transmission of education on the distribution of schooling in the next generation. Not only will this model provide more accurate estimates on the aggregate effects of migration, but it will also isolate the specific demographic mechanisms that facilitate or impede the intergenerational educational mobility for Mexican Americans.	Kate	H. Choi	Robert	D. Mare
2009	143	Intergenerational Mobility	How Does Economic Inequality Affect Intergenerational Mobility? An Exploration of the Context of Opportunity	This paper examines the relationship between family income inequality and intergenerational family income mobility. As family income inequality in the United States rose, children benefited from increasingly divergent resources available for their health, education and care. It is thus possible that economic inequality reduced opportunities for intergenerational mobility, reinforcing the privileges of the affluent and compounding the disadvantages of the poor. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (combined with data on state characteristics), this paper exploits state- and cohort-variation in inequality to estimate the relationship between inequality and mobility. Family, neighborhood and institutional mechanisms are explored to help elucidate this relationship. Results suggest that increasing inequality raises the probability of downward mobility for African American children, although most of this movement occurs within income quintiles. The negative effect is largest for children with the highest mobility prospects. Some evidence also suggests a small dependence between the intergenerational income elasticity and inequality.	Deirdre	 Bloome
2009	144	Abortion Decision-Making and Experience	Knowledge and Care-Seeking Behavior of Safe Abortion in Four Selected Districts of Bihar and Jharkhand, India	Unsafe abortion is a global public health issue receiving increasing attention primarily focused on supply-side interventions such as training providers and equipping facilities. The purpose of this project is to create a behavior change communication intervention to educate women on safe abortion, beginning with baseline assessment of knowledge, attitude, behavior and practice and mass media exposure. Based on availability of safe abortion services, one district from each state was selected: Patna in Bihar and Lohardaga in Jharkhand. Control districts were selected by matching socio-demographic characteristics. The target population was married women, ages 15-44; women were selected using two-stage stratified random sampling. Baseline data have been analyzed for 752 women in the two intervention districts, including 352 women from Patna and 350 women from Lohardaga. The full paper compares intervention and control districts and provides a description of the resulting BCC campaign.	Sushanta	 Banerjee	Kathryn	 Andersen Clark	Subrato	K. Mondal
2009	144	Abortion Decision-Making and Experience	Exploring the Perceptions and Experiences of Stigma among Abortion Patients in the United States	It is estimated that one-third of American women will have an abortion in their reproductive lifetimes. Despite the common occurrence of abortion in the U.S., stigmatization of abortion, and the women who have them, proliferates. Social stigma is associated with decreased physical and emotional well-being, yet we know very little about the role stigma plays in women’s abortion experiences. Using qualitative data collected in 2008 via in-depth interviews with abortion patients, we explore: perceptions of and experiences with abortion stigma, and motivations and experiences with concealment and disclosure. Many respondents reported feeling stigmatized by their decision to terminate a pregnancy; concealment of abortion was the primary mechanism for avoiding judgment from others. Our findings illustrate the importance of exploring the potential impact of stigma on women’s abortion experiences and mental health, with the ultimate goal of ensuring all women the best abortion care possible.	Kristen	M. Shellenberg	Lori	 Frohwirth
2009	144	Abortion Decision-Making and Experience	The Burden of Choice: Mother’s Education and Prenatal Sex Selection	This paper isolates channels through which mother’s education influences propensity for prenatal sex selection in societies with strong son preference. We created a detailed theoretical model and have tested it using  data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (India, 1998-99). We find that the relationship between mother’s education and pre-natal sex selection is complicated and governed by threshold effects. Econometric analysis shows that sex selection is usually carried out with the second conception and is a common part of the family-building strategy for women with some education. Our regressions show that at the second parity, increasing education implies increased use of sex-selective technologies for balancing household sex composition. However, we also find evidence that suggests that once certain education thresholds are met, the propensity to selectively abort female children increases. We find that other variables of female agency like autonomy and working status do not appear to be systematically related to sex selection.	Shwetlena	 Sabarwal
2009	144	Abortion Decision-Making and Experience	Induced Abortion in Ghana: A Qualitative Study	Despite abortion being legal, complications from induced abortion are the leading cause of maternal mortality in Ghana. The objective of this study was to understand the decision-making process associated with induced abortion. We collected data from female post-abortion care patients, male partners, family planning nurses and obstetricians/gynecologists at the two teaching hospitals in Ghana using in-depth interviews and focus group discussions. While experiences differ for married and single women, according to providers and women, men are involved in abortion decision-making directly, through “orders” to abort, or indirectly, through denying responsibility for the pregnancy. While results suggest that targeting men may be important, there are substantial gender norms to overcome in order to prevent unsafe induced abortions in Ghana.	Hilary	 Schwandt	Richard	M.K. Adanu	Kwabena	 Danso
2009	145	Family Planning Programs and Contraceptive Use in Africa	Achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Kenya: The Contribution of Family Planning	For many countries, meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) will be a challenge, and they will need to employ every tool at their disposal, including family planning (FP). This analysis estimated costs for five of the eight MDGs, including: (1) primary education, (2) child mortality, (3) maternal health, (4) environmental sustainability, and (5) infectious disease. Costs were calculated for two scenarios: when unmet need for FP remains constant, and when unmet need for FP is gradually met. Meeting unmet need for FP would result in fewer unintended pregnancies, reducing the population needing the services required to meet the MDGs and consequently, reducing costs for meeting the MDGs. Following analysis of 30 countries worldwide, we found savings ratios between $2 and $20. FP also helps to reduce the number of high-risk pregnancies, thereby reducing the high levels of mortality associated with risky pregnancies. Our presentation will focus on the Kenya analysis.	Thomas	J. Goliber	Rachel	 Sanders
2009	145	Family Planning Programs and Contraceptive Use in Africa	Revitalization of Family Planning Programs	Many family planning programs in Sub-Saharan Africa are weak and poorly functioning. Lack of leadership, resources and above all, political will, are the major issues being faced by currently existing programs. This paper reviews current population policies and family planning agendas in some of the fastest growing countries in Africa. We then assess the impact that rapid population growth is having on their maternal and child health, economy, equity and poverty reduction strategies. Lastly, we outline four critical steps that governments can take which will benefit their populations now and in the long-term: (1) increase general public knowledge about the safety of family planning methods; (2) reduce fees to ensure contraception is genuinely affordable to even the poorest families; (3) ensure supply of contraceptives by making family planning a permanent line item in national/state health budgets; and (4) take immediate action to remove barriers hindering access to family planning methods.	Ndola	 Prata	Amita	 Sreenivas
2009	145	Family Planning Programs and Contraceptive Use in Africa	Understanding Emergency Contraception Practice in Ghana: A Theory-Based Approach	This analysis employs structural equation models to test whether the theory of planned behavior (TPB) can be applied to explain intended use and provision of emergency contraception (EC) among family planning (FP) clients and by providers in Kumasi, Ghana. We use data from two cross-sectional surveys conducted in Kumasi in 2008; interviews were conducted with 992 clients attending the FP clinic at Komfo-Anokye Teaching Hospital and 600 FP providers. Extended TPB models including socio-demographic characteristics, EC knowledge and either experiential (for clients) or work-related (for providers) variables to explain 34% and 36% of the variance in clients’ and providers’ behavioral intentions, respectively. Clients’ perceived behavioral control over using EC and providers’ attitudes toward EC appear to be the most important predictors of their intentions to use and offer EC, respectively. Personal forces are stronger than social forces when it comes to self-reported intentions to use or provide EC in Kumasi, Ghana.	Andreea	A. Creanga	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2009	145	Family Planning Programs and Contraceptive Use in Africa	Menstrual Pattern, Sexual Behaviors and Contraceptive Use among Postpartum Women in Nairobi Slums	This study examines the time-to-menstrual resumptions among postpartum women; their sexual behavioral patterns in the period immediately after delivery, including contraceptive use; and how their use of contraception links with the menstrual resumption and sexual behaviors. This paper uses data from a Maternal and Child Health component of a 5-year Urbanization, Poverty and Health Dynamics longitudinal study carried out by the African Population and Health Research Center in two slums in Kenya’s capital, Nairobi. These slums are Korogocho and Viwandani. This study is ongoing and entails interviewing all women who had live births since September 2006. For this study, completed interview data from about 2,157 women are used. To assess the time-to-event regarding resumption of menstrual flow, resumption of sex, pregnancy and use of contraception, survival analysis methods are used. Univariate and multivariate analyses are used to determine the effect of age, education and parity on the outcome variables.	John	G. Cleland	Nyovani	 Madise	Robert	P. Ndugwa	Martin	K. Mutua
2009	146	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality: Methodological Contributions	Social Conditions and Infant Mortality in China: A Test of the Fundamental Cause Perspective	The fundamental cause argument represents a distinctively sociological approach to explaining persistent social disparities in health across a range of socio-historical contexts. We elaborate and test this U.S.-based argument using representative survey data from China covering births from 1970 to 2001, and focusing on social disparities in infant mortality over a period of dramatic change. Our results show that despite the massive changes, the increasing use of medical pregnancy care and the steady decline in the infant mortality level, disparities in infant mortality by mother’s education and urban/rural residence remained largely unchanged. More educated women were increasingly likely to take advantage of the newly-available prenatal care and delivery assistance facilities, while urban women maintained a stable advantage over rural women. This differential utilization of highly-effective maternal care technology has maintained disparities in infant mortality over a period of major social and technological change, providing support for the fundamental cause argument.	Shige	 Song
2009	146	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality: Methodological Contributions	Does Income Distribution Matter? A Multilevel Analysis of Income Inequality and Self-Rated Status of Health in Brazil	The relationship between socioeconomic status (at the individual or population level) and health is well established. The general pattern is one by which persons or populations of higher socioeconomic status generally have better health. However, it has been suggested that health is affected not only by the absolute level of income, but also by degree to which income is equitably distributed within a population. In this paper, I evaluated the effect of income inequality measured by the Gini Index on the self-rated status of health using information from a Brazilian national survey. Our results showed that the Gini index, measured at the state level, did not appear as an important predictor of self-rated heath after being controlled by a set of sociodemographic factors, particularly, individual income and education. However, at the metropolitan areas the Gini index showed a statistically significant effect on individual health (OR: 1,29; 95% C.I.: 1.04 – 1.60).	Iuri	C. Leite
2009	146	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality: Methodological Contributions	Selected for Attainment: Estimating Early Child Health Effects on Adult Outcomes	Sample selection bias is a chronic problem in longitudinal studies but one which is only rarely addressed in studies concerning ties between health and socioeconomic status. This paper adopts two alternate methods for handling sample selection bias. Both methods are applied to examine the magnitude of bias in the effects of early health on educational attainment and adult socioeconomic status. A sample selection model and a multiple imputation method for handling missing data are each adapted to account for different types of nonresponse and the possibility for changing severity in sample selection bias over time. Estimates from both methods are significantly larger than effects in the absence of any treatment for sample selection. The results demonstrate the importance of explicitly taking account of sample selection bias and suggest the possible magnitude of downward bias in standard estimates of socioeconomic gradients in health.	Robert	G. White
2009	146	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality: Methodological Contributions	Trends of Socioeconomic Mortality Differences in Italy:  New Insights from Indirect Orphanhood-Based Estimates	We analyze socioeconomic mortality differences for women and men by using the orphanhood method for the estimation of life expectancy on survey-based information about parental survival. We extend the classic orphanhood method to developed countries and conduct our analysis in Italy since there is no other promising data source for the analysis of recent socioeconomic status (SES)-specific mortality differences. Furthermore, in combination with the specific characteristics of the surveys, this innovative approach helps to overcome several weaknesses of usual studies on SES-specific mortality differentials. Our analysis provides a time series of education- and occupation-specific life tables for women and men that enable both an analysis of more recent socioeconomic mortality differences in Italy and their development over the last decades. Special attention is devoted to the derived extension of the orphanhood method that can be transformed easily to any other survey data, including information on parental survival.	Marc	 Luy	Paola	 Di Giulio	Graziella	 Caselli
2009	147	Work-Family Barriers to Gender Equality	Conflict and Housework: Does Country Context Matter?	In this paper, I analyze housework conflict cross-nationally using a unique data set that pairs 2004 European Social Survey data for respondents in 25 nations with societal measures of gender equality. At the individual-level, I test two theoretical approaches to subjective housework considerations: the distributive justice and relative resources perspectives. The results support these theories for men and women. At the country level, I test the relationship between housework conflict and two country-level measures: societal gender equality and rates of full-time female labor force participation. The results show a negative relationship between housework conflict and gender equality for men and women in countries with high rates of full-time female labor force participation. For those in countries with limited access to the labor force, housework conflict and gender equality are positively correlated for men and women. These results suggest a dynamic relationship between country context and individual negotiations over housework.	Leah	 Ruppanner
2009	147	Work-Family Barriers to Gender Equality	A Longitudinal Evaluation of Gender Display in Spouses' Housework Hours	Gender display theory suggests that women whose earnings are less than their husbands’ will reduce their housework as they contribute a greater share of family income, while women who contribute a majority of household earnings will spend more time in housework as their earnings rise, compensating for their deviant labor market position with gender-conformist household roles. We use a fixed effects strategy and 1976-1996 data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to test the validity of gender display in explaining changes over time in couples’ housework hours. Using longitudinal data reduces the possibility that our results are due to unobserved differences among couples that affect both labor outcomes and housework hours. After taking into account both couple-specific fixed effects and non-linearities in the relationship between women's own earnings and their housework hours, we find no evidence of gender display behavior.	Alexandra	 Achen	Margaret	 Gough
2009	147	Work-Family Barriers to Gender Equality	Legislating Equality: State-Level Anti-Discrimination Laws and Labor Force Sex Stratification	Although a large body of research has explored the sources of gender inequality in the labor market, most extant research focuses on the influence of individual- or occupational-level characteristics on increasing gender equity. The effects of state-level policies on increasing gender equity in the labor force have been largely ignored. In this study, we examine whether state laws prohibiting marital status discrimination in employment have influenced progress toward gender equality on a range of employment outcomes. Twenty-two states enacted laws that prohibit marital status discrimination between 1970 and 1988, providing a natural experiment in the impact of state-level policy. We use data from the 1962-2007 Current Population Surveys to estimate growth-curve models of trends in a range of labor market outcomes that test for (1) state-level variation in the trend toward sex equity and (2) the influence of state-level policies on the trends toward greater equity.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2009	147	Work-Family Barriers to Gender Equality	Fertility of Fast-Track Professionals in Sweden, 1991–2005: A Longitudinal Register-Based Study on How Birth Events Vary among Groups of High-Achieving Women and Men	This paper studies the fertility of fast-track professionals and explores how continued childbearing varies among high-achieving men and women in different occupational groups. We focus on the situation of three particular fast-track professional groups (e.g., lawyers, medical doctors and PhDs), that face quite different career structures and work environments that may affect their fertility. The determinants of second and higher-order births are analyzed multivariately using longitudinal data on couples from different population registers in Sweden, 1991–2005. Preliminary results indicate that career choice affects higher-order fertility in a highly gendered way, in line with hypotheses about how educational and occupational orientation may reflect different degrees of work-family conflicts that exist in different fields. The results also indicate that the couple context is very important as it reflects the relative power balance within the couple. Own as well as couple income seems to have different effects in different intervals.	Maria	A. Stanfors
2009	148	Criminal Justice System Issues for Children and Youth	Maternal Incarceration and Children’s Long-Term Outcomes: Timing versus Dosage?	This study examines the differential effects of maternal incarceration by timing and dosage on adolescent children’s high school dropout rate as well as on the rate of admission to a correctional institution. I use data on 9,563 children who are between the ages of 5 and 17 when their mothers entered either jail or prison during 1993 and 2001. Using a sibling pair sample to control for unobserved maternal characteristics, I find that exposure to maternal incarceration during late adolescence is associated with higher high school dropout rates for both sons and daughters than exposure to maternal incarceration during middle childhood. However, results indicate that only daughters are sensitive to varying dosages of maternal incarceration measured by the number of incarcerations in jail and in prison. Frequent maternal incarcerations in jail are associated with better long-term outcomes for girls, while the opposite is true for incarcerations in prison.	Rosa	M. Cho
2009	148	Criminal Justice System Issues for Children and Youth	Staying out of Trouble: What Counts for Young Male Offenders?	Rapidly increasing youth imprisonment and recidivism in many countries pose challenges to successful transition to adulthood. Reports from young offenders in England of how hard it will be for them not to reoffend following release from prison were most strongly associated with the number of delinquent friends but were also significantly associated with the specificity of post-release plans, life control and self-efficacy, net of peer influences. Offenders’ feelings of life control were stronger among those who took vocational courses while in prison and among those who had more frequent contacts from family members and friends. Specific policies that are consistent with our findings are vocational courses that develop skills and policies that encourage contact with family members and friends. In addition, interventions that help offenders make specific plans and increase feelings of control and self-efficacy have promise in helping released offenders successfully complete the transition from prison to the community.	Lynda	 Clarke	Renata	 Forste	Stephen	 Bahr
2009	148	Criminal Justice System Issues for Children and Youth	Unintended Consequences of  Paternal Incarceration: Effects on Young Children’s School Readiness with Possible Implications for the Persistence of the Black-White Achievement Gap	This project links research on disparities in educational achievement with research on the stratification consequences of mass incarceration of African American men. Using the Fragile Families and Child-Wellbeing Study and its rich paternal incarceration data, I ask whether there are harmful effects of having an imprisoned father on young children’s school readiness, and whether this effect persists after multivariate controls. I construct a school readiness scale from a variety of mother-reported socio-emotional and attention-related behaviors. Propensity score matching is used to control for observed characteristics of fathers that are predictive of incarceration, thus gaining a more powerful test of the effect of incarceration on school readiness. Additionally, I analyze racial differences to determine whether disparities in incarceration rates between blacks and whites can begin to account for the persistence of a portion of the black-white test score gap present in later academic achievement outcomes.	Anna	R. Haskins
2009	148	Criminal Justice System Issues for Children and Youth	Fathers' Incarceration and Child Development	High rates of incarceration among urban men, and high rates of fatherhood among men in prisons, have raised concerns about the effects of parental incarceration on children. We use a longitudinal survey of nearly 5,000 urban families to examine the effect of fathers’ incarceration on children’s socioemotional and cognitive development. Controlling for a rich set of potential confounders, and using lagged measures of child development and individual fixed effects, we find a significant effect of fathers’ recent incarceration on children’s externalizing behavior and attention problems. Placebo tests confirm that these relationships are unlikely to be due to unobserved heterogeneity between families. We anticipate that the effects are mediated by mental health difficulties among mothers left behind, and suggest that strengthened support for families left behind, coupled with a reduction in the use of incarceration where appropriate, may reduce the collateral harm to children of incarcerated fathers.	Amanda	B. Geller	Carey	E. Cooper	Ofira	 Schwartz-Soicher	Irwin	 Garfinkel	Ronald	B. Mincy
2009	149	Changes over Time in the Transition to Adulthood	Differential Transitions of Adulthood in a Rapidly-Changing Social Context	Marriage and becoming a parent for the first time are the major life course transitions for an adolescent. During the last two decades, the social institutional setting of reproduction has experienced intensive transitions in Turkey. Different sections of the population have been affected by these changes in different ways and at varying paces. By applying event-history analysis to retrospective data, this study first investigates trends of adolescent marriage and entry into first-time motherhood in the context of socioeconomic, cultural and political changes. Secondly, the study demonstrates various patterns of transitions by mother tongue groups. Thirdly, we examine how the differential transitions to adulthood among mother tongue groups are conditioned by socioeconomic (structural) and socio-cultural characteristics of adolescents. The study demonstrates that to understand contemporary transitions to adulthood in Turkey, it is necessary to consider a combination of individual socioeconomic and cultural factors.	Sutay	 Yavuz
2009	149	Changes over Time in the Transition to Adulthood	The Changing Transition to Adulthood in Ethiopia over the Past Three Decades	Over the last three decades, Ethiopia has undergone significant social, economic and political changes that have a profound impact on young people’s transition to adulthood. Long-term social changes include urbanization, expansion of formal education, emergence of market economy and a rapid growth of young population. In addition, short-term social disruptions from political instability and economic recession in the past few decades pose paramount difficulties and uncertainty for young people’s transition to adulthood in Ethiopia. However, the study on transition to adulthood remains poorly documented in Ethiopia. The objective of this study is, thus, to fill this research gap by analyzing the patterns and changes of transition to adulthood using data from national population censuses. The result shows that young people in Ethiopian have increasingly postponed their transition to adulthood because of extended participation of youth in the formal education, lack of employment opportunities, and delayed entry into marriage.	Kassahun	A. Admassu
2009	149	Changes over Time in the Transition to Adulthood	Making It? Paths to Achieving and Not Achieving Aspirations in the Transition to Adulthood	How do life course transitions in young adulthood and family background factors contribute to the failure to attain educational and occupational aspirations? This paper uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 and the National Educational Longitudinal Study to understand why many young adults fall short of their aspirations for schooling and work. I demonstrate that life course transitions and the timing of these events, particularly family formation and dissolution, contribute to the likelihood that a young person will fail to attain his or her aspirations by adulthood. I also find support for previous research that has pointed to the importance of family background in predicting attainment. Finally, I provide evidence of stability and change between two cohorts of youth, born approximately 14 years apart.	Jessica	H. Hardie
2009	149	Changes over Time in the Transition to Adulthood	The Transition to Adulthood of Two Cohorts: Over Time Success or Decline?	This paper compares two cohorts of U.S. adolescents, one born in the 1960s (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 NLSY79)) and the other born in the early 1980s (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth , 1997 (NLSY97)) in how they transition into adulthood, and shows how various sub-groups of these two cohorts differ in their transitions. Results show six life-paths of transitioning to adulthood that are predominant in the NLSY97 cohort: (1) becoming a dependent worker, (2)becoming an independent worker, (3) becoming a dependent working student, (4) becoming a dependent parent, (5) becoming an independent adult, and (6) prolonged studies. Important gender, racial and family background differences were found in the proclivity of population sub-groups to follow various life-paths, reflecting both their ability and also their acceptance of the different life-paths. This paper investigates whether similar life paths characterize the cohort born during the 1960s and trends in gender and racial differences between the cohorts.	Elisabeta	 Minca
2009	150	Comparative Perspectives on Migration and Health	Migration as a Response to Intrahousehold Risk: Evidence from Indonesia	Using the Indonesian Family Life Survey, 2000 (IFLS-3), we examine whether care-giving responsibilities for the household’s sick elderly members impact the migration decisions of working-age adults. The main dependent variable in our analysis is a binary variable indicating the migration status of a working-age adult member. We define an economic migrant as an individual between the ages of 15-49 who migrated for a period of at least six months in the year prior to the survey for the purpose of finding employment. An individual is described as being a care-giver if two conditions are simultaneously met: (1) they are co-residing with an elderly member aged 50 + and (2) the elderly person is in ill-health. Our analysis predicts that participating in the migrant labour market or migrating for any reason will look less attractive if the individual has an elderly household member who is not in good health.	Elisabetta	 Magnani	Anu	 Rammohan
2009	150	Comparative Perspectives on Migration and Health	Internal Migration and Maternal and Child Health Care Utilization: Trends in Bangladesh	Despite strong urban advantages in health care utilization and child survival, intra-urban variation has been well documented, including rural-to-urban migrant disadvantages. With rapid urbanization in less developed countries, however, selection of rural-to-urban migrants and, thus, differential health outcomes among migrants, urban non-migrants and rural non-migrants are likely to have changed over time. The primary purposes of the study are: to assess trends in internal migration patterns; to identify changes in factors associated with rural-to-urban migration; and to investigate changes in associations between rural-to-urban migration and selected health care utilization. Data will come from four Bangladesh Demographic and Health Surveys conducted between 1993-1994 and 2003-2004. Study results will address changing characteristics of rural-to-urban migrants, and conclusions will provide recommendations for urban health programs in Bangladesh.	Yoonjoung	 Choi	Courtland	 Robinson
2009	150	Comparative Perspectives on Migration and Health	Immigration and Health among Korean Americans	We examined the health and health behaviors of Korean Americans, focusing on the effect of acculturation to U.S. society and overall U.S. health-related structural environments. A bi-national comparison is carried out, based on Koreans residing in the U.S. and in Korea. Acculturation variables did not show any patterned effect on the health (self-rated health and body mass index) and health behaviors (smoking and binge drinking) of Korean Americans. Overall, this population exhibited more advantaged health and more favorable behaviors than Koreans. However, health inequality across socioeconomic status groups was generally much greater among Korean Americans as compared to Koreans residing in Korea. Findings showed that socioeconomic status was the primary factor influencing health and health behaviors among the two groups of Koreans, indicating the influence of U.S. health-related structural environments. Further, our results suggested that a multidimensional acculturation perspective should be employed in understanding the health/health behaviors of immigrant populations.	Youngtae	 Cho	Soonim	 Hur	Parker	 Frisbie
2009	150	Comparative Perspectives on Migration and Health	Has the Hispanic Paradox Persisted in Childhood Health?	Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort data, this paper addresses whether Hispanic immigrants pass on their health advantages to their children. After controlling for family background, our preliminary findings indicate that the Hispanic paradox has persisted through childhood for most of health indicators we examined. Hispanic children born to Mexican immigrants face the lowest risks of developing chronic health problems, such as asthma and sinusitis. Hispanic children of Mexican origin are less likely to develop cognitive disability, behavioral and emotional problems. Some of their health advantages can be traced to their better health condition at birth and maternal health. Yet, almost all Hispanic children suffer from obesity, regardless of their mothers’ ethnicity and nativity. Overall, these findings provide the supporting evidence for the Hispanic paradox hypothesis in childhood health.	Hongyun	 Han
2009	151	Race and Socioeconomic Status	Cultural Practices and the Academic Achievement of Minority Youth: An Examination of Strategies of Action	The paradigmatic cultural explanation for the high academic success of Asian Americans is that their culture emphasizes hard work and places high academic expectations on its youth. In contrast, black youth are mired in a dire “culture of poverty” and as a result have developed an oppositional culture to mainstream values on education. But the oppositional culture hypothesis does not stand empirical testing, as black youth also have a strong school orientation. Herein lies a paradox: if both Asian youth, who are touted to be “model minorities,” and black youth, who are believed to espouse “oppositional culture,” alike have strong positive values, the mechanism between race and achievement does not appear to be beliefs/values but perhaps the translation of these values into practice. I argue that the key mechanism governing the relationship between their academic expectations and the academic achievement is the enrollment in “better” schools.	Lulu	 Chen
2009	151	Race and Socioeconomic Status	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Significant Other’s Encouragement to Attend College on Educational Ambitions and College Attendance	This analysis used longitudinal data from the University of Washington Beyond High School Project to determine whether the level of significant others’ influence varies across eleven racial/ethnic groups and whether the effect of significant other’s influence on educational ambitions and college attendance varies across racial/ethnic groups. Also, variation in the consistency of significant other’s influence over time is examined in relationship to the educational ambitions and college attendance of students from different race/ethnic groups. Preliminary results indicate that the level of significant other’s influence varies across racial/ethnic groups, with Vietnamese and East Asian students generally receiving the highest levels of encouragement, while Native American students receive the lowest. Cambodian and Mexican students, after adjusting for social class, also receive high levels of encouragement to attend college from significant others.	Nikolas	D. Pharris-Ciurej
2009	151	Race and Socioeconomic Status	The Impact of Race, Ethnicity and Occupational Status on Income: An Examination of the STEM Field Population in the United States, 1980-2008	Demographers have long studied the disparity in occupational status and income between the white and the various disadvantaged minority populations in the United States. Most studies have found that while minorities have yet to reach parity with the majority white population, there has been a substantial decrease in the gap in professional attainment between college educated workers across race and ethnicities. This paper builds upon prior research by examining the differences across race and ethnicity among workers in the STEM (Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics) fields in the United States. The data for the study are from the 1980-2008 Integrated Public Use Micro-data Series-Current Population Survey. The findings are placed in the context of the changes in the American occupational structure and the implications for future studies of the STEM field population.	Hayward	Derrick  Horton
2009	151	Race and Socioeconomic Status	Hispanics and Organized Labor in the United States, 1973-2007	Using 1973-2007 Current Population Survey data, we provide the most comprehensive analysis of Hispanics and organized labor in the United States to date. After controlling for industrial, occupational and demographic predictors, Hispanics have similar odds of unionization as whites. Recent arrivals and non-citizens, however, exhibit lower unionization probabilities, suggestive of group-specific preferences against unionization, although the effects are not as substantively large as traditional structural predictors. Restricting the sample to union joiners reveals higher odds of unionization for Hispanic non-immigrants compared to whites in recent years, and lower odds for undocumented and recent migrants. Despite the highly-publicized, organizing successes of recent Hispanic immigrants, we find no evidence of an uptick in unionization rates among this subpopulation compared to other groups. Overall, variables specified in traditional structural theories are more powerful predictors of unionization than Hispanic-specific factors.	Jake	 Rosenfeld
2009	152	Biomarkers of Fertility, Early Life and Sexual Function	Fertility Biomarkers Predict Differential Survival in a Long-Term Follow-Up Study of Male Fertility: Capturing and Treating Heterogeneity	We found that low sperm counts and other impaired biomarkers predict differences in survival among otherwise healthy subjects in a long-term fertility follow-up. Here we report on possible hidden effects of the heterogeneous decomposition of the sample. Thus, the differences in lifespan for men with a lower sperm concentration might be an artifact because of the heterogeneity. A convenient way to demonstrate the intensity of hetereogeneity on the population hazard is to use frailty models regarding the individual frailty. Heterogeneity can be indicated by the variance of frailty. If sigma square = 0 indicates no heterogeneity,  with increasing value of sigma square, the effect of heterogeneity becomes more relevant and leads to an unimodal shape of the hazard function. The final intention of the research is the estimation of the survival function for both subgroups under consideration of different age-structure and the hidden effects of co-morbidity regarding to the diseases of the genitourinary system.	Ronny	 Westerman	Katharina	 Pyka	Martina	 Schmidt-Stolte	Markus	 Thiede	Sabine	 Groos	Walter	 Krause
2009	152	Biomarkers of Fertility, Early Life and Sexual Function	Are Sex Hormones Biomarkers of Sexual Function in Later Life?	The relationship between sex hormone physiology and sexual function in older men and women is complex and, based primarily on small clinical or laboratory studies, it is only partially understood. The National Social Life, Health and Aging Project data including salivary sex hormone measures for 3,005 respondents were used to explore the associations between endogenous sex hormone levels with global self-reported health and characteristics of sexual performance. In multivariate analyses, sex hormone concentrations were differently associated with physical and sexual health. In men, high androgen concentrations were positively associated with self-reported health, but high testosterone levels were associated with reported erectile problems, anxiety about sexual performance and complex sexual morbidity. Women with high estrogen levels were less likely to report excellent health but were also less likely to report sexual problems. The study revealed significant correlations between sex hormone levels and the role of progesterone in sexuality of both genders.	Stacy	T. Lindau	Natalia	S. Gavrilova
2009	152	Biomarkers of Fertility, Early Life and Sexual Function	Is There a Trade-Off between Fertility and Longevity? A Comparative Study of Three Large Historical Demographic Databases Accounting for Mortality Selection	Frontier populations provide exceptional opportunities to test the hypothesis of a trade-off between fertility and longevity. We test this hypothesis using complete female reproductive histories from three large demographic databases: the Registre de la population du Québec ancien, the Bas-du-Fleuve, Lac St-Jean, Saguenay, and Charlevoix, Chibougamou, and Côte-Nord database, and the Utah Population Database. From these databases, we extracted, respectively: 5,447, 1,610, and 11,395 women who survived married to age 50. Together, the three samples allow for comparisons over time and space. Using survival analyses, we found a negative influence of parity and a positive influence of age at last child on post-reproductive survival in the three populations, with remarkably similar effect sizes. However, we found little evidence that early fertility affects post-reproductive survival. We used Heckman’s procedure to assess the impact of mortality selection during reproductive years, with no appreciable alteration of the main results. We conclude by discussing the needs and the advantages of comparative approaches.	Alain	 Gagnon	Ken	R. Smith	Marc	 Tremblay	Hélène	 Vézina	Paul-Phillipe	 Paré	Bertrand	 Desjardins
2009	152	Biomarkers of Fertility, Early Life and Sexual Function	Is Sex Imbalance in Early Age Mortality Driven by
Prebirth Environmental Factors, Child Biology, or
Parental Preferences? Evidence from Male-Female
Twin Pairs	We propose a methodology that decomposes sex differences in mortality into the effects of pre-birth environmental factors, child biology and parental preferences. Exploiting variation in sex differences in mortality among twins and within male-female twin pairs, and variation in gender bias in Sub-Saharan Africa and India, we show that : (1) pre-birth environmental factors account for a large fraction of the usual excess mortality rates of male children; (2) the biological make-up of male children contributes to this excess mortality only during infancy, but its effect has been previously overstated; and (3) parental discrimination against female children in India negatively affects their survival, but failure to adjust for pre-birth and biological effects leads the conventional methodological approach to understate its effect by 160% during infancy, and 33% during childhood.	Roland	 Pongou
2009	153	Generational Exchanges and the Well-Being of Grandchildren	Co-Resident Grandparents and Their Grandchildren: Family Structure Matters	Since the 1990s, there has been increasing policy interest in the role grandparents play in raising and providing care for their children. Family structure is particularly relevant for the well-being of individuals in co-residential families. We use data from the 2000 and 2007 American Community Survey to (1) enumerate and describe family structure diversity within co-residential grandparent-grandchild households;’ (2) identify which grandparents take primary responsibility for their grandchildren and how this varies by family structure; and (3) employ multivariate methods to investigate the link between family structure and well-being for grandchildren living with their grandparents.	Lynne	M. Casper	Radheeka	 Jayasundera	Timothy	J. Biblarz
2009	153	Generational Exchanges and the Well-Being of Grandchildren	Role Markers of Adulthood and Grandchildren's Ties to Grandparents	Young adulthood generally entails greater separateness from the family of origin. Do relationships of young adults with their grandparents vary by adult roles that grandchildren occupy? This study investigates the implications of residential independence, enrollment in higher education, full-time employment, marriage and parenthood for contact with and closeness to grandparents. Data come from 1,507 young adults interviewed in Wave 3 of the National Survey of Families and Households. Findings suggest that occupying adult roles can be either negatively or positively associated with grandparent-grandchild ties, depending on specific configurations among such factors as the adult role in question, a particular dimension of intergenerational solidarity, lineage and grandparent’s gender. Little support was found for the idea that grandchild’s gender moderates these associations.	Maria	A. Monserud
2009	153	Generational Exchanges and the Well-Being of Grandchildren	Single Motherhood and Parent-Child Relations in Japan: The Role of Living Arrangements	The goal of this paper is to shed light on the implications of single-parenthood in Japan. Using nationally representative survey data, we compare parent-child interactions in single-mother families and two-parent families. We pay particular attention to the ways in which relationships between family structure and parent-child interactions may be moderated by the presence of coresident grandparents. Initial tabulations indicate that several measures of parent-child interactions and parent-child relationship quality are significantly lower for single mothers. We also find some evidence that these differences are greatest for single-mothers who are not coresiding with their parents. These preliminary results suggest that the rapid rise in divorce may have important implications for parent-child relationships in Japan and that the relatively high prevalence of intergenerational coresidence may temper the implications of single-parenthood to some extent.	James	 Raymo	Hyunjoon	 Park	Miho	 Iwasawa
2009	153	Generational Exchanges and the Well-Being of Grandchildren	Family Type and Parental Time Involvement in Educational Activities	Family type has received attention as a socio-demographic dimension that structures differentials in parental time-investment. However, whether parental time involvement affects children's academic outcomes, and whether parental involvement level differs across family types remain unclear. This study examines whether: (1) parental involvement in academic activities is linked to children's academic achievement; and (2) parental involvement in academic activities differs across family types. We analyze the 1997 and 2003 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics which include the Child Development Supplement. We measure family types across three union types (e.g., parental first marriage, remarriage, or cohabitation) and two parent types, as defined by step and biological parent.	Hiromi	 Ono	James	 Sanders
2009	154	Cross-National Patterns of Fertility	The Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Early Transition Rise and (Slow) Decline	Fertility in most of Sub-Saharan Africa has remained very high since fertility estimation started in the 1960s. This article documents the current stage in the fertility transition at the country level for all Sub-Saharan countries making use of all the available national data on children ever born and total fertility. It is possible to document for almost every country that fertility increased in the early stages of the transition to reach a maximum level, and that fertility has started to decline from that maximum level. These qualitative features hide large quantitative differences both in the maximum level reached and in the present stage of the transition. There are many countries where fertility is still high and the pace of decline is slow. In some countries where fertility had started to decline there might be stalls in the transition although the available data is often contradictory regarding recent trends.	José	Antonio  Ortega
2009	154	Cross-National Patterns of Fertility	A Close Examination of the HIV/Fertility Timing Linkage in Africa: Examination of Age and Cohort-Specific Fertility Spacing’s Correlation with Cohort-Specific HIV Prevalence	We use individual data from every publicly available Demographic and Health Survey in Africa to examine whether the fertility timing of specific age groups is differently affected by HIV, and to track how cohort fertility timing is affected by HIV. Going beyond recent data which test women for HIV status, we use sentinel test results from 1980 onward in Sub-Saharan Arica, which are HIV tests of women in each African country by year and by region. This allows us to estimate HIV prevalence among pregnant women for the entire scope of the epidemic so far (1980-2006), and to see if the response is different in countries and regions with high and low HIV prevalence. Our results suggest that the relationship between HIV and fertility timing is negative. Controlling for country, cohort and region fixed effects, we find that fertility spacing is lower when the cohort-specific fertility rate is high.	Stacy	 Sneeringer
2009	154	Cross-National Patterns of Fertility	Explaining Trends and Cross-National Differences in Teen Birth Rates in Developed Countries	In this paper, I use natality data from European countries and the U.S., over a 45-year period, to investigate (1) the effect of sex education on teen birth rates and (2) the effect of adult fertility patterns on teen birth rates. Preliminary findings suggest that the provision of sex education has little effect on teen birth rates and that much but not all of the between-country differences in teen birth rates and the within-country time trends in teen birth rates can be explained by changes in adult age norms associated with parenthood.	Julien	O. Teitler
2009	154	Cross-National Patterns of Fertility	The Effect of First Birth Postponement on Second Birth Rates across Europe	In recent decades, tempo effects have played a major role in fertility trends: the emergence of very low period fertility levels has primarily been caused by the postponement of first births. Yet, there are clearly tempo-quantum interactions: the tempo shift affects parity progression rates after the first birth, but not to the same extent in all social groups and all regions of Europe. Differences in tempo-quantum interactions are likely to be an important factor behind the divergence of fertility levels within Europe. The nature of these interactions is the major focus of this paper. How does the postponement of first births affect second birth rates in different social groups and countries and regions of Europe? We use data from the European Social Survey to address this research question. Preliminary results indicate that postponement effects are mediated by both his and her level of education, and by welfare state provisions.	Joanna	 Rozanska	Jan	 Van Bavel
2009	155	Anthropogenic Environmental Change	Poverty and Vulnerability: A Static vs Dynamic Assessment of a Population Subjected to Climate Change Shock in Sub-Saharan Africa	Despite the effects of climate change being evident at a global scale, its negative impact will severely affect those communities highly dependent on natural resources. The emerging threat of climate change to household’s welfare calls for more research to assess the household’s probability to fall into poverty. This would require a combined analysis of the potential risk of experiencing climate-related extremes (such as droughts or floods) and the household’s ability to cope with such events. This research aims to extend a methodology developed by “micro-economists” and explicitly models the unexplained household components (i.e. idiosyncratic household component, error term) using Geographical Information System technique. Using data from the fifth round of the Ghana Living Standard Survey and detailed maps of rainfall variability and soil types, the research attempts to model the heterogeneous household shock, provides a profile of the most vulnerable and also highlights the gains obtained from this approach.	Angela	 Baschieri
2009	155	Anthropogenic Environmental Change	Population and Biodiversity in a Natural Resources-Dependent Community	This article examines the influence of population on local terrestrial biodiversity, with a special focus on species diversity. We construct a theoretical framework for the study of micro-level population-environment relationships that emphasizes the multidimensional nature of population influence on flora diversity. We use newly available longitudinal measures of vegetation counts, local population dynamics, and measures of local community context from the foothills of Nepalese Himalayas to provide empirical estimates of our theoretical model. This empirical investigation reveals that multiple dimensions of population influence floral diversity. Multiple dimensions of population-size, age structure, birth and household size - each have a large negative effect on local flora diversity; however, these effects are greatly varied by the property right/management regimes of the local resource. This intriguing finding is consistent with the hypothesis that human influence on environment, particularly local biodiversity, is greatly mediated by the property right/management regimes of the local resource.	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	William	G. Axinn
2009	155	Anthropogenic Environmental Change	Shifts in Determinants of Fertility among Women Living in the Amazon	A fundamental relationship in studies of tropical land use is the contribution of population growth to agricultural development and expansion. Population-environment interactions often view population in aggregate form – i.e., the influence of total and/or age- /gender-specific population to land use trajectories. We offer two contributions to this literature: (1) an in-depth analysis of spatio-temporal dependent factors influencing fertility in a forest frontier and (2) modeling the importance of population components (fertility and migration) on land use change. Data are derived from longitudinal household surveys in Ecuador’s northern Amazon, where petroleum extraction has accelerated migration to the region since the 1960s and 20-year birth histories are re-constructed for each woman of childbearing age from 1980 to 1999. Multilevel models are implemented to (1) identify factors causally linked to childbirth and (2) model the impact of five-year fertility and migration rates from 1980-1999 on land use changes observed from 1990 to 1999.	William	 Pan	Daesha	 Ramachandran	David	 Carr
2009	155	Anthropogenic Environmental Change	Measuring Economic Growth from Outer Space	We propose a simple model that allows us to consider satellite data on lights at night as a proxy for local economic activity, distinguishing between population density  and consumption per person. We test it on a 12-year panel of countries, as well as a panel of subnational administrative units in Guatemala and a cross section of units in three southern African countries. To our knowledge, this is the first global analysis using panel night lights data (1992-2003). We find that changes in lights explain a large portion of the variation in changes in consumption. We then apply the lights data to the more substantive question of how local agricultural productivity, as proxied by rainfall, affects urban economic activity, either via urbanization (more people) or increased urban incomes (more activity per person). We find a statistically significant and substantial increase in urban economic activity during and following years of high rainfall.	Vernon	 Henderson	Adam	 Storeygard	David	N. Weil
2009	156	Immigrant Generations	Demographic Characteristics of Third-Generation Asian Americans: Socioeconomic Attainments and Assimilation	Using data from recent Current Population Surveys, this study compares third-and-higher generation with earlier-generation Asian Americans and non-Hispanic whites in terms of socioeconomic characteristics and demographics. The findings suggest a third-generation decline or flattening for Asian American and white men as well as Asian American and white women. For each of these groups, the mean of years of schooling among the 2.5 and third generations is lower than among the first and second generations. This pattern is most pronounced among Asian Americans. As for wage determination, the generational differentials can be explained by educational attainment and other basic demographic variables. Overall, these results suggest that assimilation beyond the first generation immigrants no longer improves socioeconomic attainments as expected by traditional assimilation theory. Furthermore, in the case of Asian Americans, cultural assimilation across the generations may actually lower educational attainment and thereby reduce wages contrary to traditional assimilation theory.	Isao	 Takei	Arthur	 Sakamoto
2009	156	Immigrant Generations	School or Work or School and Work? Enrollment and Intergenerational Variation in Work Activity among Mexican-Origin Adolescents	We compare patterns of school enrollment and labor force participation across four generational groups of Mexican-origin adolescents. Consistent with a perspective viewing the school and work orientations of early-generation Mexican-origin youths as influenced by a culture of labor migration, we find that school enrollment and labor force participation tend to be more mutually-exclusive among these youths, as compared with their later-generation counterparts. Early-generation Mexican-origin youth are less likely to pursue school and labor force participation simultaneously. Those not enrolled in school tend to participate in the labor force to a greater extent and work more intensively than their later-generation counterparts. By contrast, those enrolled in school are less likely to participate in the labor force and work less intensively. We argue that these findings carry implications for contemporary perspectives of immigrant incorporation and for research on racial/ethnic differences in adolescent school enrollment and labor force participation.	James	D. Bachmeier	Frank	D. Bean
2009	156	Immigrant Generations	Minority Status, Generational Status and Educational Attainment: A Test of the Human Capital and Immigrant Optimism Perspectives	Despite the increasing equality in college attendance rates between white and Mexican students in America, disparities in college completion persist. The human capital and classical assimilation theories propose that these disparities should decrease over generations as native-born Mexicans achieve English language skills similar to whites. However, the immigrant optimism and segmented assimilation theories suggest that disparities will increase as native-born Mexicans reject education as a means of social mobility. Using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), multinomial logistic regression models are performed that compare the educational attainment of native whites to first, second, and third generation Mexicans and test whether these disparities can be explained by test scores or family background characteristics. Supporting the immigrant optimism perspective, the findings suggest that, relative to native whites, second generation Mexicans are experiencing more success in both two-year and four-year institutions than their third-generation counterparts net of test scores and family characteristics.	Kristina	L. Zeiser
2009	156	Immigrant Generations	Does Acculturation Lower Educational Achievement for Children of Immigrants?	Several studies have documented declines in educational outcomes across immigrant generations. Such findings have often been attributed to the negative effects of acculturation on immigrant children’s attitudes toward education. Very little research, however, has directly examined whether attitudes toward education do in fact change across generations. Nor has there been a study that has tried to explicitly link immigrants’ educational attitudes to either acculturation or educational outcomes. This project uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to examine educational attitudes and behaviors as possible mechanisms linking acculturation to educational outcomes. First, it assesses whether there is a pattern of generational change in educational attitudes and behaviors. Second, it assesses to what extent generational differences in high school graduation, college enrollment and grades are attributable to generational differences in attitudes and behaviors. Third, it tests whether generational changes in immigrant children’s attitudes depend on the school peer context in which they acculturate.	Emily	 Greenman
2009	157	Spatial Demography and Health	Modeling Spatial Inequalities in Health in Cities of Developing Countries: The Case of Accra, Ghana	Sustainable development requires a healthy population because only this can generate the levels of economic productivity necessary to lift an economy out of widespread poverty. We posit that variability in health within urban places, where most jobs are being created, is importantly a function of the composite characteristics of place, not just of the people themselves. In this research, we model the spatial inequality in health outcomes in Accra, Ghana, by applying data from the Women’s Health Survey of Accra to proxy variables derived from the Census and from remotely sensed imagery, for which we have full spatial coverage. These estimates will allow total health inequality across Accra to be decomposed into its within-neighborhood and between-neighborhood components, and will allow for identification of those neighborhoods that exhibit high levels of health vulnerability.	John	R. Weeks	Allan	G. Hill	Arthur	 Getis	Mark	R. Montgomery	Livia	 Montana	Kenneth	 Hill
2009	157	Spatial Demography and Health	Area-Level Influences on Individual HIV Status in Rural Malawi	Few studies use spatial methods to explore relationships between people and place in Sub-Saharan Africa or in the context of HIV. This research uses individual-level data linked to area-level, spatially-oriented socioeconomic and access data to determine how the relationship between area- and individual-level risks and individual HIV status varies in rural Malawians using geographically weighted regression. The Political Economy of Health aids interpretation. Area-level factors include income inequality, absolute poverty and access to roads, cities and health clinics. Individual-level factors include high-risk sex and sexually transmitted infections. Stratified analysis reveals the role of gender. Spatial models show significant, local-level variation and indicate that area-level factors drive HIV patterns above individual-level contributions. In distinct locations, women who live further from health clinics, major roads and cities are less likely to be infected. For men, HIV is associated with migration patterns in specific areas. Local-level, gender-specific approaches to HIV prevention are necessary.	Caryl	 Feldacker
2009	157	Spatial Demography and Health	Well, It Depends on Where You're Born: A Practical Application of Geographically-Weighted Regression to the Study of Infant Mortality in the U.S.	The purpose of this paper is to examine the associations between various socioeconomic indicators of inequality and county infant mortality rates across the United State for the time period 1998 to 2002. By using analytical methods that allow the relationships between our socioeconomic indicators and infant mortality rates at the county level to vary across space, we hope to provide a better understanding of the often continuous and spatially varying nature of inequality and health. Specifically, the primary analytic method used in this paper is geographically weighted regression (GWR), and the benefit of using the GWR approach is that it allows us to visualize how the effects of each covariate in our model vary over geographic space. The ultimate goal of this work is inform policy-makers about the distinct regional variations in the relationship between socioeconomic inequality and population health, measured here by county infant mortality rates.	P.	Johnelle  Sparks	Corey	S. Sparks
2009	157	Spatial Demography and Health	Mapping Longevity in a Northern Italian Region: A Scan Statistic Approach	It is known that human longevity patterns show regional variations. Starting from this point, we applied different techniques of spatial analysis (based on Scan statistics) in Emilia Romagna, a northern Italian region, to identify aggregations of areas (municipalities) characterized by a statistically significant level of the phenomenon. We identified areas with higher propensity to longevity in the south-eastern part of the region that oppose to others in the north-eastern direction characterized by lower intensity of the phenomenon. Comparing the results of the different spatial scan statistic methods, we have obtained a combined solution that could provide insight to identify possible longevity “clusters” and their persistence. We're trying to link these results with standardized mortality rates to see if they are lower in the areas of high longevity than in other parts of the region. On the whole, the results show the effectiveness of spatial analysis in revealing geographical longevity patterns.	Massimiliano	 Marino	Rossella	 Miglio	Rosella	 Rettaroli	Alessandra	 Samoggia
2009	158	Gender and HIV Risk in Understudied Populations	Multiple Concurrent Partnerships in a Sub-Saharan Setting: Biases in Self-Reported Measures and Their Implications for HIV/AIDS Prevention	Multiple concurrent partnerships (MCP) have been described as the “key driver”' of generalized HIV epidemics, but comparative studies show that MCP are not more common in regions of Africa with high HIV prevalence than in concentrated epidemics. This might be due to systematic under-reporting of MCP during sexual behavior surveys. We use sexual network data from a small island on Lake Malawi, in conjunction with a simple model of HIV transmission, to assess whether self-reports of partnership concurrency possibly underestimate the contribution of MCP to HIV epidemics. We find that the prevalence of MCP was significantly higher in this population according to estimates derived from network data. Self-reported data underestimated the proportion of incident infections attributable to MCP by more than 50%. Our results emphasize the need for interventions addressing patterns of sexual networking at the population level rather than focusing on the transmission of HIV within stable cohabiting couples.	Stephane	 Helleringer	Linda	 Kalilani-Phiri	Jemima	A. Frimpong	James	 Mkandawire
2009	158	Gender and HIV Risk in Understudied Populations	Changing Inequitable Gender Norms among Young Women in India to Reduce Their Vulnerability to HIV and SRH Problems: A Pilot Intervention in Mumbai Slum Communities	This paper presents findings from a longitudinal study testing the intervention that stimulates critical thinking about gender norms that promote women’s vulnerability and to create support for norms that promote equity and empowerment. Pre- and post- intervention surveys were implemented with a cohort of 263 young women (16-28 years) to test the effectiveness of the intervention. A 21-item gender equity scale for women (GESW) was developed to measure young women’s attitudes (alpha = .90). At baseline, young women reported inequitable gender norms. Post-intervention, a significant (p	Vaishali	Sharma  Mahendra	Ravi	K. Verma	Ajay	Kumar  Singh	Julie	 Pulerwitz
2009	158	Gender and HIV Risk in Understudied Populations	Multiple Partnerships and HIV among the Garifuna Minority Population in Belize	The Garifunas are believed to have the highest HIV rate among all ethnic groups in Belize, at 8%. Cultural barriers have led to difficulties in understanding how HIV is viewed in this community and why prevalence is higher in this population. We conducted a study of 530 Garifunas in 2007, to explore abstinence, faithfulness and condom use measures. We found 50% of the sample had more than one partner in the last 30 days, and greater knowledge of HIV transmission is associated with higher chances of having multiple partners. We also found that young male Garifunas are more likely to have multiple partners. Segmenting the population between those who practiced concurrency in the past 30 days and those who did not, we found that Garifunas who exhibit higher means on the internal locus of control measure are more likely to have multiple partners.	Justin	 Buszin	Benjamin	 Nieto-Andrade	Jorge	 Rivas	Kim	 Longfield
2009	158	Gender and HIV Risk in Understudied Populations	Exploring Taboo Behaviours in a Traditional Society: Evidence from Pakistan	Pakistan is a low HIV prevalence country. However a concentrated epidemic is now emerging in the high-risk groups. Sexually transmitted infections can spread to the general population through men who engage in risky sexual practices. A cross sectional survey carried out in Pakistan has examined male sexual behaviors in six major cities. In each city, 400 men aged 16-45 were selected systematically employing a multi-stage sampling design. Nearly 29% of the respondents (95% CI 27-31) reported having had non-marital sex in their lifetimes: among these men, 9.6% reported sexual relationships with men. Nearly 2.6% reported exclusive sex with men. Multivariate analysis has shown that men having sex with men are more likely to be young, less educated, living away from their homes and are more likely to have had exposure to pornographic materials. Urban men in Pakistan are engaging in risky sexual practices including having unprotected sexual relations with men.	Ali	M. Mir	Abdul	  Wajid	Laura	J. Reichenbach	Mumraiz	 Khan	Irfan	 Masood
2009	159	Multiple Country Perspectives on Reproductive Health	Alcohol Use and Sexual Risk-Taking Behavior: A Multilevel Investigation with African Data	Across the lifespan, individuals are at risk of multiple threats characterized by co-occurring health risk behaviors. Adolescents and young adults are most at risk, many of whom often participate in risk behaviors that threaten their current and future health. These include substance/alcohol use and unprotected sexual intercourse that are responsible for much of their mortality and morbidity experiences. Studies which show that reducing alcohol use will reduce at-risk sexual behavior usually fail to control for unobservables that are potentially correlated with alcohol use and sexual behavior. Using various estimation techniques and data from Wave 1 of the Cameroon Longitudinal Family Life and Health Surveys, we estimate the effects of alcohol use on the probability of being sexually active and the probability of having sex without contraception. We find evidence of a causal link between alcohol use and sexual activity in this African setting and consider its implications for HIV/AIDS prevention among young people.	Barthelemy	D. Kuate
2009	159	Multiple Country Perspectives on Reproductive Health	The Impact of Bolsa-Família Program on Fertility Behavior	The aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of Bolsa-Família on beneficiary’s fertility behavior. We attempt to investigate the fertility decisions between women who are recipients of the program with those who are not. We use the National Household Sample Survey, carried out annually by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. We carried out a probabilist matching procedure. The procedure matches units from different groups (recipient and not) that are similar in terms of observable characteristics. The idea is to select women in the treatment group who are identical to women in the control group, except for the fact that women in the treatment group receive a benefit (Bolsa-Família).	Bruna	A. Signorini	Bernardo	L. Queiroz
2009	159	Multiple Country Perspectives on Reproductive Health	An Imperfect Contraceptive Society: Fertility in Italy	Italy represents an unexpected and in some ways paradoxical outcome in terms of fertility control: one of the lowest birth rates in the world seems to have been accomplished through the preponderant use of “traditional” methods. Compared to other countries, there has been a reluctance to abandon coitus interruptus. In France in 1994, 84% of women used Intrauterine Devices or the pill, compared to 42% in Italy in 1995; the proportion using withdrawal was respectively 3% and 25% (Castiglioni, et al. 2001). Using data from 362 interviews conducted in 2005-2006 in four Italian cities, we argue that Italians using withdrawal often have “unplanned” AND desired conceptions. Such results suggest the need to rethink theoretical understandings of low fertility. Individuals manipulate culturally produced norms and beliefs about the appropriate moment to have a child (albeit delayed) through use of coitus interruptus; simultaneously, their actions are embedded in cultural, economic and political processes.	Alessandra	 Gribaldo	Maya	 Judd	David	I. Kertzer
2009	159	Multiple Country Perspectives on Reproductive Health	The Short-Term Reproductive Consequences of Genocide in Bosnia and Rwanda	How did genocide affect short-term fertility rates in Bosnia and Rwanda? During and immediately after genocide, both countries experienced a rapid reduction in the birth rate due to factors such as spousal separation, increased miscarriages and delayed births. Yet this reduction in the birth rate should have been tempered by two countervailing factors. First, the social collapse associated with genocide drastically reduced the availability and/or safety of accessing reproductive health services. Second, mass rape was widely used as a weapon of war during both genocides. Drawing from a multi-method, multi-site study involving data analysis from nationally-representative household surveys and 117 qualitative interviews with women in both countries, I assess the relative importance of several factors on fertility trends during and immediately after genocide in Bosnia and Rwanda. Despite widely divergent pre-war reproductive contexts, there were important similarities in the effects of genocide on short-term birth rates in both countries.	Sarah	E. Staveteig
2009	160	Residential Segregation and Labor Market Outcomes	Minority Population Concentration and Earnings: 
Causal Effect or Spurious Association?	Seemingly consistent with the hypothesis that heightened visibility and competition lead to greater economic discrimination against minorities, countless studies have observed a negative relationship between minority labor market population concentration and minority socioeconomic attainment. But minorities who reside in areas of high minority representation are likely to differ from minorities who reside in areas with few minorities on many typically unobserved characteristics related to economic attainment; thus, this association may be spurious, a product of either differential skills, behaviors and networks acquired during childhood or of selective migration. Applying individual fixed effects regression models to a quarter-century of panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, we find that for both blacks and Latinos the contemporaneous inverse association between minority county racial-ethnic concentration and earnings is completely eliminated when unobserved person-specific characteristics are controlled. These results cast doubt on the widely-accepted hypothesis that high levels of minority labor market concentration generate income discrimination against minorities.	Jeremy	 Pais	Scott	J. South	Kecia	 Johnson
2009	160	Residential Segregation and Labor Market Outcomes	The Effects of Housing Market Discrimination on Earnings Inequality	The ratio of black-white loan denial rates and residential segregation can capture a measure of racialized outcomes in a metropolitan area. Individual level earnings gaps may be explained by these place-based racialized outcomes. Our descriptive results suggest that higher black-white loan denial rates and higher black-white segregation rates are associated with larger earnings gaps. Our OLS regression models include: estimating log-earnings equations with a dummy variable for race, controlling for the loan denial ratio, controlling for index of dissimilarity, and estimating the earnings equations separately for the MSAs in quintiles based on loan denial and segregation. There is little change in the race effect when controlling for lending disparities and modest change when controlling for residential segregation. Despite the apparent inverse relationship between these place-based outcomes and earnings ratios, when controls are made for other determinants of earnings, there is little impact of these measures on individual earnings gaps.	William	 Darity, Jr.	Kris	 Marsh	Samuel	L. Myers, Jr.
2009	160	Residential Segregation and Labor Market Outcomes	Why Are Ghettos Bad? Examining the Role of Educational Experiences	Relative to whites, African Americans that reside in highly segregated metropolitan areas have worse education and labor market outcomes than those that reside in less segregated areas. This paper examines the extent to which cross-metropolitan differences in school environments can explain this empirical relationship. Using data from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 merged with the Common Core of Data, we test whether racial differences in school exposure to single-parent families, standardized test scores, African American teachers, and English as a Second Language (ESL) students can explain the negative impact of residential segregation. We find little evidence to support the idea that the negative impact of residential segregation of African Americans operates through its effect on school environments. This suggests that segregation harms African Americans primarily because it concentrates them into neighborhoods with low levels of income, human capital or related endowments.	Delia	 Furtado	Stephen	 Ross	Robert	 Bifulco
2009	160	Residential Segregation and Labor Market Outcomes	The Ecology of Ethnic Economies	With the increase in immigrant population and the growth of ethnic communities, the study of ethnic economies has received considerable attention in recent decades. As most studies explore the economic and social consequences of participating in ethnic economies, the literature has largely treated the ethnic economies as given. There has been little accounting of factors that contribute to the concentration of members of minority groups in specific industries. To understand the topic, we explore how the ecological structures of the metropolis shape the concentration of minority groups in specific industries. In addition, we explore how earnings in these ethnic concentrated industries are related to the social and demographic characteristics of the ethnic group and the characteristics of the metropolis. Based on the 2001 Canadian Census, we explored Chinese ethnic economies in Canada in three major Canadian metropolitan areas. These three cities consist of over 80% of Chinese population in Canada.	Eric	 Fong	Jing	 Shen
2009	161	Health in Later Life	Estimating Causal Effects of Early Occupation on Later Health: Evidence Using the PSID	Using the panel structure and retrospective occupational histories available in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we examine whether early occupation has lasting effects on health status as individuals age. We merge historical Census data that reflect the labor market conditions when individuals in the PSID made their first occupational choices. We use these data on labor market conditions (e.g. percentage blue collar workers in the labor market in the state when entering the labor market) and father’s occupation as instruments to address endogeneity bias in our baseline results. Importantly, we control for respondent’s pre-labor market health and education and both mother’s and father’s education. We find substantial evidence that choosing blue collar occupations at labor force entry harms later health. These health effects are larger after controlling for endogeneity. We also find differences in the effects of occupation by gender, race and age.	Jason	 Fletcher	Jody	 Sindelar
2009	161	Health in Later Life	Modeling Disability Trajectories among the Oldest-Old in China	This paper identifies and describes common disability and mortality trajectories among oldest-old in China and assesses associations with socio-demographic characteristics. Data are from the China Longitudinal Health Longevity Survey conducted in 22 Chinese provinces. About 9,000 individuals 80 and older were interviewed in 1998. Survivors were followed up in 2000, 2002, and 2005, and mortality was recorded for non-survivors. The outcome is a count of limitations with activities of daily living (ADLs). A semi-parametric, finite mixture model determines typical trajectories in number of limitations, while mortality is modelled simultaneously. Covariates are employed to determine characteristics of those who fall into trajectory groups. Results indicate three trajectories representing “healthy,” “developing,” and “high” disability groups. Women, more than men, are likely to be in the “developing” and the “high” groups. Further analyses examine additional covariates and how drop-out due to mortality associates with trajectories.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Linda	G. Martin	Daniel	 Nagin	Bobby	 Jones
2009	161	Health in Later Life	The Impact of Diabetes on LTC Disability and Mortality: Population Estimates from the National Long Term Care Survey	The purpose of this study was to estimate the impact of diabetes on expected lifetime years of Long Term Care (LTC) disability above age 65,using the 2004 National Long Term Care Survey (NLTCS) with LTC disability based on HIPAA policies, capability of performing activities of daily living and CI triggers, Diabetes was assessed using Medicare files linked to the NLTCS. Disabled life expectancy (DLE) with and without diabetes was computed via Sullivan’s (1971) method. A simulated intervention in diabetes-related disability was generated by recalculating the diabetic component of DLE using non-diabetic disability rates. Total DLE at age 65 was 1.45 years for males and 2.53 years for females with 0.57 and 0.83 years respectively for persons with diabetes. The latter values drop to 0.29 and 0.46 years respectively under the simulated intervention. Nearly half of the lifetime years of disability for diabetics was associated with the diabetes. Increasing secular trends in diabetes prevalence rates may slow or halt the decline in late-life DLE.	Eric	 Stallard
2009	161	Health in Later Life	Obesity and the Update of Survival Expectations	There is almost no evidence on whether individuals acknowledge the possible deleterious effects that excess body weight may have on their health and on their survival perspectives. Perceiving the threat that excess body weight posits to survival may motivate behavioral changes conducive to both weight gain prevention and weight loss encouragement when necessary. To the best of my knowledge, there is almost no research done in this area or on whether recent serious obesity-related health problems may influence updates of these expectations. I am, therefore, interested in answering the following questions: (1) are there differences in the determinants of the subjective survival expectations between individuals with excess body weight and those that are considered as normal weight individuals? and (2) do these groups of individuals update their survival expectations differently in the presence of obesity-related health shocks?	Beatriz	 Novak
2009	162	The Context and History of Adolescent Sexual Behavior Trends	Trends in Adolescent Sexual Behaviors and Reproductive Outcomes in Central America between the 1990s and the Turn of the Century	Regionally, adolescent fertility is high among Central American countries, particularly Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua. This study uses data from four national health surveys in each country from the early 1990s to the early 2000s to: (1) describe trends in sexual and reproductive health (SRH) for adolescents (ages 15-19); and (2) test the significance of and contributing factors to changes in SRH over time. Logistic regression analyses were employed to test trends and associations among sexual behavior, reproductive outcomes and key demographic factors over time. Findings show modest declines in adolescent childbearing over the decade studied. Rates of first births to adolescents have not dropped, while the rate of unwanted pregnancies has increased in the 15-19 age group in three of the four countries. Childbearing remains highest among rural women with lower education levels. These results suggest that further program policy development is needed to target adolescent fertility in Central America.	Ghazaleh	 Samandari	Ilene	S. Speizer
2009	162	The Context and History of Adolescent Sexual Behavior Trends	Changing Behavior Risk for Teen Pregnancy in the United States, 1991-2007	After declining dramatically from 1991-2005, teen birth rates rose in 2006. Using sexual behavior and contraceptive use data from the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (N~125,000), we calculated changes in pregnancy risk over time. Our index of pregnancy risk declined between 1991 and 2003, closely following declines in teen birth rates. Improvements in contraceptive use between 1991 and 2003 were responsible for 70% of declining pregnancy risk. Between 2003 and 2007, sexual activity was unchanged and pregnancy risk based on contraceptive use increased (p=.06). Although pregnancy risk was higher among blacks and Hispanics compared to whites, differences in sexual activity between blacks and other groups declined over time. After improvement in the 1990s and early 2000s, sexual behavioral change related to teen pregnancy appears to have stalled or reversed after 2003. These behavioral trends portend stagnant or even rising teen birth and pregnancy rates through 2008.	John	 Santelli	Mark	G. Orr	Laura	 Lindberg	Daniela	C. Diaz
2009	162	The Context and History of Adolescent Sexual Behavior Trends	Social Networks and Sexual Activity among Unmarried Young Women: The Role of School Environment	This paper examines the links between schooling, sexual activity and social networks among unmarried women (aged 15-24) in rural Malawi. Using survey and qualitative data from a sub-set (N=258) of the 2004 youth sample as part of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project , the survey data show that school-going girls report lower levels of sexual activity than do out-of-school girls, even after controlling for age, wealth and region. Yet AIDS-related knowledge does not differ, suggesting that behavioral differences are due not to the content of school instruction, but to individual and social factors tied to school attendance. School-going and non-going girls have social network characteristics that differ; half of school-goers’ networks consist of other school-going girls, while a majority of non-goers’ consist of other non-goers (52% vs. 84%, respectively). These salient differences may provide protection from infection amongst school-attendees.	Michelle	 Poulin
2009	162	The Context and History of Adolescent Sexual Behavior Trends	Education and the Timing of Sexual Initiation and Marriage in Rural Malawi: A Longitudinal Analysis of the Effect of Grade Attainment, School Dropout and Math and Literacy Skills	While early marriage has declined in Sub-Saharan Africa in recent years, premarital sex has increased. Women’s level of education has been documented to be strongly and positively associated with age at first marriage in the region. Moreover, girls enrolled in school are less likely to engage in premarital sex than those out-of-school, although this appears not to be the case for boys. In this study, we examine the effect of education — including grade attainment, school dropout and math and literacy skills — on the timing of sexual initiation and marriage using a longitudinal adolescent survey conducted in rural Malawi. The analysis will estimate multiple decrement tables for sexual initiation before and within marriage and will use hazard models to explore the effects of education on age at first sex for males and females, and marriage for females. Finally, a joint model to account for potential endogeneity will be estimated.	Erica	 Soler-Hampejsek	Barbara	S. Mensch	Paul	C. Hewett
2009	163	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Developing World	Social Returns from Fertility Decline: Impact on Child-Schooling in India	It is a well-known fact that child schooling has far-reaching influence particularly on shaping a child’s subsequent living and overall socioeconomic development of the society. With declining fertility, it becomes imperative to identify how and to what extent it influences child schooling. Using data from the National Family Health Survey, this paper attempts to observe the trend in child schooling scenario in India and to examine the impact of fertility decline on child’s schooling, considering rural children whose parents are illiterate. Analyses show sex and birth-order differential in school attendance is statistically significant. Child schooling is negatively related with family size and it increases considerably in smaller families, among contraceptives users compared to non-users. Contraceptive use significantly influences child schooling, apart from its influence through reducing family size. Earlier-born and girl children are benefited more in terms of schooling when family size declines. Thus, a return of fertility decline is favorable for the children’s education.	Puspita	 Datta
2009	163	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Developing World	Differential Patterns of Completing Fertility Transition in Turkey	During the last two decades, social institutional setting of reproduction has experienced intensive transitions in Turkey. The purpose of the present study is to examine social demographic aspects of fertility dynamics by mother tongue groups in Turkey. By applying event-history analysis to retrospective data, the study first illustrates trends of birth intensities (first birth up to fourth) in the context of socioeconomic, cultural and political changes. Secondly, the study examines how the variations between the Turkish and Kurdish speaking women are conditioned by demographic, socioeconomic (structural) and socio-cultural characteristics. The results allowed us to identify different groups in the fertility decline process in Turkey. We demonstrate that to understand contemporary fertility dynamics, it is necessary to consider a combination of individual demographic, socioeconomic and cultural factors.	Sutay	 Yavuz
2009	163	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Developing World	The Extent of Association between Pregnancy Intention and Utilization of Maternal Health Care Services in India	Information about women's intention to become pregnant has been used for a variety of purposes, from estimating the number of unintended pregnancies to assessing the effects of pregnancy intention on behaviours during pregnancy, birth outcomes, health and development of children born as a result of unintended pregnancies. Births or pregnancies may be unwanted because they either pose a serious threat to health of mothers or children or they do not conform to specific family size desired by couples. Using data from the National Family Health Survey, bivariate and multivariate (multinomial logistic regression) techniques have been applied. There is a negative discrimination in the use of antenatal, intra-natal and post-natal care in cases where pregnancies are unintended. A woman who has planned a pregnancy will be highly motivated to seek early prenatal care to ensure a successful outcome and more concerned about the well-being of the foetus.	Sujata	 Ganguly	Nalin	 Singh Negi
2009	163	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility in the Developing World	Late Childbearing and Changing Risks of Adverse Birth Outcomes in Korea	The total fertility rate has plummeted from 1.65 in 1995, to 1.08 in 2005, in Korea. This very low fertility, mainly caused by delayed childbearing, has generated a national concern on degrading quality of population, since maternal old age has known to be one of the critical risk factors of adverse birth outcomes from a biological perspective. However, given the facts that late marriage and childbearing are mainly caused by social factors (e.g., economic crisis and increased female labor force participation) and that their social meanings have dramatically changed for the past decade, late childbearing should be examined from a social perspective. As delayed childbearing is considered normal, it may not as strong a determinant of adverse birth outcomes as it used to be. This study examines the changing magnitude of demographic and social risk factors on adverse birth outcomes in Korea during the period of lowest-low fertility.	Youngtae	 Cho	Robert	A. Hummer	Sung	Won  Jung
2009	164	Intrahousehold Relationships in Non-Western Societies	Daughters-In-Law and Mothers-In-Law: Determinants of Relationship Happiness	Despite much emphasis on the extended family system in many non-Western settings, research on dynamics of these relationships is sparse. This study investigates the impact of family integration on a fundamental relationship in the Nepalese extended family: the mother-in-law/daughter-in-law relationship. I hypothesize that when a daughter-in-law is integrated into her husband's family she perceives a happier relationship with her mother-in-law. Using individual interview data, I test two mechanisms of family integration: a daughter-in-law's childbearing experiences and religiosity. Empirical analyses demonstrate that the more children she has born, the happier the daughter-in-law perceives the relationship. The number of sons she has born yields even stronger results. A daughter-in-law's religiosity also increases her reported happiness in her relationship with her mother-in-law. Religiosity retains a strong positive impact even when childbearing experiences are considered. These findings point to the importance of studying in-law relationships as a particular aspect of the kinship system.	Cynthia	F. Link
2009	164	Intrahousehold Relationships in Non-Western Societies	Fathering in Kin Networks: A Comparison of  Low-Income Families in South Africa and the U.S.	In this paper, we draw on ethnographic data on men who fathered children in the 1995-2005 period in South Africa and the U.S. to demonstrate that fathers’ roles as “kin workers” enable them to meet the culturally-defined criteria for responsible fathers in two economically fragile contexts. The examination of kin networks shifts the focus from intrahouseold to interhousehold linkages. Black men in both societies face enormous challenges including structural inequalities that have precluded them from accessing stable employment, legacies of racism, and increasing rates of incarceration and HIV/AIDS that are disproportionately affecting black communities. We examine three processes: (1) how are young men socialized by their kin networks into roles as caregivers and providers? (2) how do kin networks negotiate a set of expectations for fathering, even if father roles are ambiguous and changing? and (3)how are kin strategies for father involvement shaped by local and global political economies?	Sangeetha	 Madhavan	Kevin	 Roy
2009	164	Intrahousehold Relationships in Non-Western Societies	Co-Residence of Divorced and Widowed Adult Children with Their Mothers in South Korea	In Korea, the recent rapid rise in divorce has important implications for well-being of divorced parents and their children, who receive weak public support. Alternatively, the extended family system has played an important role in providing emotional and economic support to single-parent families. Korea is a country with “strong family ties” and co-residence with grandparents  is particularly important for children of single parents. Using data from Korean Longitudinal Study of Ageing, which was conducted in 2006, I examine prevalence of co-residence of the divorced/widowed adult child with her/his mother and explore both parent’s and the adult child’s characteristics that affect co-residence. Specifically, mother-level analysis shows that Korean mothers (age 60+) have a greater likelihood of co-residence with an adult child when they have a divorced or widowed child. Child-level analysis reveals that adult children who are divorced or widowed are much more likely to live with their mother than their married counterparts.	Hyunjoon	 Park
2009	164	Intrahousehold Relationships in Non-Western Societies	Family Caregiving, Property Ownership and Intrahousehold Bargaining in Colombia	Scholars studying intrahousehold economics attempt to understand the components of intrahousehold bargaining processes and how they influence individuals’ negotiation outcomes. Property ownership is known to play a major role in providing individuals with negotiation leverage. My prior research in Colombia suggests that women are not able to purchase as much property as men. Is caregiving - that is the financial, emotional and unpaid work performed on behalf of relatives - a component of intrahousehold bargaining? If so, does it influence property acquisition? The emotional realm that underpins families is largely absent from intrahousehold bargaining models and ethnographic accounts. This mixed methods paper explores caregiving as a component of intrahousehold bargaining and by gaining an understanding of the cultural definition of and gendered role of caregiving as well as the association between caregiving and asset accumulation by gender in Colombia among individuals in the formal and informal labor market.	Greta	 Friedemann-Sanchez
2009	165	Explaining Fertility Patterns in International Contexts	Socioeconomic Progress and Fertility Transition in the Developing World: Evidence from the Demographic and Health Surveys	This paper examines fertility decline in the developing world, with emphasis on ascertaining the impact of socioeconomic change. We use data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs) to assess the current situation of fertility transition and examine linkages between fertility decline and socioeconomic development. To what extent do differences in the pace of development account for differences in fertility transition and the emergence of stalling? We use three indicators of socioeconomic development: changes in women’s education, changes in infant/child mortality and growth in GDP per capita. We also examine the influence of changes in modern contraception on fertility decline. These multivariate analyses of fertility decline between the two most recent surveys use data from the 47 nations that have had multiple DHSs. Our empirical work analyzes data at three different levels, and we find that changes in women’s schooling, mortality and contraceptive practice are strongly related to changes in fertility.	Amanda	 Kreider	David	 Shapiro	Malika	 Sinha	Catherine	 Varner
2009	165	Explaining Fertility Patterns in International Contexts	Rural-To-Urban Migration and Fertility in an Environment of Change: Evidence from Nang Rong, Thailand	This paper examines how fertility behavior is influenced by rural-urban migration, both in terms of current status and lifetime experience with urban residence. Particular attention is paid to how the effect of migration on fertility differs depending on the duration of migrant experience and the point in the life course at which migration takes place. I take advantage of a unique longitudinal data set with information on women from 22 villages in Nang Rong, a predominantly rural district in the Northeast province of Thailand. I use event history analysis to explore this issue and evaluate the robustness of the findings resulting from this approach by estimating separate models examining the role of migrant selectivity and the potential endogeneity of migration and fertility in shaping this relationship. The results suggest that the effect of migration in this setting is contingent on family formation stage, and is closely tied to marriage.	Jeffrey	 Edmeades
2009	165	Explaining Fertility Patterns in International Contexts	Patterns of Stall in Fertility Decline and Their Determinants in Eastern Africa	We examine patterns of stall in fertility decline in four Eastern African countries using data from four rounds of Demographic and Health Surveys. Kenya and Tanzania experienced a stall in fertility decline, while Uganda and Zimbabwe show no stall in fertility decline. Both Kenya and Tanzania have experienced a stall, and fertility decline continued among the most educated women and in some regions. In Uganda and Zimbabwe, stalled fertility decline is observed among the most educated women and in some regions. Despite continued fertility decline in Uganda, the country has a pre-transition fertility level of 6.7 children per woman compared to Zimbabwe’s total period fertility rate of 3.8. The most common factors associated with fertility trends in the sub-region are contraceptive use and infant and under-5 mortality. Our findings call for focus on specific groups within countries, repositioning of contraceptive use and reduction in infant and under-5 mortality.	Alex	C. Ezeh	Blessing	  Mberu	Jacques	 Emina Be-Ofuriyua
2009	165	Explaining Fertility Patterns in International Contexts	HIV Prevalence, Investment in Education and Fertility Trajectories	While it is commonly believed that the HIV/AIDS epidemic will contribute to fertility decline in Sub-Saharan Africa, adult mortality reduces the utility of investing in education and could thereby stimulate fertility. Fertility decline has slowed and even reversed in some countries on the continent despite lower fertility among HIV-infected women. My previous work using Kenyan data showed that with individual sero-status controlled, higher community HIV prevalence rates predicted higher fertility. Data from Lesotho and Tanzania are used in the current paper to test whether the fertility-enhancing effect of community HIV rates pertain in countries that have not experienced recent fertility increase. I also explore whether community HIV prevalence contributes to lower investments in education and hence higher fertility. Validity of findings from random effects models are tested by making assumptions that allow for inclusion of fixed effects.	Laurie	 DeRose
2009	166	What Subjective Health Status Does and Doesn't Measure	What Do Retrospective Subjective Reports of Childhood Health Capture? Evidence from the WLS and the PSID	Population researchers are increasingly interested in the utility of using retrospectively collected information on childhood health status. Several large data collections have begun collecting such information. However, little is known about the quality of these measures and what aspects of childhood health these measures are capturing. Using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, we attempt to fill this gap by investigating the content of retrospective childhood health reports. We find that overall subjective assessments of childhood health are strongly correlated with reports of specific childhood health conditions as well as reports of health-related functional/activity limitations. For all conditions, the proportion reporting the condition increases monotonically as respondents report worse overall childhood health status.	Steven	A. Haas	Nicholas	J. Bishop
2009	166	What Subjective Health Status Does and Doesn't Measure	Measuring Health Status: An Examination of Self-, Interviewer- and Physician-Assessments of Overall Health	Self-assessed health status (SAH) is one of the most frequently-used summary health measures in empirical research. Recent studies, however, highlight the problem of reporting heterogeneity in SAH, calling into question the comparability of SAH ratings across countries and population sub-groups. This paper extends previous work to better understand self-evaluations of health and to correct for possible biases arising from the evaluation process. We examine SAH in relation to two alternative measures of respondent health in survey data: interviewer- and physician- assessments of overall health. We use data from a nationally-representative survey of older adults in Taiwan, which includes extensive self-reported, clinical and biomarker data. We find similarities and differences in factors affecting health ratings across evaluators, but low levels of inter-evaluator ratings’ agreement. Our results suggest that SAH tends to be worse than interviewers’ and physicians’ health ratings, and that differences exist across evaluators in the thresholds used when rating health.	Kimberly	V. Smith
2009	166	What Subjective Health Status Does and Doesn't Measure	A Comparative Analysis of Self-Rated General Health in Three Developing Countries	The validity and comparability of self-rated general health have been relatively better known among developed societies, but little is known, for developing countries, about how self-rated general health correlates with other health indicators and whether different social groups report their health status differently. In this study, we will rely on health surveys from three developing countries with dramatic cultural and socioeconomic variations: China, Indonesia and Mexico, to examine the validity and comparability of self-rated general health among developing countries. We estimate a heterogeneous ordered probit model that allows for cut points of self-rated general health varying as a function of individual characteristics to examine heterogeneous reporting behaviors among social groups after an approximation of “true” health status is controlled. Moreover, we compare whether the correlational structure between self-rated general health and other health indicators is consistent across populations and examine how reporting heterogeneity affects cross-population comparability of self-rated general health.	Yaqiang	 Qi	Peifeng	 Hu	William	M. Mason
2009	166	What Subjective Health Status Does and Doesn't Measure	Self-Rated Health: Is Happiness the Missing Link?	We analyze the relationship between happiness and self-rated health, using the World Values Survey. We look at the joint distribution of health and happiness in a sample of over 200,000 observations from 82 countries. Both in the case of happy predicting healthy, and vice versa, the relationship is highly statistically significant and extremely robust to the inclusion of seemingly every possible appropriate confounding variable. Applications are in areas like the study of marital status and health. Other coefficients in the models can be very fragile to the inclusion of happiness as a control, requiring more attention to modeling issues in the future. If happiness should be included, then many models are misspecified. If happiness should not be included, then misspecification is not a problem, but justification for exclusion of such an important variable needs to be developed. The demonstrated fragility of the models makes it more than a theoretical concern.	Andrew	 Noymer	Leah	 Ruppanner
2009	167	Union Instability	Factors Affecting Repartnering in Australia and the UK	Repartnering has become increasingly important in recent years as a result of a rise in divorce rates coupled with an increase in rates of cohabitation, a union type which research has demonstrated to be more unstable than marriage. Although a large body of literature exists on the study of remarriage, there is far less research which  investigates repartnering in the form of a cohabiting union. Further, much of this work focuses those who have been previously married, with far less attention paid to repartnering after the breakdown of a cohabiting relationship (Wu and Schimmele, 2005). This paper seeks to address the issue of repartnering in comparative perspective. We explore the impact of children and relationship histories on the repartnering patterns of men and women. The paper uses a longitudinal approach to compare Australia and the UK, countries with similar policy and legislative frameworks.	Alexandra	J. Skew	Ann	 Evans	Edith	E. Gray
2009	167	Union Instability	Union Dissolution in Fragile Families	Most parents who have children outside of marriage are cohabiting or romantically involved when their child is born. By the child’s fifth birthday, however, over half of these relationships have ended. What causes unmarried parents to end their relationships? Previous qualitative research suggests that unmarried couples’ more often attribute their breakups to the low quality of their relationships or to partners’ negative behaviors, while economic factors are more important predictors of entry into marriage. We test this hypothesis and find support for it using nationally representative data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Relationship commitment prior to a nonmarital birth is the strongest predictor of whether unmarried parents remain together following the birth, while economic conditions have little effect on the likelihood of relationship dissolution. We also explore whether the causes of relationship dissolution differ for married and unmarried parents.	Laura	M. Tach	Kathryn	 Edin
2009	167	Union Instability	Post-Marital Serial Cohabitation	I use Cycle 6 of the National Study of Family Growth to examine estimates of serial cohabitation among recently divorced women (N=947). I examine the levels of women’s serial cohabitation after divorce from one’s first husband. I also investigate the predictors of serial cohabitation after divorce.	Jessica	A. Cohen
2009	167	Union Instability	Serial Cohabitation and Family Formation	This paper provides national estimates of serial cohabitation using data from the 1995 and 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. Serial cohabitors are defined as having cohabited with more than one partner and who often have children with different partners. This paper has several objectives. First, we provide estimates of the percentage of ever-serially-cohabited men and women among five-year age cohorts. Specifically, we document inter-cohort changes in single-instance and serial cohabitation. Second, we provide new estimates of the duration, instability and disposition of cohabiting unions. How long do they last and how do they end (i.e., marriage or dissolution)? Specifically, we examine inter-cohort shifts in (serial) cohabitation as a stepping-stone to marriage. Third, we examine linkages between serial cohabitation and fertility, including multiple-partner fertility. We argue that the rise in multiple-partner fertility is both cause and consequence of the recent rise in temporary co-residential relationships and family instability.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Richard	N. Turner
2009	168	Condom Use and HIV Risk	Factors Associated with Condom Breakage among Men in Kanchanaburi Demographic Surveillance System, Thailand	The objectives of the study are to: (1) explore condom breakage experience among men in Kanchanaburi in 2004, and (2) obtain an understanding of social and behavioral factors associated with condom breakage, and (3) to explain whether the diffusion in quality of condoms or factors associated with condom users contributed to condom breakage. It was found that men who had multiple partners experienced condom breakage more frequently than those with a single partner. Those who had a partner that was not a sex worker had higher percentage of condom breakage. Source of condoms was not significantly associated with condom breakage. However, behavioral factors and experience in condom use, such as the percentage of condom use, were associated with condom breakage. Logistic regression showed that the major factors associated with condom breakage were a lower frequency of sexual intercourse with a condom, inconsistent use and heavy consumption of energy drinks.	Donlachai	 Hawangchu	Aphichat	 Chamratrithirong
2009	168	Condom Use and HIV Risk	A Community-Based Condom Social Marketing Initiative in Post-Conflict Liberia	This study describes a condom promotion strategy to prevent HIV/STDs among vulnerable youth in a post-conflict, resource-constrained environment via the provision of both male and female condoms to non-traditional venues like music shops, ice cream parlors, money exchange centers and beauty salons. Community members from four zones within designated catchment areas volunteered their services and the use of their small businesses to support this endeavor. We postulate that this approach may increase condom use among urban youth and community members in Monrovia, the capital city of Liberia. In this paper, we describe the condom promotion strategy and its implications within the context of a community-based participatory social marketing program to prevent risky sexual behaviors among highly vulnerable urban youth, as well as adults within the communities, in a post-conflict country.	Curtis	 Taylor	Stephen	 Kennedy	Wede	 Nagbe	Fred	 Sosu	Daisajou	 Woods	Roland	 Martin	Ernree	 Bee	Prince	 Sirleaf	Monica	 Quaqua	Wede	 Seekey	Barclay	 Dennis
2009	168	Condom Use and HIV Risk	Acceptability of the Female Condom among Vulnerable Populations in the Dominican Republic	Female-controlled methods to prevent STI transmission could be useful tools to prevent STI transmission. We conducted a qualitative study to better understand the acceptability and experiences of sex workers and their male partners with female condoms in the Dominican Republic. We conducted in-depth interviews with 18 sex workers, 15 clients and 7 regular partners. Twelve women had good experiences with the female condom (FC). Most women negotiated the use of the method; however, others used it secretly. They mentioned advantages such as: having the feeling of control” to protect themselves against STIs (including HIV), their belief the FC cannot break, and high satisfaction of sexual partners. Six women disliked the FC because of its unattractive appearance and excessive lubricant gel. All male participants reported a high satisfaction using the FC, feeling protected. The introduction of female-controlled barrier methods such as the female condom improved women’s options to have protected sex.	Marieke	G. van Dijk	Diana	K. Lara	Daniel	 Grossman
2009	168	Condom Use and HIV Risk	Sexual Behaviour, Resistance to Change and Prospects for HIV/AIDS Spread in Metropolitan Lagos	Despite the knowledge and awareness about HIV/AIDS, attitudes of most people in metropolitan Lagos that promote the spread of HIV/AIDS have not changed. This paper examines factors that have been responsible for the kind of resistance that we have been witnessing. The study was carried out in Lagos State. A multi-stage random sampling procedure was employed in the administration of 1,000 questionnaires to the general populace. The study revealed that the psychological nature of sex does not allow people to change their attitudes in spite of their good knowledge of HIV/AIDS. Significant proportions were also involved in risky behaviour by not using condoms during intercourse. The study shows that fighting the most complex disease like HIV/AIDS requires more information about the consequences of living with the disease. People must realize the effect of HIV/AIDS on the household income and the knock out effect on the family apart from resorting to death.	Gbemiga	E. Adeyemi	Adekunbi	 Omideyi
2009	169	Comparative Mortality Experiences	Mortality Improvement: The Most Efficient Country	Oeppen (2008) proposed a concept of efficiency of mortality changes in terms of lifespan gains and found that the countries with the highest or very high life expectancy are usually among the most efficient. Considering the association between life expectancy and lifespan disparity, it is of interest to check whether and how closely the efficiency in increasing life expectancy is related to that in decreasing lifespan disparity. Furthermore, the existence of threshold age suggests that mortality changes before threshold age are favorable to gains in lifespan and against lifespan disparity, and thus the efficiencies regarding the two gains are comparable. Comparing the two efficiencies reveals that underlying the concomitant of high life expectancy and low lifespan disparity is the high resemblance of efficiency in terms of the rising of life expectancy and the falling of lifespan disparity. Best practice countries, with the highest life expectancy, are the most efficient in either sense.	Zhen	 Zhang	Jim	 Oeppen
2009	169	Comparative Mortality Experiences	From the Compression of Mortality Scenario to the Shifting Mortality One: The Canadian Experience	The mortality decrease of the last century has led to substantial modifications in the shape of the survival curve. Recent studies have suggested a number of indicators measuring these changes, which are easy to implement and offer intuitive interpretation. However, these indicators are developed in a parametric setting, which implies fairly rigid theoretical assumptions and modeling structure. In this paper, we propose a flexible nonparametric approach based on regression splines, specifically B-splines with penalties known as P-splines, to improve our monitoring of transformations in the survival curve over time. Our study focuses on Canada, for which there have been very few studies on the topic. Canadian provinces are first compared against each other using the Canadian Human Mortality Database, and the Human Mortality Database then allows for an analysis of the Canadian experience in an international perspective.	Nadine	 Ouellette	Robert	R. Bourbeau
2009	169	Comparative Mortality Experiences	How Are Causes of Death Shaping the Differences in Population Health Inequality between the United States and Sweden?	This paper investigates the cause-specific underpinnings of differences in population health inequality between the United States and Sweden. Population health inequality is conceptualized as population heterogeneity in the age at death and is measured as the spread of the mortality age distribution. We use a decomposition technique to derive measures that quantify the degree to which the inequality difference between these two countries is due to specific causes having a higher spread in their patterns, different average timings of death and higher levels of mortality. We show which causes are the main contributors to international differences in inequality and through which mechanisms they do so. Cross-country differences in these features of cause-specific mortality are likely to be reflective of, and might inform us on, national idiosyncrasies in the distribution of risk factors. Since susceptibility to specific causes and risk exposure vary by sex, the decomposition is partitioned by sex.	Claudia	L. Nau	Glenn	 Firebaugh
2009	169	Comparative Mortality Experiences	Demographic Analysis of War-Related Mortality and Migration in Liberia, 1989-2003	In 2003, the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement concluded fourteen years of civil war in Liberia. During the conflict, the civilian population was affected by hostilities through war-related mortality (both through direct civilian killings and increases in preventable diseases, resulting from the disruption to health care, food security and transportation systems). This paper presents demographic analysis developed for the Liberian Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC). The analysis draws on data from the Demographic and Health Survey and the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, pre- and post-conflict Censuses and data collected by the Liberian TRC. It presents estimates of war-related mortality alongside analysis of conflict-related migration. This paper is the first scientific paper on estimating the full mortality impact of the Liberian civil war on civilian mortality. It draws heavily on classical child and adult mortality estimation techniques used in developing countries and intercensal survival methods (including the Generalized Growth Balance Method and the Synthetic Extinct Generations Method).	Romesh	 Silva
2009	170	The Structuring of Internal Migration	Moving across Boundaries: Migration in South Africa, 1950-2000	Existing knowledge about the actual historical patterns of black migration within South Africa is incomplete at best, because of the lack of good life course studies and the apartheid government’s suppression and censoring of data about the black population. This paper attempts to remedy this using an analysis of individual retrospective migration life history data from a nationally representative sample of the black population collected in 2000. The results indicate that almost all types of voluntary migration have significantly increased among black South Africans during the last half of the 20th century, and that this increase began well before the official end of apartheid in 1991 or the first free election in 1994. The increase in migration rates began before the Pass Laws were repealed in 1986, which suggests that defiance of the Pass Laws (albeit a dangerous proposition) was a necessary way of life for many black South Africans.	Holly	E. Reed
2009	170	The Structuring of Internal Migration	Intra-Metropolitan Mobility, Social Networks and Vulnerability: A Study of the Metropolitan Region of Campinas in São Paulo, Brazil	Process of growing of the metropolitan areas, both physical and demographic, is a question of concern for various professionals of different areas, especially demographers. Regarding migration, despite its importance in this process, little is yet known about the mobility of the population inside the metropolis, although such local migrations may be just as significant as those of people from other regions for the understanding of the dynamics of the demographics and socio-spatial transformations of the metropolitan area. Using data from a survey, the present paper analyzes the dislocation of people within the Metropolitan Area of Campinas (a region with 2.3 million inhabitants), State of São Paulo, Brazil, by tracing their paths in the metropolis and ascertaining what they are like. We also consider the causes of intra-metropolitan mobility, the influence of social networks on this process and relations between these networks and the vulnerability of families.	José	Marcos  Cunha
2009	170	The Structuring of Internal Migration	Types of Migration in China	Using data from a just completed 2007-2008 national probability sample of approximately 3,000 Chinese adults that includes an oversample of internal migrants and also information from recent Chinese Censuses, this paper will develop a typology of types of internal migration in China. Internal migration in China is far more complex than is revealed by the typical study, which focuses on rural-to-urban labor migration of relatively unskilled workers. In addition, however, a non-trivial fraction of people living other than where they were born are urban-to-urban movers; rural-to-urban movers who have achieved formal urban status through education or other personal achievements; rural-to-rural marriage migrants and rural-to-rural labor migrants. In addition, there are returned migrants. The task of this paper is to describe the pattern of migration and the prevalence of different types of migration as a basis for studying the impact of migration on people’s lives.	Donald	J. Treiman
2009	170	The Structuring of Internal Migration	Moving In and Out of Nairobi Slums: Evidence from the NUHDSS	This paper examines the determinants of migration in two Nairobi slums using longitudinal data collected since 2003, under the Nairobi Urban Health and Demographic Surveillance System to evaluate health and demographic trends. The migration intensity is particularly high in the two slums – 24.4% of the residents move out of the slums every year while 25.4% move in every year. No age group below 50 years old has less than 10% chance to move in or out of the slums every year. The annual immigration rate even reaches 39% in the 15-24 age group. There is evidence of intense circular migration system whereby the majority of the slum dwellers are short-term migrants spending fewer than three years in the same slum. The multivariate analysis shows the complex combination of demographic and economic status in explaining migration. Results call for further analysis of the health determinants and consequences of migration.	Donatien	 Beguy	Netsayi	 Mudege
2009	170	The Structuring of Internal Migration	Characteristics of Migrants in Nairobi’s Informal Settlements	This paper seeks to describe the process of migrating into Korogocho and Viwandani, two informal settlements in Nairobi city, Kenya, by examining the characteristics of migrants currently living there. The paper draws on data from the migration and employment histories collected from 12,638 randomly selected participants aged 12 and above in both sites, under the Urbanization, Poverty and Health Dynamics, a research project nested in the Nairobi Urban Health Demographic Surveillance System. This paper gives a more detailed picture about the migration patterns and process – clearly separating issues to do with the migration to the slums and those relating to Nairobi as a whole. Reasons for migrating into the slums are particularly explored, taking into account other factors (e.g., environmental, social and cultural factors) that drive the migration into the slum areas.	Eliya	M. Zulu	Kanyiva	 Muindi	Donatien	 Beguy
2009	171	Advances in Methods for Measuring Mortality	Reducing Ignorance about Adult Mortality: Improving Methods for Evaluating the Completeness of Death Registration	Over 40 developing countries annually report death statistics to the World Health Organization or the United Nations Statistical Office, yet their utility for measuring levels and trends in mortality, particularly among adults, remains uncertain due to a lack of confidence in the completeness of death registration. Death distribution methods have been widely applied to estimate the completeness of death registration and correct for incompleteness. However, these methods have not been extensively validated in real populations in the presence of measurement error. In this paper, we use simulated populations where we know the true level of death registration completeness to characterize the performance of the three main methods in wide use for assessing the completeness of death registration: synthetic extinct generations, generalized growth balance and a hybrid of the two.	Christopher	J.L. Murray	Tom	 Laakso	Julie	Knoll  Rajaratnam	Alan	D. Lopez
2009	171	Advances in Methods for Measuring Mortality	Measuring Adult Mortality Using Sibling Survival: New Analytical Methods and Results for 38 Countries, 1970-2005	To date, attempts to measure adult mortality from questions in censuses and surveys have generally led to implausibly low levels owing to biases inherent in survey data such as survival and recall bias. We present the Corrected Sibling Survival (CSS) method, which addresses both.  Using logistic regression, this method directly estimates the probability of death for a country, age, sex and time period from sibling history data. We apply the method to generate estimates and trends of adult mortality (45q15) for 38 countries. Our findings suggest that levels of adult mortality in many developing countries are substantially higher than some have suggested. This effort represents a major expansion of our direct knowledge of levels and trends in adult mortality in these countries. The CSS method provides grounds for renewed optimism in collecting sibling survival data. We argue that all nationally representative survey programs ought to implement this critical module for tracking adult mortality.	Ziad	 Obermeyer	Chang	 Park	Julie	Knoll  Rajaratnam	Emmanuela	 Gakidou	Alan	D. Lopez
2009	171	Advances in Methods for Measuring Mortality	INDEPTH Model Life Tables 2.0	This work utilizes prospectively collected, individual-level data gathered by Demographic Surveillance System sites that are members of the INDEPTH Network to identify commonly observed age patterns of mortality in Africa and Asia and use them to build a set of model life tables that are more appropriate for use in Africa. A component model of mortality is proposed that facilitates identification of empirical regularities in the age pattern of mortality via a Bayesian model-based clustering method and also provides a framework for generated model age patterns based on the characteristics of the empirical age patterns assigned to each cluster. This is the first major update of the original INDEPTH mortality patterns published in 2002, hence the designation “2.0” in the title.	Samuel	J. Clark	Momodou	 Jasseh	Ayaga	A. Bawah	Osman	 Sankoh
2009	171	Advances in Methods for Measuring Mortality	A Flexible Two-Dimensional Mortality Model for Use in Indirect Estimation	Mortality estimates for many populations are derived using model life tables. We propose a new model of age-specific mortality as a means of improving both the quality and the transparency of such estimates. We describe a flexible two-dimensional model of the age pattern of mortality and fit the model (separately by sex) to a collection of 616 period life tables from the Human Mortality Database. The fitted model is used to estimate full life tables given one or two pieces of information: child mortality only (5q0), or child mortality and adult mortality (5q0) and (45q15). Using empirical life tables from a variety of sources, we compare the performance of new and old methods. We find that the new model performs competitively against existing methods. If desired, the model can be applied in a flexible manner to incorporate non-quantitative information about the age pattern of mortality.	John	R. Wilmoth	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	Sarah	 Zureick	Cheryl	C. Sawyer
2009	172	Early Life Conditions and Adult Health	Birth Circumstances and Adult Health and Mortality in 
Northeast China, 1749-1909	We investigate whether length of preceding birth interval, maternal age at birth, and season of birth influence health and mortality in adulthood and old age. These features of birth circumstances have been shown to influence infant and child mortality in developing countries and historical populations. We assess whether they have longer term consequences as well. Our data comprise a database of life histories of 250,000 largely rural residents of northeast China in the 18th and 19th centuries recorded in household registers. We estimate logistic regressions to examine how birth circumstances affect the risks of dying or being recorded as disabled in adulthood and old age, accounting for unobserved community and household characteristics with fixed and random effects models. Preliminary results suggest that maternal age and previous birth interval influence health and mortality in adulthood. Contrary to several previous studies, results do not suggest associations between adult mortality and season of birth.	Dwight	 Davis	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	Z. Lee
2009	172	Early Life Conditions and Adult Health	Infant Mortality during the 1920s-1940s in Puerto Rico and the Health of Older Puerto Ricans Adults	Infant mortality (IMR) during the late 1920s-early 1940s in Puerto Rico may shed light on the importance of early life exposures in utero and early infancy for older adult health. Data for IMR at the county (municipio) level during the late 1920s-early 1940s in Puerto Rico were obtained using historical records and linked with individual birth year and place using the Puerto Rican Elderly Health Conditions study. We used different representations of IMR (continuous, logit, quartile) and also classified IMR according to the dominance and level of neonatal endogenous mortality by applying the Bourgeois-Pichat biometric method. We then estimated the effects of these indicators on adult health (self-reported heart disease and diabetes) for those who lived in the country during childhood, controlling for age, gender, obesity, respondent’s educational level, smoking behavior, other early life exposures (birth month, knee height, childhood socioeconomic status, childhood health, and mother’s risk of exposure to malaria).	Mary	 McEniry
2009	172	Early Life Conditions and Adult Health	Morbidity and Mortality in England, 1850-1950: Testing the Insult Accumulation and Constant Frailty Hypotheses	This paper analyses the relationship between morbidity and mortality in England during the late-19th and early-20th centuries using a sample of more than 5,000 individual sickness histories drawn from the records of the Hampshire Friendly Society. The focus of the analysis is on testing the constant “frailty” and insult accumulation hypotheses proposed by Alter and Riley (1989). The analysis examines the impact of duration and frequency of sickness at ages under 50 on mortality at ages over 50, comparing: (1) a model incorporating a constant “frailty” term, (2) a model including sickness history data to examine the effects of insult accumulation, and (3) a model encompassing both models (1) and (2). A multiple state competing risks model is then used to assess the impact of insult accumulation and frailty on the hazards of falling sick and recovering from sickness, treating death as a competing risk in both cases.	Andy	 Hinde	Aravinda	 Guntupalli	Bernard	J. Harris	Martin	 Gorsky
2009	172	Early Life Conditions and Adult Health	Midlife Predictors of Exceptional Longevity: A Study of the U.S. WWI Draft Registration Cards	This study explores whether people living to 100 and beyond were any different from their peers at their middle age (30 years). A random sample of 240 men born in 1887 and survived to age 100 was selected from the U.S. Social Security Administration database and then linked to the U.S. World War I draft registration cards collected in 1917, when these men were 30 years old. Randomly selected shorter-lived men matched by birth year, race and county of draft registration were used as controls. It was found that the “stout” body build (being in the heaviest 15% of population) was negatively associated with survival to age 100 years. Both farming and having large number of children (4+) at age 30 significantly increased the chances of exceptional longevity. The effects of immigration status, marital status and body height were less important, and they were statistically insignificant in the studied data set.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Leonid	A. Gavrilov
2009	173	Gender and Intimate Partner Violence	Intimate Partner Violence and Modern Contraceptive Use: Exploring the Relationship in 10 Countries	We examined the relationship between women’s experience of intimate partner violence and their reports of ever use and current use of modern contraception in ten countries. In 7 of the 10 countries studied, there is a statistically significant association between partner violence and contraceptive use with experience of violence being positively associated with ever use. In contrast, women’s experience of violence is generally not associated with current modern method use in most settings, with the exception of Bolivia (OR=1.28, p      	Sunita	 Kishor	Donna	L. Ansara
2009	173	Gender and Intimate Partner Violence	Identifying Risk Factors for Male Acceptance of Intimate Partner Violence in Ethiopia	Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a growing public health concern, and the majority of related research focuses on the context and consequences for women. Lacking from current literature are the risk factors and social context of accepting male attitudes toward IPV from the perspective of men. This study sought to determine individual, partnership, community and social level factors that influence accepting male attitudes toward IPV among males age 15-59 in Ethiopia (N=6,033), where over half of males (57%) approve of IPV. Results of a probit regression analysis show that younger ages (15-24 years), lack of education and the Moslem religion were factors associated with more accepting attitudes toward IPV, as were agreement of greater decision-making by the husband alone and responding with violence to a wife’s refusal of sex. These findings underscore the importance of employing a multidimensional framework to understanding the factors that influence male attitudes toward IPV.	Elizabeth	 Bunde
2009	173	Gender and Intimate Partner Violence	Masculinity, Femininity and Domestic Violence in Assiut, Egypt	Intimate partner violence (IPV) against women is widespread globally. Survey research in Egypt has shown a strong association between a woman’s relative resources in marriage and her odds of experiencing IPV. Extending Komter’s (1989) theory of manifest, latent and invisible power in marriage, we use in-depth interviews with ever-married men (N=24) and women (N=19) to explore the nature and meanings of gender complementarity, status compatibility and conflict in marriage in Assiut, Egypt. We also reveal women’s day-to-day encounters with manifest, latent and invisible power not only in marriage, but also in their extended families and peer interactions. This analysis situates the nature and meaning of “domestic violence” against women in a highly patriarchal and communal context in which men’s control in marriage and the family is a complex, shifting, yet ever salient, expectation of men and women.	Rosalie	A. Haughton	Kathryn	M. Yount
2009	173	Gender and Intimate Partner Violence	Changing Gender Attitudes and Reducing HIV Risk and Gender-Based Violence among Young Men in Low-Income Settings of India	This paper presents findings from a longitudinal study in India focused on testing the impact of interventions to promote male engagement and gender equity as strategies to reduce HIV and violence risk for both men and women. Participants included young men (16 to 29 years old) from low-income urban communities in Mumbai (n = 537 at endline) and rural communities in Gorakhpur (N=601 at endline). There was a significant shift (p      	Ravi	K. Verma	Vaishali	Sharma  Mahendra	Julie	 Pulerwitz	Ajay	Kumar  Singh
2009	174	Policy Impacts in Social and Economic Well-Being	State Investments in Successful Transitions to Adulthood	Over the last four decades young Americans have experienced unprecedented changes in economic opportunities as a result of de-industrialization and market restructuring. States have responded to economic restructuring by mounting a variety of development policies to promote economic opportunities for entrepreneurs and job creation within their borders. This project investigated the effects of state development policies on the lives of adolescents and young adults. The educational, employment and family activities of young persons were examined from ages 12 to 25, using information from nationally representative population surveys. Prolonged school enrollment and delays in the formation of romantic unions and becoming a parent are strong predictors of human capital development and later career success and life satisfaction. This research demonstrates that attention also needs to be directed toward the broader economic context in which young persons grow up, with particular attention to state supports for human capital investment.	Kevin	 Leicht	Elisabeta	 Minca	Dennis	 Hogan
2009	174	Policy Impacts in Social and Economic Well-Being	Partial Benefits in the Social Security Disability Insurance Program: A Policy Alternative to Foster Work among the Disabled	This paper solves and calibrates a life-cycle model that characterizes rules of Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) and Retirement programs, and then predicts behavioral responses to a Partial Disability Benefit system that allows combining work earnings with disability benefits. The appeal of this policy hinges on the possibility of inducing applicants to self-select into a given disability level, while maintaining those with work capacity in the labor force, and therefore keep them contributing through labor taxes to the Social Security system, easing budgetary pressures of the system. Simulation results show significant increases in DI applications and rolls under a Partial DI system: most of the increases are due to increases in applications for and awards to partial benefits; full DI benefits applications and receipts drop substantially. Mean duration spent on DI decreases dramatically. It also shows a Partial DI system, under some conditions, could result in financial savings and individuals’ welfare improvements.	Na	 Yin
2009	174	Policy Impacts in Social and Economic Well-Being	The Happiness of Single Mothers after Welfare Reform	U.S. welfare programs were transformed by the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act (PRWORA). The changes were life altering for those on welfare, or prone to be. What was the impact on happiness? To investigate, I compare the happiness of single mothers before and after PRWORA. Using data from the General Social Survey and the World Value Survey, I find that single mothers’ happiness increased during the period. To demonstrate that the observed increase was likely the result of policy changes, I use a Difference in Difference test. Specifically, I compare the happiness of single mothers with low levels of education to the happiness of three comparison groups before and after PWRORA; each comparison group is similar to the single mothers in many respects but unlikely to be affected by the policy changes. PRWORA appears to have increased, and certainly did not decrease, happiness. Alternate explanations, such as robust economic growth and the Earned Income Tax Credit expansion, are considered.	John	D. Ifcher
2009	174	Policy Impacts in Social and Economic Well-Being	Employment Barriers, Welfare Time-Limit Exemptions and Material Hardship among Long-Term Welfare Recipients in California	Welfare recipients’ employment barriers are widely researched, and policy interest is growing in the disconnected poor. Much less is known about how the more flexible welfare programs respond to barriers. We use a two-wave survey of a cohort of 1,300 timing-out long-term California welfare recipients, linked to administrative welfare and earnings data, to explore the correlation of exemptions with survey-reported barriers, and the influence of barriers and exemptions on employment, earnings and hardships. Only 15% of those with a health, mental health, caregiving or domestic violence barrier are exempted, and one-third of exemptions go to respondents with no reported barriers. Having a barrier predicts less work a year later; having an exemption but no barrier has no effect on subsequent work. Barriers at Wave 1 predict lower income and more hardships later. These effects are mediated by exemptions, and, possibly, by the continued full welfare grant that an exemption permits.	Jane	 Mauldon	Rebecca	A. London	Jon	 Stiles
2009	175	Structural Influences on Race/Ethnic Identification	Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner: Structural Determinants of Black-White Biracial Identification in the 2000 Census	This study borrows from Blau’s theory of intergroup relations, and empirical scholarship on interracial marriage, to assess the effects of macro-structural variables on the likelihood of black Americans reporting black-white biracial identification in the 2000 U.S. Census. To evaluate whether social forces historically shown to influence black-white intermarriage also influence black-white biracial identification, aggregate opportunity-structure parameters across 330 metropolitan areas are examined. The results provide strong support for several of Blau’s postulates. As expected, black group size, residential exposure, racial heterogeneity, racial inequality and interracial educational parity affect the likelihood of blacks in America reporting black-white biracial identification over single-race identification in much the same way that these variables have been shown to affect the likelihood of interracial marriage in past studies.	Rachel	Jernigan Butts
2009	175	Structural Influences on Race/Ethnic Identification	Intermarriage and the Intergenerational Transmission of Ethnic Identity and Human Capital for Mexican Americans	We investigate whether selective intermarriage and endogenous ethnic identification interact to hide some of the intergenerational progress achieved by the Mexican-origin population in the United States. Using microdata from the Current Population Survey, we analyze the extent and selectivity of ethnic attrition among second-generation Mexican-American adults and among U.S.-born Mexican-American youth. In particular, we directly assess the influence of endogenous ethnicity by comparing an “objective” indicator of Mexican descent (based on the countries of birth of the respondent and his parents and grandparents) with the standard “subjective” measure of Mexican self-identification (based on the respondent’s answer to the Hispanic origin question). For third-generation Mexican-American youth, we show that ethnic attrition is substantial and could produce significant downward bias in standard measures of attainment which rely on ethnic self-identification rather than objective indicators of Mexican ancestry.	Brian	 Duncan	Stephen	 Trejo
2009	175	Structural Influences on Race/Ethnic Identification	Unstable Ethnicities: Impacts of Question Wording and Respondent Characteristics	Our analysis shows that question wording in surveys influences ethnic responses and creates ethnic volatility in how respondents label their ethnic origins. We compare responses to the ethnic origin question appearing in the 2001 census of Canada to responses provided by the same individuals to a different question appearing in a post-censual survey, the 2002 Ethnic Diversity Survey (EDS). Approximately three-quarters of the EDS respondents who answered the 2001 census gave ethnic responses that contained at least one match to the responses to the ethnic origin EDS question. Matching varies by socio-demographic characteristics of respondents, by whether Census responses were single or multiple origin, and by the ethnic origin label chosen by respondents in the Census. Matching is particularly low for those respondents who indicated a national ethnic origin of “Canadian/Canadien” on the Census, a feature that reflects the question design on the EDS.	Monica	 Boyd	Naoko	 Shida
2009	175	Structural Influences on Race/Ethnic Identification	United We Stand? The Effect of the 9/11 Terrorist Attacks on Ethnic Boundary Formation	In this paper we examine the salience and stability of ethnic boundaries in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Data are based on the National Survey of American Life, a nationally-representative cross-sectional survey of African and European Americans conducted before and after 9/11. We examine the effect of 9/11 on two kinds of symbolic boundaries: interethnic, or feelings of closeness between ethnic groups, and intraethnic, or feelings of closeness within ethnic groups. Findings indicate that after 9/11, African Americans did not feel closer to other African Americans but felt closer to other ethnic groups, especially European Americans. In contrast, European Americans did not feel closer to African Americans, nor any other ethnic group. These results suggest that recognition of common obstacles and problems can be a way to building the bridge over the racial divide,” but only in a way limited by existing ethnic relations.	Ethan	 Fosse	Nathan	 Fosse
2009	176	Attitudes toward Immigrants and Future Impacts	Sources of Negative Attitudes toward Immigrants: A Multilevel Analysis	In recent times, many nations are experiencing an increase in anti-immigrant attitudes on the part of natives. Most papers only explore one or two sources of anti-immigrant attitudes at a time. This paper tests eight different explanations for anti-immigrant attitudes: cultural marginality theory, human capital theory, political affiliation, societal integration, neighborhood safety, contact theory, foreign investment and economic competition. Analysis is conducted using combined data from the European Social Survey and Eurostat and individual, regional and national level predictors. Results indicate that fear of immigrants or of uncertainty may be one of the main reasons anti-immigrant attitudes arise.	Elisa	 Rustenbach
2009	176	Attitudes toward Immigrants and Future Impacts	A Tale of Two Counties: Perceptions and Attitudes toward Immigrants in New Destinations	The geographic dispersal of immigrant settlement in the United States has made immigration and the integration of immigrants an important local issue in a diverse swathe of smaller cities and towns. This paper focuses on the reactions of the native population to the influx of immigrants using a representative survey from a pair of matched counties in North Carolina—one that experienced rapid growth in its immigrant population and one that did not. In particular, we consider how perceptions and attitudes toward immigrants differ depending on whether native populations are exposed to foreign-born populations. Interactions with media consumption and other moderating factors are considered. The comparison between the two counties is also exploited to assess the extent to which specific groups may perceive immigrants as a threat.	Kevin	 O'Neil	Marta	 Tienda
2009	176	Attitudes toward Immigrants and Future Impacts	The Effects of Future Immigration Scenarios on GDP and GDP Per Capita in Australia	With the Australian Productivity Commission, the authors have developed a demographic-economic model, MoDEM, that enables examination of the impact on future gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita of changes in a population’s demography (fertility and migration), labour force characteristics (participation, hours of work) and productivity growth. This model has been successfully employed to examine the impact of changes in migration on GDP and GDP per capita in Australia and has been fed into the Australian policy-making process. For Australia, the model shows an inevitable fall in GDP per capita in the next decade as the baby boom generation leaves the labour force. However, this effect can be modified in the short term and reversed in the longer term through specific levels of international migration. The comparative advantage provided by immigration reduces in value as the level of migration increases and so an optimum level of migration can be determined.	Peter	 McDonald	Jeromey	 Temple
2009	176	Attitudes toward Immigrants and Future Impacts	Divergent Patterns in the Ethnic Transformation of Societies through Immigration	The uneven timing of the demographic transition in different countries of the world will lead to divergence between countries in ethnic and religious homogeneity. Developed-country populations that began their fertility transitions relatively early are becoming increasingly diverse with respect to the ethnic origin and religion of their inhabitants, thanks primarily to high recent levels of immigration. Many patterns of the developed world, such as low death and birth rates, become universal. The heterogeneity arising from immigration will be an exception to that general trend and will be less marked in many of those developing countries which began their fertility transitions much later. This paper evaluates critically the data and assumptions behind this proposition, whether indeed the growing heterogeneity of Western countries today should be regarded as inevitable, and what the social, economic and political consequences might be especially if other countries do not follow suit.	David	A. Coleman
2009	177	Partner Selection and Sexual Networks	Sexual Networks and the Potential for Spread of HIV/STDs in China	Much speculation exists as to whether China, where HIV prevalence is currently very low and infections are concentrated in well-defined population groups, will be a major stage of the next wave of HIV/AIDS epidemics or whether concerns about the future growth of HIV infections are misplaced. We use data from a recent sexual behavior/sexual networks survey conducted in Shanghai to address the role of patterns of sexual mixing and partnerships attributes (e.g. concurrency) in accounting for differential levels of risk-taking behaviors and STD infection within and across groups defined by their levels of sexual activity, their age, socioeconomic status and migration status. In addition to providing empirical grounding to the role played by the characteristics of sexual networks for the potential spread of HIV and other STDs in China, our results will enable the identification of population groups that are epidemiologically relevant to the transmission of HIV/STD so as to inform policy interventions on the ground.	Giovanna	 Merli	Feng	 Tian
2009	177	Partner Selection and Sexual Networks	HIV Serosorting among Men Who Have Sex with Men: Population-Level Impacts of Partner Selection and Sexual Behavior	Serosorting is the practice of preferentially having sex with partners of concordant HIV status, or of selectively using condoms with HIV discordant partners. Despite many potential benefits, serosorting may be risky if perceived and actual HIV status differs: a perceived HIV-negative individual may in fact be recently infected, and thus highly infectious. We developed a deterministic mathematical model of HIV transmission dynamics to study how serosorting affects HIV prevalence among men who have sex with men in Seattle, Washington. Predicted population-level HIV prevalence decreases when the odds of serosorting are increased in the mathematical model. In our baseline model with serosorting, HIV prevalence is 16.0%, and increased to 24.5% without reported levels of serosorting. However, our findings depend on rates of condom use, mean anal sex contact rates and HIV testing in the population. Under realistic scenarios of sexual behavior and testing frequency, serosorting can be an effective harm-reduction strategy.	Susan	L. Cassels	Timothy	W. Menza	Steven	M. Goodreau
2009	177	Partner Selection and Sexual Networks	Ethnic Identity, Strategic Cross-Ethnic
Sexual Network Formation and HIV/AIDS in Africa	We develop a simple theory of how community-level ethnic heterogeneity determines sexual network formation, and how this in turn affects the diffusion of HIV/AIDS. The model is built on the assumption that agents derive utility from sexual relationships, but sexual infidelity is socially prohibited and penalized if detected. It implies a mechanism wherein ethnic heterogeneity provides incentives for optimizing agents to multiply sexual partners across ethnic groups, and thus positively affects the spread of HIV/AIDS. The theory is tested using micro level data from six representative Sub-Saharan African countries. We find a direct effect of ethnic heterogeneity on the number of sexual partners as well as HIV infections. Robustness checks show that this effect is not driven by a lack of public goods in ethnically diverse communities. Interestingly, ethnic heterogeneity is also shown to have no effect on anemia, which unlike HIV/AIDS does not spread through socially prohibited human interactions.	Roland	 Pongou
2009	177	Partner Selection and Sexual Networks	Selective Mixing Based on HIV Status in Sub-Saharan Populations? Some Indirect Evidence from Demographic and Health Surveys and Implications for HIV Prevention	While most studies of behavior change in Sub-Saharan countries have focused on abstinence, partner reduction or condom use, partner choices and selective mixing may also represent important strategies to reduce exposure to HIV in generalized epidemics. In this paper, we investigate whether individuals are more likely to form new relationships with sero-concordant partners. While this practice has been documented in high-risk groups in developed countries (e.g., serosorting among men who have sex with men), it has garnered little attention in Sub-Saharan Africa. It may however become more and more relevant as HIV testing becomes widespread. We use data from the Demographic and Health Survey to compare the proportion of concordant relationships among recent relations (i.e., formed within a year of the survey) to what would be expected under a baseline model of random mixing. Initial results suggest selective mixing among both HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals. These results have strong implications for prevention and treatment programs.	Stephane	 Helleringer	Georges	 Reniers
2009	178	Comparative Perspectives on Union Formation	Heterogeneous Effects of College on Family Formation Patterns among Women	Despite substantial literature on the effects of education on family formation patterns among women, few studies evaluate potential heterogeneity in effects. Women’s increasing educational attainment motivates renewed, careful attention to the impact of education on family formation patterns, particularly among college-educated women who have a low likelihood of college completion. Such women at the margin of college completion are those for whom the expansion of higher education exerts its greatest impact. We expect that women with the lowest probability of completing college experience the largest impact of college upon family formation patterns. Using panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, we adopt an innovative methodological approach to study the heterogeneous effects of college on family outcomes. We estimate propensity score stratum-specific event history models to uncover effects of college education and examine patterns of effects across strata using a hierarchical linear model.	Jennie	E. Brand	Dwight	 Davis
2009	178	Comparative Perspectives on Union Formation	Ethnic Intermarriage among Immigrants: Human Capital and Assortative Mating	This paper analyzes the determinants of interethnic marriages among immigrants in the United States. The unit of observation is adult foreign-born men and women from the 1980 Census Public Use Microdata Series, the last Census to ask age at first marriage. A model of rational economic behavior is used to generate hypotheses regarding the determinants of intermarriage. Age at migration, duration in the U.S., educational attainment, times married, veteran status and spouse's veteran status, and several marriage market variables are analyzed. The 1960 to 1980 Censuses are used to create relevant marriage market variables. Because of the potential endogeneity of current earnings and English language proficiency, these variables are not included. A measure of the linguistic distance of the respondent's mother tongue from English is entered as a proxy for the respondent's proficiency in English when they were in the marriage market. The hypotheses are found to be consistent with the data.	Barry	R. Chiswick	Christina	 Houseworth
2009	178	Comparative Perspectives on Union Formation	Informal and Formal Union Formation in Three Central American Countries	Research of union formation trends has recently become more popular in demographic and population research. Increasing rates of cohabitation are defining components of the second demographic transition, while in the United States they occur more frequently among women with less education. In Central America, informal union formation is over 50% in some regions, yet research on union formation determinants is scant. Research has shown the significant role of the partner in determining contraceptive use and completed family size; however, it is not clear if the high fertility, low contraceptive use and high infant mortality- characteristic of much of the area- are related to the high rates of cohabitation/informal union. The purpose of this research is to model individual formal/informal union formation in three Central American countries, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, using a competing risks hazard-analysis.	Kathryn	 Grace	Stuart	H. Sweeney
2009	178	Comparative Perspectives on Union Formation	Changing Attitudes toward Marriage and Children in Six Countries	This paper examines changes in attitudes toward marriage and children in Austria, West Germany, Great Britain, Ireland, the Netherlands and the U.S. using International Social Survey Program data for 1988, 1994, and 2002. Consistent with the idea of deinstitutionalization of marriage and the second demographic transition theory, public opinion in these countries has been moving away from traditional norms of universal marriage and obligatory fertility. However, cross-country differences are significant: Dutch were and remain the most non-traditional, while Americans and Austrians are the least non-traditional. In all countries, women, never married, better educated, employed, and relatively secularized individuals hold less traditional views about marriage and children. Although younger cohorts are consistently less traditional than older generations, shifts in public opinion do not proceed linearly in time and uniformly across socio-demographic groups. Increased polarization of attitudes toward marriage and children by gender and marital status might have implications for family policy.	Zoya	 Gubernskaya
2009	179	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Schooling and Sexual Behavior in South Africa: The Role of Peer Effects and Family Instability	This study examines the influences of individual, household  and school characteristics on the sexual behavior of adolescents in urban South Africa. The study analyzes data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), a recently collected longitudinal survey of young adults and their families in metropolitan Cape Town. We focus in particular on the impact of family instability and the school environment on sexual debut and risky sexual behavior. In previous research with CAPS we found that higher grade attainment, controlling for age, increased the probability of sexual debut. In this paper we focus more closely on the possible role of peer effects in explaining this result, taking account of the large variance in grade-for-age in South African schools. We also take advantage of longitudinal and retrospective data to analyze the impact on sexual behavior of instability in household living arrangements and economic conditions, variables that may interact with school environment.	David	 Lam	Leticia	J. Marteleto	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2009	179	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Gatekeepers, Umpires and Commentators in Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Ghana	Adults constitute gatekeepers, umpires and commentators on adolescent sexual and reproductive health (ASRH) but are yet to be given the attention they deserve on such issues. As policy-makers, providers, and implementers they dictate the nature of ASRH information and sources. This paper discusses the perceptions and attitudes of adults on ASRH based on 60 in-depth interviews conducted in 2005. Adults were purposively selected on the basis of their roles as parents, teachers, health care providers and community leaders. Some of the adults were against services for young people while others dictated the type of information adolescents should have. Added to these were those who projected their views, were helpful and mediated in the ASRH problems when they arose in the community. It is argued that exploring the views of adults about their encounters, fears, concerns and areas for action can form the basis to improve ASRH issues and information delivery.	Kofi	 Awusabo-Asare	Akwasi	 Kumi-Kyereme	Eugene	 Darteh
2009	179	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Correlates of Sexual and Reproductive Health Service Use by Young People in Jinja District, Uganda	This study examines correlates of sexual and reproductive health (SRH) service use by young people (14-24 years of age) in Jinja district, Uganda. We use survey data collected between December 2006 and March 2007 from a sample of 1,223 young people living in Jinja district. We fit logistic regression models of ever use of SRH services by all young people and, separately, by young people who have ever had sex, adjusting for key covariates of interest. Married/in union youth, those who reside in rural areas, live without parents, and have an occupation other than being a student are less likely to use SRH services than their counterparts. The perceived risk of pregnancy and of contracting a sexually transmitted infection and the practice of contraception are positively associated with young people using SRH services. Among those who had sex, the likelihood of using SRH services decreases with each additional sexual partner.	Angela	 Akol
2009	179	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Risky Sexual Behaviors among Urban Youth in Post-Conflict Liberia	Globally, young people aged 15-24 account for an estimated 45% of new HIV infections, of which, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is gravely affected (The Joint United Nations Programme on AIDS, 2008). Liberia, a country west of SSA has not escaped the massive and terrible effect of this HIV/AIDS epidemic, especially among vulnerable populations like youths. For example, HIV prevalence among 15-24 year-olds was estimated as 5.7% (NACP Survey report 2007), which is generally assumed to be higher than reported. However, scanty information is available on the HIV risk behaviors of urban youth in post-conflict Liberia. In this presentation, we report the correlates of risky sexual behaviors from the baseline data of 709 youth aged 15-17 enrolled in an ongoing randomized controlled trial (RCT) with 12-months of follow up. We anticipate that the findings from this report have the potential to contribute to the research and policy gaps associated with risky sexual behaviors in post-conflict Liberia.	Albert	 Harris	Stephen	 Kennedy	Pearl	 Fahnbulleh	Momolu	 Massaquoi	Ernlee	 Barbu	Salome	 Garber	Oretha	 Perry	Prince	 Korvah	Moses	 Kolubah	Mawen	 Gobeh	Jemee	 Tegli
2009	180	Child Care and Work-Family Reconciliation	Childcare-Provision, Family Ideology and Fertility in Sweden	This study examines the impact of public and private childcare provision and family ideologies on individual childbearing behavior in Sweden. The central argument is that childcare provision will incentivize parenthood only under the condition that potential parents generally accept the concept of child minding outside the family. The empirical investigation focuses on a multilevel analysis of transition to first birth. The model takes into consideration the interaction effect of publicly and privately provided childcare and its social acceptance. We use the Swedish survey data set “Family and Working Life in the 21st Century” and combine it with data of the Swedish provinces.	Sandra	 Krapf
2009	180	Child Care and Work-Family Reconciliation	The Effect of Child Care Centre Openings on Child Care Arrangements and Maternal Labour Supply	This study investigates how new child care centre openings affect child care arrangements and maternal labour supply. The results show that centre openings induce a substitution toward centre-based care, away from home-based and informal care. This is accompanied by reductions in overall non-parental care usage and mothers’ work, suggesting an increase in maternal care duties associated with the shift toward centre-based care. These results imply that, unlike the introduction of subsidised childcare, increasing centre availability only is likely to have a limited impact on maternal labour supply. While it may broaden childcare options, it is likely to disproportionately benefit relatively educated mothers, who demonstrate a particularly strong response. These findings are not driven by endogenous household migration, and are unlikely to be solely caused by endogenous centre entry.	Chikako	 Yamauchi
2009	180	Child Care and Work-Family Reconciliation	What Is Behind the Delayed Marriage in Japan?:  Do Women Postpone Marriage because They Are Traditional or because They Are Egalitarian?	The trend of delayed marriage is strongly associated with the low and declining total fertility rate in Japan (Klitsch, 1994), given the fact that unmarried childbearing is rare (Rindfuss et al., 2004). Furthermore, past research indicates the incompatibility of work and family, especially for women, in Japan (e.g., Brewster & Rindfuss, 2000). This research proposes that single women have relatively traditional attitudes toward married life, which may compete with their career aspirations, leading to the postponement of marriage. Using data from the Japan 2000 National Survey on Family and Economic Conditions (Tsuya, Bumpass, & Rindfuss, 2008, N = 4,482), this study investigates women’s attitudes toward marriage and linkages between marriage and childbearing, and how their characteristics, including, age, birth order, educational attainment, employment status, co-residence with parents, and childhood residence, are associated with their attitudes. This study discusses policy implications, including the need for institutional support for Japanese families.	Sayaka	 Kawamura
2009	180	Child Care and Work-Family Reconciliation	Because Care Matters: Care Capital and the Work/Family Dilemma	In today’s economy, parents confront numerous challenges in their efforts to balance the demands of work and family. This paper is engaging in the development of the concept of care capital – the material, the social, the institutional and other resources that are necessary for the care of children – The aim is to test for systematic variation in availability and impact on how mothers balance childcare and employment in the American context. Care capital will be juxtaposed with the classic explanations of mothers’ employment participation, namely human capital and economic capital. We hypothesize that care capital—specifically on the provision side factors such as maternal and paternal leaves, flexible hours of work and financial supports and on the “personal” side the availability of a partner, the proximity of parents and siblings and social support networks—will have a measurable impact on mothers’ distribution of paid and unpaid labor.	Dennis	 Hogan	Mary	 Daly	Lisbeth	Trille G. Loft
2009	181	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Behavior	Parental Learning and Teenagers’ Risky Behavior	It is well documented that teenagers engage in risky behaviors at high rates. Usually these behaviors occur without parental consent and teens invest resources to preclude parents from knowing whether and to what extent they engage in such behaviors. This may give rise to parental incentives to learn about their children by paying close attention to observable signals of the underlying risky behavior. Moreover, parents can set up parenting rules which are contingent upon the realization of these signals in an effort to control the behavior of their children. We explore a game theoretic model of parent-child interactions and propose an empirical strategy to identify the equilibrium reaction functions that determine teenagers’ risky behavior and parenting rules. In preliminary work, we estimate approximations to these reaction functions using data on teens’ risky behavior and stringency of parental rules from the National Longitudinal Survey - Young Adults (NLS-YA)	Lingxin	 Hao	V.	Joseph  Hotz	Ginger	 Jin	Juan	 Pantano
2009	181	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Behavior	Adolescent Employment and Fertility: Evidence for the Precocious Development Hypothesis	Long-running debates about effects of adolescent employment have failed to reach consensus, possibly because studies frequently rely on local samples and fail to adequately address selection bias. Namely, the same characteristics that promote adolescent employment may also affect adolescent behavior and outcomes. Using the 2006 American Community Survey and state-level youth employment laws as an instrumental variable, this analysis estimates the effect of employment on adolescent fertility net of self-selection. Results indicate substantial self-selection into work and a net positive effect of employment on adolescent fertility, even in models addressing possible time-order problems. Findings contradict self-selection, social capital, and opportunity cost explanations for effects of work. Theories predicting a positive effect of youth employment on adolescent fertility are divided in their predicted effects of occupation type and earnings. Findings indicating that occupation and earnings complicate the effects of employment on fertility, support the precocious development hypothesis.	Emily	 Rauscher
2009	181	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Behavior	Neighborhood Mortality and Age at First Intercourse among Chicago Adolescents	This paper describes my efforts to test the hypothesis that adolescents initiate sexual intercourse at younger ages when they live in areas characterized by high young adult mortality rates. Using data from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods and other sources, I seek to isolate the effects of neighborhood mortality from the confounding influences of a wide range of individual-, family-, and neighborhood-level variables using a series of multilevel hazard models and stratification on a neighborhood-level generalized propensity score. I find that mortality among young adults in adolescents’ neighborhoods has large gross impacts on age at first intercourse for both females and males, but adjustment for individual-, family-, and neighborhood-level variables substantially reduces those effects, often to the statistical null.	Jeffrey	B. Bingenheimer
2009	181	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Behavior	Beauty, Brains and Bulges: Life Course Consequences of Adolescent Attractiveness, Ability and Obesity	Across half a century, the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) has obtained a rich record of educational attainment, family life, careers and health among 10,317 female and male high school graduates. Using high school yearbook photographs, we have added measures of facial attractiveness and facial mass. Facial mass in late adolescence is associated with early morbidity and mortality. This paper compares women and men across a wider set of outcomes – educational attainment, occupational standing, earnings and marital choice. It compares effects of obesity in combination with those of two other key measures obtained from WLS participants in adolescence – academic ability and facial attractiveness. Biases in household interviewers’ ratings may have led to over-estimates of the advantages of facial attractiveness, but these are not a problem in our ratings of high school yearbook photos.	Robert	M. Hauser
2009	182	Analytical Innovation in the Place & Health Relationship	Neighborhood Context and Psychological Distress among Older Taiwanese Adults: Relationships over Time	Studies continue emphasizing the importance of neighborhood environment on health. Relatively little research has been directed at understanding the pathways through which neighborhood influences on mental health develop among older adults in industrialized Asian nations. This study is to explore the relationships between individual social group participation, neighborhood context and distress trajectories among older Taiwanese adults, with a specific focus on the role of community interaction. Data are from a nationally representative sample of adults aged 60-64 followed from 1989 to 2003. Psychological distress is measured with a subscale of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale. Individual growth modeling used to examine whether differences in community interaction can explain variations in distress trajectories by social group participation. Implications of these findings particularly benefit future policy and programmatic strategies aimed at promoting mental health and improving quality of life among a rapidly growing segment of the Taiwanese population.	Chi	 Chiao	Li-Jen	 Weng	Amanda	 Botticello
2009	182	Analytical Innovation in the Place & Health Relationship	Selection or Causation?  Using Marginal Structural Models to Estimate the Causal Effect of Neighborhood Disadvantage on Alcohol Use and Misuse	Previous research has reported conflicting findings about the relationship between neighborhood disadvantage and alcohol use/misuse. We used data from the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults study of 5,115 adults interviewed seven times between 1985 and 2000. We estimated inverse-probability-of-treatment-and-censoring (IPTC)-weighted models to assess the effect of cumulative neighborhood poverty on alcohol use after accounting for time-dependent confounders and mediators. The IPTC-weighted estimate of the number of drinks-per-week associated with a one-unit increase in poverty was OR: 1.23 (95% CI:0.98,1.56), while the estimate from an unweighted model controlling for baseline and time-varying covariates was OR: 1.28 (95% CI:1.05,1.57). Under certain conditions, traditional regression methods provide estimates comparable to techniques proposed to adjust for simultaneous time-varying mediators and confounders in longitudinal studies. Neighborhood poverty was not associated with the odds of binging: cumulative exposure to neighborhood poverty may influence level of alcohol use, but not extreme manifestations of use such as binging.	Magdalena	 Cerda	Ana	 Diez Roux	Eric	 Tchetgen	Penny	 Gordon-Larsen	Catarina	 Kiefe
2009	182	Analytical Innovation in the Place & Health Relationship	Examining the Role of Social Networks and Herd Immunity in a Cholera Vaccine Trial in Bangladesh	A recent study found that in a field trial for a killed oral cholera vaccine in Matlab, Bangladesh, the vaccine conferred herd protection to non-vaccinated individuals based on the levels of coverage in their neighborhood. However, as in traditional vaccine trials, the study assumed equal contact amongst all individuals. This research develops social networks based on demographic data from the vaccine trial population to evaluate whether or not these networks of contacts confer the same protection as levels of neighborhood vaccine coverage. We calculated the number of vaccinated individuals every person in the study area is connected to and found that levels of vaccine coverage in one's social network are positively associated with decreased cholera risk. The results were more significant for vaccinees than for placebo recipients. We plan to also integrate spatial distance into our model to assess the effects of geographic distance between individuals on these protective effects.	Sophia	 Giebultowicz	Elisabeth	D. Root	Michael	 Emch
2009	183	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Contraceptive Use among Bolivian Women	Despite the investments and advances in the area of reproductive health, the prevalence of contraceptive methods, one of the main proximate determinants of the fertility decline in Bolivia, has been increasing slowly from 45% in 1994 to 58%, in 2003. In addition, according to the 2003 Demographic and Health Survey, about 40% of all married women rely on traditional methods. Among the modern methods, the Intrauterine Device is the most prevalent (10.2%) followed by injections, the method whose prevalence increased substantially in recent years, from 1% in 1998 to 8% in 2003. In spite of being an instigating case, very few studies on contraceptive dynamics have focused on the Bolivian context. Therefore, the objective of the present study is to identify factors associated with the use of contraceptive methods in Bolivia. We believe that the results of this study could be of great importance for implementation of women’s health policy.	Iuri	C. Leite	Roberto	 Nascimento Rodrigues	Moises	Alberto  Calle Aguirre
2009	183	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Oral Contraceptive Continuation along the U.S.-Mexico Border: Does a Prescription or the Number of Pill Packs Dispensed Matter?	In this paper, we present life table results that compare continuation rates over a nine month period for pill users who last obtained their method at a family planning clinic in El Paso, Texas, U.S., with users who last obtained their pills over-the-counter at a pharmacy across the border in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico. We then carry out a hazards analysis of both all cause discontinuation, and discontinuation rates that exclude the risk of discontinuing in order to get pregnant or switch a method. These models include time-varying covariates for the number of pill packs at last supply and where they were obtained, as well as parity and duration of use at baseline. The results provide support for removing the medical requirements for obtaining oral contraception in the U.S., as well as the recent finding that continuation can be improved by providing a larger number of cycles at clinic visits.	Joseph	E. Potter	Sarah	 McKinnon	Daniel	 Grossman	Kristine	 Hopkins	Jon	 Amastae	Michele	 Shedlin	Daniel	A. Powers
2009	183	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Group versus Individual Family Planning Counseling in Ghana: A Randomized, Noninferiority Trial	The objective of this study is to identify whether group family planning counseling is as effective as individual family planning counseling in Ghana, using a randomized, noninferiority study design. We enrolled female gynecology patients from two teaching hospitals in Ghana. Patients were randomized to receive either group or individual family planning counseling. We set the margin of noninferiority at 10%. The primary outcome in this study was change in contraceptive use intention before and after the intervention. After family planning counseling, the increase in intention to use contraception was 4.6% in the individual counseling arm (N=325) and 5.2% in the group arm (N=306); the difference in change in intention between the two study arms was 0.6% (95% CI: -2.8 to 4.1). Group family planning counseling is as effective as individual family planning counseling in increasing intention to use modern contraceptives among female gynecology patients in Ghana.	Hilary	 Schwandt	Michelle	J. Hindin	Kwabena	 Danso	Richard	M.K. Adanu
2009	183	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Trends in Contraception among Postpartum Women in Africa: An Analysis of DHS Calendar Data	Retrospective information on contraceptive use from the two most recent Demographic and Health Surveys in Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda and Uganda are analyzed to examine trends in the contraceptive uptake and method-switching use among women in the extended postpartum period ranging from childbirth to 12 months. The effects of family planning programs and policy in these countries on this group of women are examined. Emphasis is given to specific sub-populations such as those belonging to the poorest socioeconomic groups or younger age-groups, so that family planning programs may be targeted to those in greater need. This research will help frame policies to target the delivery of family planning services more effectively to this group, possibly through integration with maternal and child health services to prevent unintended pregnancy, particularly with short birth intervals. Furthermore, targeting this group also has consequences for reducing the lifetime risk of maternal mortality by preventing their exposure to pregnancy.	Soumya	 Alva	Leanne	 Dougherty
2009	184	Reducing Maternal Mortality in Africa and Latin America	Use of Magnesium Sulfate to Treat Severe Preeclampsia and Eclampsia in Mexico City	To better understand whether magnesium sulfate (MS) is used for women with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia in Mexico City hospitals, we conducted a chart review of women who died of (pre)eclampsia in Mexico City in 2005, 2006 and 2007. We excluded the charts not containing clinical information, bringing us to 92 charts over the three years. Sixty-four women (70%) had gone to two to five medical facilities. In the total of these medical visits, women were diagnosed 54 times with severe preeclampsia. In 12 cases (22%), they were given anticonvulsant treatment with MS (without other anticonvulsant drugs). Women were diagnosed 61 times with eclampsia and given MS (only) in five cases (8%). More common was the treatment with phenytoin, a combination of drugs or no anticonvulsant treatment at all. Despite clear evidence that MS is indicated in severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, the drug is not used routinely in Mexico City.	Sandra	 García	Marieke	G. van Dijk	Jorge	Armando  Valencia Rodríguez	Patricio	 Sanhueza
2009	184	Reducing Maternal Mortality in Africa and Latin America	New Paradigm, Old Thinking: The Case for Emergency Obstetric Care in the Prevention of Maternal Mortality	This study assessed maternity unit operatives’ knowledge of the concept of emergency obstetric care and examined their preferred strategies for averting maternal mortality among obstetric clients in South-west Nigeria. The study involved all the 152 health workers (doctors, midwives, nurses and community health extension workers) employed in the maternity units of the 22 public health facilities offering maternity care in five cities of two states. Results were presented using descriptive statistics. Ninety-one percent of the maternity unit staff had poor knowledge of the concept of Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC). Moreover, only about 41% routinely used the partograph in monitoring the progress of labour. Concerning strategies for averting maternal deaths, 70% of respondents still preferred the strengthening of routine ante-natal care services in the health facilities to the provision of access to EmOC services for all pregnant women who need it. These findings have implications for the country’s unacceptably high maternal mortality statistics.	Kayode	T. Ijadunola	Yinyinade	 Ijadunola	Titilayo	 Abiona
2009	184	Reducing Maternal Mortality in Africa and Latin America	An Economic Evaluation of a Delivery-Fee Exemption Policy on Maternal and Child Health Indicators in Ghana	User fees are believed to represent important barriers to access to essential health services, and eliminating user fees for maternity services has been advocated to improve maternal and child health. Few studies, however, have evaluated the impact of these fees on the utilization of maternity services in developing countries. In late 2003, Ghana introduced a delivery-fee exemption policy, initially rolling the policy out to 4 of its 10 regions, creating a natural experiment to evaluate the effect of user fees on the utilization of maternity services. Using nationally representative household survey data and routine administrative data on reproductive health services, I evaluate the effectiveness of this policy using a difference-in-difference study design comparing early-intervention regions with the other regions in the country. My findings suggest that this policy was effective at increasing the proportion of births supervised by trained medical personnel and other maternal and child health outcomes.	Karen	A. Grepin
2009	184	Reducing Maternal Mortality in Africa and Latin America	Reducing Maternal Mortality in Developing Countries: Evidence from Sierra Leone	At the 2000 Millennium Summit, world leaders committed themselves among other things toward the reduction of maternal mortality by 75%, come 2015. Nearly two-thirds of a decade has gone by and only the industrialized countries have improved on this goal. Most Sub-Saharan countries including Sierra Leone have seriously lagged behind. The 2002 United Nations Children’s Fund Report shows that out of 514,000 women that die each year at child-birth, over 50% of the cases occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2000, the maternal mortality rate for Sierra Leone was estimated at 2,000 per every 100,000 live births. In 2007, the “Countdown to 2015- Maternal, Newborn & Child Survival” shows a staggering figure of 2,100 maternal deaths per every 100,000 live birth. This paper explored the available statistics from seven referral hospitals in Sierra Leone. The results of our analysis have shown that maternal mortality is indeed on the increase and at an alarming rate.	Sahr	Eric  Nabieu	Almamy	 Koroma
2009	185	Household and Individual Behavior in Developing Countries: New Questions and Sources of Data	The Decision to Invest in Child Quality over Quantity: 
Declining Fertility and Rising Investment in Private Tutoring in Vietnam	Despite the recent considerable study of the quality-quantity tradeoff, there has been little research so far on the correlation between household size and household educational investment in their children in the form of expenditures for private tutoring (and more broadly private schooling). Private tutoring merits attention for several reasons. First, private tutoring expenditures may be a good measure of a household’s decision to invest voluntarily in their children’s human capital. Second, private tutoring is widespread in many countries, and it can improve students’ academic performance (Bray and Kwok, 2003; Dang and Rogers, 2008). Third, there has been considerable debate about tutoring among policy-makers in some countries (Bray, 2003). This paper investigates the quality-quantity tradeoff in terms of household size and household spending on private tutoring. We also collected data on a large set of variables that could be used as instruments for family size, which are usually used scatteringly in the literature.	Hai-Anh	H. Dang	Halsey	F. Rogers
2009	185	Household and Individual Behavior in Developing Countries: New Questions and Sources of Data	Transfers in Response to a Massive Shock: Interactions between Family and Public Support	Who receives aid after a major disaster? Longitudinal survey data from Aceh are used to examine the characteristics of households that received aid after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, which killed 150,000 Indonesians. The baseline, conducted ten months before the tsunami, provides information on household resources prior to the tsunami and, using satellite imagery, whether the household was living, at the time of the tsunami, in an area that sustained heavy damage. Loss of life and asset destruction due to the tsunami is assessed in follow-up surveys. Aid from the government and from non government organizations was targeted toward those who were living in areas that were heavily damaged, and, within those areas, to the relatively poor and those whose houses were completely destroyed. Religious organizations targeted areas that were only moderately damaged. In sharp contrast, family and friends targeted households not served by the public sector.	Jed	 Friedman	Nick	 Ingwersen	Bondan	 Sikoki	Duncan	 Thomas
2009	185	Household and Individual Behavior in Developing Countries: New Questions and Sources of Data	Counting Cinderellas: Numbers and Trends of Child Domestic Servants	Counting child domestic servants seems a commonplace task. In fact, it is both complex and important. Child domestic servants are among the most vulnerable of child workers, and the most invisible. They may be treated kindly and allowed to attend school, or they may be secluded in their employers’ home, beaten, overworked and unable to leave or report their difficulties to kin. In this paper, we summarize trends in the use of child domestics in a number of Latin American countries using International Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) census samples for five decades. In addition to identifying child domestics based on employment and household status variables, we estimate the numbers of hidden domestics. We also analyze trends in live-in versus live-out status and enrollment and educational attainment of child domestics.	Deborah	 Levison	Anna	 Langer
2009	185	Household and Individual Behavior in Developing Countries: New Questions and Sources of Data	Home-Leaving and Migration in Indonesia: Evidence from Four Waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, 1993-2007	This paper investigates the patterns of home leaving and migration among young adults in Indonesia, using data from four waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS): IFLS1 (1993), IFLS2 (1997), IFLS3 (2000), and the new IFLS4 (2007). Since IFLS2, the survey followed some members who left their original households, even when they moved outside the enumeration areas, and interviewed them in the new households (split-off households). The number of split-off households in IFLS2 was close to 900, in IFLS3 it was more than 2,600. In the new IFLS4 data, around 4,100 new split-off households were interviewed. The paper exploits the longitudinal nature of IFLS by looking at the patterns of home-leaving across survey waves to answer the following questions: how important are human capital, household background, and the level of development in the sending areas play in influencing individuals' decision to: (1) co-reside with their parents, (2) move locally, or (3) migrate (move outside of own sub-district).	Firman	 Witoelar
2009	186	Using the ACS in Applied Demography	Using the ACS to Enhance Population Segmentation for the Census 2010 Integrated Communications Program	As part of the development of the Census 2010 communications program, the Census Bureau conducted cluster analysis with tract-level data from 2000. Eight distinct clusters were defined with unique demographic, socioeconomic and housing characteristics, as well as varying levels of mail return rates. This paper describes how data from the 2005 through 2007 American Community Survey (ACS) have been used to validate and augment this segmentation. Because the 2010 Census will be the first decennial to use a replacement form, we also use the 2006 and 2007 ACS to examine cluster differences in the propensity to mail back ACS forms before and after the replacement form mailing date. The paper discusses the implications and potential applications of these ACS analyses for Census 2010 communications efforts.	Linda	A. Jacobsen
2009	186	Using the ACS in Applied Demography	An Evaluation of the Consistency of Subcounty Estimates of Population Based on the American Community Survey and the Population Estimates Program	The American Community Survey (ACS) data are controlled so that the population estimates defined by age, sex, race and Hispanic origin agree with the Census Bureau's official population estimates. Such adjustments are important to correct the survey data for non-sampling and sampling errors. The controls are applied at the county level; the estimates for subcounty areas are not directly controlled. This paper compares the ACS estimates for subcounty places to published population estimates. The differences in the two sets of estimates are systematically analyzed, in terms of percent difference by size of place, the pattern of differences (whether the ACS estimate is higher or lower than the population estimate and the characteristics of the places), and the variability in the implied change based on an estimates time series. The pattern of differences identified informs additional research to address the use of population estimates as ACS controls for subcounty areas.	Gregory	 Robinson	David	 Dixon
2009	186	Using the ACS in Applied Demography	Risk Factors for Children in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas: Data from the 2007 American Community Survey	Across the varied literature on child well-being, findings suggest that children may be “at risk” for less desirable life outcomes when certain limiting factors are part of their environment. This paper looks at a collection of 22 possible risk factors to which children can be exposed. Using a model identifying specific factors in four domains (personal, familial, economic and household conditions), “risk” levels are assessed for all children in the United States using data from the most recent cycle of the American Community Survey (ACS), a large scale, nationally representative survey of over two million households per year. This paper examines the intercorrelation of specific risk factors and the socio-demographic variation of risk across, age, gender and racial groupings. The paper also demonstrates the variability of risk both at the state level, and for 360 metropolitan areas in the United States, a unique capability of the ACS data.	Robert	 Kominski	Diana	B. Elliott	Molly	 Clever
2009	186	Using the ACS in Applied Demography	Using the ACS to Document Child Well-Being	For nearly 20 years the Annie E. Casey Foundation has produce a data-based report showing several state-level measures of child well-being. The report is called KIDS COUNT, and it has been produced and widely disseminated each year since 1990. With the emergence of the Census 2000 Supplementary Survey and the American Community Survey (ACS), the KIDS COUNT project has introduced measures from that data source into the report. This paper will document the use of ACS into the KIDS COUNT report and will present several issues that needed to be addressed in using the ACS in KIDS COUNT. These issues include issues of statistical science as well as issues of communication. The issues include the comparability of data over time, the exclusion of group quarters data in 2005 ACS, and analysis of trends over time, as well as an assessment of how heavily we should rely on one source for data.	Bill	 O'Hare
2009	187	The Role of Family Planning Programs in the Continuing Fertility Decline in Asia	Family Planning and Rural Fertility Decline in Iran: A Study in Program Evaluation	During the first decade of the Islamic Revolution, Iranian fertility was on the rise, in part because of the revolutionary regime's pro-natal policies. In a 1989 policy reversal, the government launched an ambitious and innovative family planning program aimed at rural families, which by 2005, had brought the average number of births per rural woman down to about two from eight in the mid 1980s. In this paper we evaluate the impact of this program on fertility in a quasi-experimental setting. We use the timing of establishment of rural health houses and village-level measures of fertility to identify program impact. Our results indicate only a moderate effect of the program on rural fertility. Villages that received health services earlier had only a slightly greater decline in fertility compared to those who received it later. Our regression results indicate that initial literacy and availability of schools played a larger role in fertility decline than family planning.	Djavad	 Salehi-Isfahani	M.	Jalal  Abassi-Sahvazi	Meimanat	Dr Hosseini Chavoshi
2009	187	The Role of Family Planning Programs in the Continuing Fertility Decline in Asia	The Trouble with Family Planning in Indonesia	The Indonesian family planning program is in trouble, but the biggest problem it faces is identifying the nature of that trouble. Politicians believe that the nation faces baby booms, population explosion and collapse of family planning services. They fear that demographic achievements of the last four decades are being swept away. This paper critically reviews the data to show that fertility decline is more solid than might appear at first sight. Contrary to the estimates of the 2007 Demographic and Health Survey, current fertility is found to be at or below replacement levels. The contraceptive mix is where the greatest problems lie. Government policies have led to a loss of method choice and a narrowing of the range of approved family planning providers, but an expansion in the number of private providers of questionable quality. Thus, while fertility may continue to fall, the quality of reproductive health care is worsening.	Terence	H. Hull
2009	187	The Role of Family Planning Programs in the Continuing Fertility Decline in Asia	High Prevalence of Traditional Methods and Unwanted Pregnancies: Barriers to Obtaining Family Planning Services in the Philippines	Evidence indicates that Filipino women increasingly want fewer children than they have. Moreover, they rely heavily on traditional methods -about half of married women use contraception and 40% of users rely on traditional methods. The Philippines has a high level of unintended pregnancy (55% of all pregnancies) and induced abortion (a rate of 27 per 1,000 women 15–44), a significant proportion of traditional methods use and switching from modern to traditional method. The objectives of this paper are: (1) to explore to what extent traditional method use contributes to unwanted pregnancy; (2) to estimate the extent of switching from modern to traditional methods and vice-versa; and  (3) to explore factors associated with women contraceptive use. The main data source is the 2004 National Survey of Women, specially collected and designed to investigate unplanned pregnancies, abortion-seeking processes and barriers to contraceptive use (N=4,094); Demographic and Heath Surveys (1993, 1998, 2003) are also used.	Fatima	 Juarez	Josefina	V. Cabigon
2009	187	The Role of Family Planning Programs in the Continuing Fertility Decline in Asia	Intentions to Use Contraceptives in Pakistan: Implications for Behavior Change Campaigns	This study identifies barriers to the adoption of family planning among men and women in Pakistan, a country with low contraceptive prevalence. A nationally representative survey of married men and women in 2007 was used for the statistical analysis. The survey administered a module that asked men and women about the various costs of regulating fertility and about their motivation to use family planning. Principal components analysis helped identify perceptions of family planning. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used determine barriers to the adoption of family planning. The analysis was restricted to respondents who were non-users of any family planning method, were not currently pregnant and were not menopausal. The outcome of interest was the intention to use a family planning method in the next 12 months. The findings will assist program managers in Pakistan make more effective decisions regarding how to frame family planning messages.	Sohail	 Agha
2009	188	Socioeconomic Status and College Education	Determinants of Mismatch between Student Ability and College Quality	For many people a college education is one of the most significant investment decisions they will make, both in terms of the costs of going to college and of the potential returns to that investment. We consider how students and their families make the decision of which, if any, college they will attend. While most college-bound students attend a school whose quality is fairly proportional to the student’s ability, there are many relatively weak students at competitive schools and even more high-ability students at relatively low quality schools. We investigate the causes of both of these forms of mismatch between student and college qualities, with particular attention to information constraints, financial constraints and social pressures during the college application process. Using data on a very recent cohort of college applicants, we find that all three factors contribute to college mismatch in both directions.	Eleanor	W. Dillon	Jeffrey	 Smith
2009	188	Socioeconomic Status and College Education	Horizontal Stratification among University Graduates in Hong Kong: A Dynamic Analysis Using Census Data	“Horizontal stratification” refers to systematic differences in labor market outcomes experienced by individuals with the same level of education based on the type of degrees they obtain. We analyze two aspects of horizontal educational among university graduates in Hong Kong: specialization of study and locality of institution (foreign vs. local institutions). Using micro-sample Hong Kong Census data we examine trends in the choice of field and in locality of study. Log-linear models reveal increasing gender differences in field of study over time. Next, we estimate earnings models with full and partial proportionality constraints on the effects of specialization and locality in order to see whether their magnitude and/or pattern have changed over time. Specialty became a more important source of earnings differentials among both male and female university graduates in Hong Kong between 1995 and 2000, which we attribute to the increase in supply of graduates.	Theodore	P. Gerber	Sin	Yi  Cheung
2009	188	Socioeconomic Status and College Education	Revising the Pattern of Declining Socioeconomic Background Effects across Educational Transitions	This study relies on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth , 1979-2002, to examine “traditional” and “non-traditional” pathways through post-secondary education. An underutilized application of event history methods, namely multi-state hazard models, is used to analyze the influence that type, timing and sequence of educational experiences have on post-secondary access and degree attainment. The pattern of socioeconomic status (SES) effects across educational transitions is consistent with findings of declining SES effects documented in the literature. Findings also reveal that SES effects are stronger in the educational trajectory associated with four-year colleges as compared with the trajectory for two-year colleges. Further analysis that accounts for individual-specific unobserved heterogeneity yields smaller SES effects for transitions associated with college entry (entry in two- or four-year college). Since SES effects remain the same in the transitions associated with degree completion, the overall pattern of decline in SES effects is less pronounced in these results.	Carolina	 Milesi
2009	188	Socioeconomic Status and College Education	The Economic Return to Education Revisited: The Role of Cognitive Skills and Socioemotional Traits in Wage Inequality	While the economic return to education remains a parsimonious explanation for rising wage inequality and its current high level, this account tends to be limited to the demand for cognitive skills and between-education group wage inequality. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979, this paper examines the role of socioemotional traits as well as cognitive skills in between- and within-education group wage inequality. Quantile regression analysis shows that differences in cognitive skills and socioemotional traits account significantly for the college wage premium and wage dispersion within college graduates. Socioemotional traits play a more pronounced role in wage inequality among college graduates, and the wage effect of these skills and traits strengthens as workers reach their prime ages in the labor market. I discuss implications of these findings with emphasis on the role of the family in wage inequality.	Dohoon	 Lee
2009	189	Parental Involvement in Diverse Family Forms	Parental Divorce and Gender Equality in Sweden	This analysis tests the impact of parental divorce on children’s gender role attitudes. We examine two theories: “Role-restructuring” predicts that children raised with one parent will develop more egalitarian attitudes because the parent must undertake the roles of both parents, while “father-absence” predicts that children growing up in father-only families will be the most traditional, because it is fathers who are more likely to reinforce traditional roles. We test these theories using data from two waves of the Swedish Young Adult Panel Study (YAPS), conducted 1999/2003. We examine attitudes towards gender equality in the public sphere of work, the private sphere of the family, and a combined measure. Our preliminary analysis of the combined measure indicates that the gender of both parent and child matters, since among children raised in father-only families, sons hold the most egalitarian and daughters the least egalitarian attitudes, relative to those from two-parent families.	Fran	 Goldscheider	Michael	 Gahler	Eva	 Bernhardt	Livia	 Olah
2009	189	Parental Involvement in Diverse Family Forms	Racial and Ethnic Gaps in School Readiness Using Fragile Families	A growing body of research indicates that large race/ethnic disparities in test scores exist at the time children enter elementary school. These gaps have been attributed to family background/socioeconomic status, neighborhood conditions, children’s health, parenting and early childcare experiences. This paper utilizes longitudinal data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to examine the role of family structure and parenting practices in accounting for gaps in school readiness among black, Hispanic and white children. We improve on previous studies by examining how fathers’ characteristics and behavior, and a more detailed set of family and parenting characteristics, improve our understanding of school-entry disparities. Our sample also includes a large number of Hispanic children. Similar to previous research, we find that white children are more academically and behaviorally ready for school. Results suggest that while socioeconomic resources remain a key explanatory mechanism, family instability and parenting independently contribute to the gaps.	Audrey	N. Beck	Carey	E. Cooper	Sara	 McLanahan	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2009	189	Parental Involvement in Diverse Family Forms	The Institutionalization of Families and Father Involvement	Resident stepfathers are less involved with co-resident children than resident biological fathers. The question of why this is the case needs more scholarly attention. This paper examines the relationship between the increased institutionalization of stepfamilies and stepfather involvement. It asks whether stepfather involvement increases with: (1) the transition out of cohabitation and into marriage and (2) the adoption of children on the part of stepfathers.	James	 Sanders
2009	189	Parental Involvement in Diverse Family Forms	Mothers' Gatekeeping of Father Involvement in Married and Cohabiting-Couple Families	This paper uses data from the first four waves of the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to examine the influence of maternal gatekeeping on both the quantity and the content of father involvement in married- and cohabiting-parent families. As Allen and Hawkins (1999) have argued, far more research is needed into the specific contextual factors that may mediate or regulate men's involvement in family work. A better understanding of these contextual factors, and in particular maternal gatekeeping, is important in light of recent interest by policy-makers in programs to encourage higher levels of father involvement, particularly among low-income fathers. This is the first study to our knowledge that compares maternal gatekeeping behaviors and their effects on fathering in married versus cohabiting couples.	Catherine	T. Kenney	Ryan	 Bogle
2009	190	Changing Patterns of Mexico-United States Migration and Return Migration	Individual and Household Characteristics of Mexican Return Migration by Community of Return in 2005	Stopping migration in the United States has not been achieved with recent border enforcement and people from all over the world continue to arrive. Some suggest that this may be locking people inside the country and threatening the previous temporary character of the migration of workers by transforming it into immigration. The authors have previously worked on the relationship between Mexican return migration and the rural-urban duality, its relationship with poverty at the community level, and have characterized the localities that are attractive to return to. They now present a profile or typology of Mexican returnees using the complete set of individual and household records of the 2005 Mexican population count regarding their socio-demographic characteristics as well as their poverty condition, with the objective of understanding how they are living after the migratory experience and indirectly estimating the characteristics of people who do not return to their places of origin.	Claudia	 Masferrer	Bryan	 Roberts
2009	190	Changing Patterns of Mexico-United States Migration and Return Migration	Determinants of Return Migration to Mexico among Mexicans in the United States	This paper recovers the migration history of individuals aged 16 and older, using data from the 2000 U.S. Census (1% sample) and the 1997 Mexican Survey on Demographic Dynamics, ENADID. We describe major traits: age, gender and educational achievement of both Mexican migrants in the U.S. and return migrants in Mexico. We pay particular attention to the time spent in the U.S. as a variable capturing unobserved characteristics such as family and work networks, command of the English language and other factors that reflect the process of settlement in the U.S. In addition, the analysis is presented for persons aged 65 and older, in an effort to describe the selection process of migrants who stay until the retirement age and are potentially eligible for old-age benefits in the U.S.	Juan	C. Ruiz-Tagle	Rebeca	 Wong
2009	190	Changing Patterns of Mexico-United States Migration and Return Migration	Mexican Migration, Gender Differences and Geographic Dispersion in the 1990s	The present research seeks to shed light on change in the dynamics of Mexican migration to the United States and settlement processes in the 1990s, a time of tremendous growth in Mexican migration flows and greater geographic diversity in migrant destinations. Specifically, the investigation that follows assesses: (1) change in the kinds of migration flows within which male and female migrants arrive in the United States; (2) whether settlement in newer destinations of Mexican migration indicate change in male/female migration processes; and (3) the extent to which such settlement diverges from traditional patterns of male and female Mexican migration and whether the role that gender plays has changed.	Mark	A. Leach
2009	190	Changing Patterns of Mexico-United States Migration and Return Migration	The Spatial Assimilation and Changing Income Inequalities of Mexican Farm Workers in the United States, 1980 to 2006	The demand for low-wage agricultural workers has been vital to the history of Mexican migration to the United States and continues to be an important factor in the contemporary assimilation processes of a large subset of Mexican immigrants. Mexican farm workers, similar to immigrants in other industries, are increasingly bypassing traditional gateway cities and states and settling in new destinations. This paper focuses on income inequalities among Mexican farm workers living in traditional agricultural settlement states (California and Texas) and those living in new agricultural destination states. Using data from 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005, and 2006 International Public Use Microdata Sample, I use OLS regression to model the relationship between income and destination while controlling for immigration-related and demographic characteristics. Preliminary findings suggest that Mexican farm workers living in traditional settlement areas earned higher incomes during the 1980s, but since 1990, incomes have been greater for farm workers living in new destination states.	Eric	B. Jensen
2009	191	Cross-Cultural Analyses of Gender and Work	Migration, Ethnicity, Gender and Religion: 
Double Employment Disadvantage?	Using a discrimination approach, this paper analyses the employment and occupational differentials of women by migration status, ethnic origin and religion which are identified as the prime causes of discrimination. The literature emphasizes the fact that the combination of a set of major sources of discrimination such as gender, migration, ethnicity and religion makes more severe the existing discrimination. Accordingly, it is proposed that the paper has a good potentiality to advance the existing knowledge on women’s market employment from a discrimination perspective. This paper is based on the multivariate results of an empirical research conducted in the multiethnic and multicultural setting of Australia.	Yaghoob	 Foroutan
2009	191	Cross-Cultural Analyses of Gender and Work	The Effects of Childcare and Eldercare on the Changing Patterns of Chinese Women’s Work Lives, 1982 to 2000	This paper focuses on the work lives of prime-aged women in China. To learn more about the effect of China’s substantial economic reform on the life course of Chinese women’s work, we compare women’s labor force status in the three most recent population Censuses: 1982, 1990, and 2000. Beyond the standard individual demographic characteristics of age, education, marital status and ethnicity, we include variables indicating the presence in the household of preschool and school-age children and/or the elderly and disabled. We find that the marginal effects of these variables are increasing over time, implying that family considerations matter more in the freer urban labor market of the post reform era than they did in the pre- or early-reform era. We also consider how the unemployment rate in their area of residence, provincial average per capita income levels and provincial GDP growth rate affect labor force participation rates.	Margaret	 Maurer-Fazio	Rachel	 Connelly	Lixin	 Tang	Chen	 Lan
2009	191	Cross-Cultural Analyses of Gender and Work	Trends in the Relative Distribution of Wages by Gender and Cohorts in Brazil, (1981-2005)	The aim of our paper is to analyse and decompose changes in earnings relative distribution between men and women of different cohorts in Brazil, using the relative distribution framework. This methodology was proposed by Handcock and Morris (1999), considering non-parametrical tools which allow an exploratory analysis that is independent of parametric assumptions on the mathematical form of the response-variable probabilities. We use density estimates of the kernel probability for each sex and cohort and decompositions of the relative distribution to get substantive evidences for gender differentials and relative mobility in Brazil, from 1981 to 2005.	Ana	 Oliveira	Raquel	 Guimarães
2009	191	Cross-Cultural Analyses of Gender and Work	Risk of Divorce and Labor Supply Behavior of Women and Men	This paper investigates the effect of an increase in the divorce risk on the labour supply behaviour of men and women. Previous literature has frequently used the gradual introduction of the unilateral divorce law across different states of the U.S. to account for exogenous increase in the risk of divorce. In this paper we discuss that the legalization of divorce in Ireland in 1996, constitutes a better source of exogenous divorce risk. Then, we follow the labour supply behaviour of individuals who were married before the law passed. We apply a differences-in-differences approach where we use as comparison groups either married individuals in other European countries (who are not affected by the law) or married Irish people who were not affected by the increase in the risk of divorce caused by the law (for example very religious individuals).	Berkay	 Ozcan	Libertad	 Gonzalez
2009	192	Retirement Transitions	Older Adults and Nonmetro Population Growth: Toward a Life Course Theory of Migration	I analyzed the 1992-2004 waves of the national Health and Retirement Survey. In 1992, study respondents had an average age of 56 and about 10% were retired. In 2004, they had an average age of 68 and a 58% majority were retired. About 18% migrated at least once during the 12 years. Event history analysis revealed that transitions in retirement, marital and health statuses were critical in pulling older adults into migration streams and routing their destinations to nonmetro retirement/recreation (R/R) counties, all other nonmetro counties or metro counties. Of special interest is the finding that worsening health unexpectedly raised the odds of migration to nonmetro R/R counties. Therefore, the life course theory appears useful in interpreting older adult migration circa retirement (Stage-1 migration). Future research should explore how changes in older adults' health affect their chances of and directions of migration in the post-retirement stages of the life course.	Nan	E. Johnson
2009	192	Retirement Transitions	Taking Different Paths: Diversity in Retirement Migration Patterns	Retirement migration as a development strategy is beginning to receive increased attention from rural policy-makers. However, the causal model of retirement migration that is usually presented is greatly oversimplified. This study attempts to broaden current retirement migration theory and methods by examining counties’ percentile ranks on net migration rates of older people by age, sex and race-ethnicity groups. These ranks are both mapped and modeled through regression analysis. Explanatory variables include natural amenities, average business size, measures of employment concentration in key sectors and demographic indicators such as population size, population change, urbanization and the proportion of people in various older age categories. Results indicate that the model predicts the migration rates of younger old people and non-Hispanic whites much better than for other groups. Finally, the discussion is extended through the exploratory use of measures for health service availability and regression models with spatially lagged dependent variables.	Benjamin	C. Bolender
2009	192	Retirement Transitions	The Gender Gap in Help Work: Does it Decline at Older Ages?	This paper examines changes in the gender gap in “help work,” (informal support and care) as adults age from their fifties into their mid-sixties and move toward retirement. During this life course phase, we anticipate a narrowing of gender differences as men and women face fewer constraints on their time, and their relative resources in terms of income have become more similar. We base our analysis on the 1992-1993 and 2004 waves of the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, which has followed the lives of a sample of 1,957 Wisconsin high school graduates. Our analysis will first assess the gender gap in help work for adults in their fifties, to determine whether and in what ways women shoulder a greater burden of care than men. We then examine changes in the gender gap as adults age into their sixties, to determine if indeed, relatively more men step forward into caring roles.	Joan	R. Kahn	Suzanne	M. Bianchi	Brittany	S. McGill
2009	192	Retirement Transitions	The Third Way? Older Workers' and Younger Retirees' Time in Paid Work and Civic Engagement	Research underscores social engagement in meaningful activities as key to health and well-being, with retirement age Americans at risk of isolation We draw on time-use data from the American Time Use Survey (2003-2006) to examine daily time spent in either paid or unpaid (volunteer) work for 5-year subgroups of American men and women ages 40-70. Some college education and low non-self earned income predict continued employment for older adults, as does being white. Having children still at home and/or caring for an aging relative reduces time spent in paid work for men and women in their 40s, and for women in their 50s. Volunteering predicts less time spent in employment for men in their 40s and 60s, and for women in their 40s and later 50s. Time spent in paid and volunteer work has increased for older Americans from 2003 to 2006. Health (2006 only) predicts more time in volunteering and employment.	Phyllis	 Moen	Sarah	 Flood	Vincent	 Louis
2010	1	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Lowest-Low Fertility: A Theory of Normative Rigidity and Economic Context	Explaining the emergence of “lowest-low” fertility in postindustrial societies is a central concern of contemporary demography. Recent work has brought gender equity issues more centrally into theoretical formulations regarding lowest-low fertility. We build on this and accentuate the norms that affect men’s behavior as well as women’s. Of particular importance, we argue, are norms regarding men’s proper fulfillment of the breadwinner role. The paper develops a theoretical framework for explaining lowest-low fertility that prioritizes the strength and rigidity of family- and gender-role norms in a country together with the structural environment that facilitates or hampers adherence to these norms, especially on the part of men.	Mary	 Brinton	Dong	Ju  Lee
2010	1	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Support Environments for Families and Fertility Intentions	We examine how supports for child rearing are related to mothers’ intentions to have a second or higher order child in a set of European societies that is heterogeneous in terms of supports and fertility levels. Our paper tests the general hypothesis that greater support for child rearing from partners, extended families, and governmental and labor market sources is positively associated with fertility intentions. Using data from the second wave of the European Social Survey, collected in 2004-05, we examine how support for parenting at the country-, regional-, and individual levels is associated with the intention to progress to higher parities using a series of multilevel statistical models. We find evidence that macro-level environments that are relatively more supportive of mothers are associated with positive fertility intentions. Among the domains we analyze, institutional supports seem to be particularly strong correlates of fertility intentions.	Kristen	 Harknett	Carla	 Medalia
2010	1	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Gender Equality and Fertility: Which Equality Matters?	Does gender equality matter for fertility? Demographic findings on this question are rather inconclusive. We argue that there are several dimensions of gender equality, situated in place and time, and they are differently related to fertility. To substantiate our position we study the impact of three gender dimensions on women´s and men´s intention to have a first and a subsequent child in countries with different gender-equity status and different fertility levels: France, Germany, Norway, Italy, The Netherlands, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Russia, and Georgia. We apply multilevel logistic regressions to data from the Generations and Gender Survey. We find that full-time employment, the maintenance of financial resources and the availability of childcare are essential for women´s and men´s parenthood intentions, but women seem to make their decisions more dependent on these factors than men do. Regarding subsequent children, gender inequality becomes more prevalent in countries which do not support gender equity.	Trude	 Lappegård	Daniele	 Vignoli	Dorothea	 Rieck	Cornelia	 Muresan
2010	1	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Social Capital and Pressure in Fertility Decision-Making: Second and Third Birth in France, Germany and Bulgaria	This paper investigates the importance of personal networks for men and women as determinants of intentions to have a second or third child. Using two sociological concepts, social capital and social pressure, we aim to examine the role of an individual’s web of informal relationships with a partner, relatives and peers on the decision to have another child. We adopt a cross-national approach (France, Germany and Bulgaria) to measure how the impact of networks depends upon institutional circumstances. We engage in logit models for men and women, using the GGS data, that provide us with information about expectations from kin and friends, and two fertility-relevant resources: (i) help with childcare, and (ii) emotional support. Results show that the impact of personal networks on second and third birth intentions is stronger in less family-supportive institutional contexts. Moreover, this study extends existing research by providing an innovative measurement of social capital.	Nicoletta	 Balbo
2010	2	Aging and Inequality: Disparities in Health, Wealth and Well-Being	The Rich Are Less Likely to Become Unhealthy, and Survive Better Afterwards. Which Advantage is Bigger?	Why a better socioeconomic (SES) position is associated with higher life expectancy is a longstanding question among social researchers. This article adds to the literature by decomposing the socioeconomic gradient (measured by education) in mortality into three parts: the gradient in the transition rate from healthy to unhealthy, the gradient in mortality rates before the transition, and the gradient in mortality after the transition. Follow up data is used to compute those rates, and their SES gradients are estimated with Cox regressions.. Results show that even though the SES gradient in each of the three rates is not substantially different, the gradient in survivorship after reaching poor health is by far the most important component; both the high death rates among the unhealthy and the high prevalence of unhealthiness explain this result. These findings call attention on the double impact of choosing a particular definition of unhealthiness.	Ruben	 Castro
2010	2	Aging and Inequality: Disparities in Health, Wealth and Well-Being	Smoking Cessation among Older Americans	Smoking cessation at every stage of the life-cycle and particularly among older Americans is an important part of a broad smoking cessation policy effort. We use retrospectively reported smoking behavior from two major data sets (PSID and CPS) to study economic determinants of decisions to quit. With these data we map tobacco control policies to individuals over their whole smoking lives. Consequently, we exploit more policy variation than the existing literature. Further we model how decisions to quit vary with events such as marriage, divorce, pregnancy, births, deaths of family members, and health shocks such as a heart attack, diagnoses of cancer, or stroke. Our results present a richer description of how policies affect decisions, controlling for the simultaneous occurrence of other important life events. Because medical evidence suggests that smokers enjoy health benefits even when they quit at older ages, our estimates have important policy implications.	Dean	R. Lillard	Donald	 Kenkel	Alan	 Mathios
2010	2	Aging and Inequality: Disparities in Health, Wealth and Well-Being	Live and Learn: Does Education Lead to Longer Lives?	A large literature establishes a positive and economically meaningful correlation between mortality and education. However, few previous studies have explored whether the relationship is causal. We use variation in compulsory schooling laws over 100 years across 50 states as instruments to predict educational attainment. We improve on the previous literature by using these unique and comprehensive data that encompass the complete history of compulsory schooling laws. We match these laws to respondents to the PSID. We also contribute a new algorithm that allows us to identify places of residence in every year of life. Using individual-level mortality data we find that our more accurate measure of the number of years of compulsory education is a strong (F=15.44) instrument for education. Our estimates suggest that an additional year of compulsory schooling reduces one's probability of death in the next five years by 2-3%.	Eamon	 Molloy
2010	2	Aging and Inequality: Disparities in Health, Wealth and Well-Being	Disparities in Health, Wealth, and Well-Being among Elderly in Developing Countries: Evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Survey	The complex relationship between aging and inequality is inextricably linked to the complex relationship between health, wealth, and well-being of the elderly. Inequalities in health may reflect and at the same time reinforce inequalities in other domain including wealth. This paper looks at the inter-relationships between health, wealth, and well being of the elderly in the context of a developing country, using data from four waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey that span over 14 years. Using longitudinal data allow us to incorporate some dynamics into our analysis of the two-way relationships between wealth and health. Recognizing the multi-dimensionality of health, we look at a number of health measures collected in the IFLS, including subjective measures such as the self-reported general health status, ADL/IADL, a version of the CES-D measure of depression, and objective health measures such as hemoglobin levels, body mass indices, and a measure of cognitive capability.	Firman	 Witoelar	John	 Strauss	Bondan	 Sikoki
2010	3	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Longer Life vs. Better Life: Life Expectancy for US Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics	Hispanics in the U.S. have life expectancies comparable to non-Hispanic whites, despite their disadvantaged socioeconomic status - a pattern coined the Hispanic Paradox. This study uses five waves of the Health and Retirement Study (1998-2006) to examine whether the Hispanic paradox in mortality extends to disability for persons aged 50 and older. Life expectancies with and without activities of daily living (ADL) disability are calculated and simulated using the SPACE (Stochastic Population Analysis for Complex Events) program introduced by Cai et al. (2008) for six race-gender groups: non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and Hispanic men and women. For non-Hispanic blacks and whites only, the result shows a clear association between SES and mortality, and between disability and mortality. Although Hispanics have comparable life expectancy to whites, they live more years with disabilities. Thus, the disability-mortality link is weaker among Hispanics, and the Hispanic mortality paradox does not extend to disability.	Chi-Tsun	 Chiu	Dustin	C. Brown	Jennifer	Karas Montez
2010	3	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Race/Ethnicity, Nativity and Morbidity Trajectories	Cross-sectional studies have shown that morbidity levels vary by race/ethnicity and nativity; however, little is known about racial/ethnic/nativity disparities in the rate of accumulation of life-threatening chronic conditions (e.g. cancer, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, and stroke). This study utilizes a life course framework, seven waves of data from the Health and Retirement Study, and growth curve models to investigate race/ethnic/nativity inequality in morbidity age-trajectories. In addition, I examine the extent to which group differences in life course capital (e.g. social origins, SES, marriage, and health behaviors) account for health disparities. Results reveal that both chronic condition levels and rates of accumulation vary by race/ethnicity/nativity, net of death and dropout attrition. Native-born blacks and Hispanics have worse morbidity trajectories than their white counterparts, and there is clear evidence of an immigrant health advantage across all racial/ethnic groups, which appears to be the result of a healthy migrant selection effect.	Tyson	H. Brown
2010	3	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Racial / Ethnic Differences in the Relationship between Childhood Disadvantage, Military Service, and Men's Later-Life Health	Data from the 1992-2006 HRS are used to examine whether the effects of childhood disadvantage on later-life health are mediated or moderated by military service, and whether the observed relationships vary by race/ethnicity. Comparisons are made between nonveterans, veterans with no wartime service, and veterans with wartime service. Growth curve models predicting ADL limitations and self-rated health are estimated. The results indicate that military service does not mediate the observed relationship between childhood disadvantage and later-life health trajectories. Military service does moderate that relationship for Whites and Hispanics, but not Blacks; for Whites and Hispanics, military service offsets some of the negative effect of childhood SES disadvantage on later-life health. Military service also has independent effects on later-life health for all three racial/ethnic groups, although some of those effects are mediated by mid- to late-life characteristics.	Janet	M. Wilmoth	Andrew	S. London	Wendy	 Parker	Glen	H. Elder, Jr.
2010	3	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Are Black-White Disparities in Mortality Increasing Over the Twentieth Century?	Despite the vast literature on black-white disparities in health and mortality, so far only a few studies have examined trends in these disparities over time. This study assesses trends in black-white disparities in mortality over the twentieth century through a comparative analysis of longitudinal data from the Union Army Sample and the Health and Retirement Study. The results reveal that despite the unprecedented decline in mortality for both blacks and whites over the twentieth century, the black-white disparities in mortality remained unchanged in absolute terms. The disparities, however, expanded over time in relative terms. Virtually all the expanded gap can be explained by the increasing disparities in marital status between blacks and whites over the twentieth century. In light of these findings, a new theoretical framework has been proposed to explain racial and ethnic disparities in health and mortality in the U.S. and their changes over time.	Dejun	 Su
2010	4	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Estimation of Health Status Inequalities from Prevalence Data: A Risky Business	Assessing the impact that socioeconomic determinants have on the prevalence of certain chronic conditions reported by respondents in population surveys must confront two problems. The first is that the self-reports could be in error (false positive and false negatives). The second is that those reporting are a selected sample of those who ever experience the problem, the selection being heavily influenced by excess mortality due to the condition being reported. In this paper we use a combination of empirical data and microsimulation to (a) assess the magnitude of the biases due to the reporting and selection problems and (b) suggests adjustment procedures that correct for the biases.	Alberto	 Palloni	Jason	R. Thomas
2010	4	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Selective Survival: Consequences and Solutions in Demographic Research	Despite its ubiquity, selective survival receives little attention in contemporary research outside of the areas of mortality and health demography. Yet, selective survival may affect substantive conclusions in a much broader array of substantive areas. Often, in analyses using panel data, missingness due to mortality is handled using missing data methods that simply do not resolve the biases introduced by mortality. In analyses using cross-sectional data, selective survival is generally not even considered, despite the fact that it affects the pool of potential respondents. In this research, I (1) discuss when selective survival may be a problem and when it can be safely ignored; (2) use simulated data to show the consequences of ignoring selective survival, in terms of biased estimates of means and regression coefficients; (3) show how popular missing data techniques fail to correct for selective survival; and (4) present methods that can partially correct for selective survival.	Scott	M. Lynch
2010	4	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Bayesian Probabilistic Projections of Mortality	Every two years, the United Nations Population Division (UN) publishes projections for populations of over 200 countries through the next 50 years. However, UN projections do not report uncertainty in mortality projections. We present a probabilistic projection model of life expectancy at birth. This is done by a random walk with drift model where the drift is determined by a Bayesian hierarchical model (BHM). We assess the performance of our model by fitting it to UN estimates from 1950 through 1995 and projecting life expectancy for males from 1995 to 2005 for 158 countries without a generalized HIV/AIDS epidemic. Our country-specific predictive distributions were well calibrated with 80% Prediction Intervals capturing the “truth” 81% of the time.	Jennifer	L. Chunn	Adrian	 Raftery
2010	4	Methodological Issues in Health and Mortality	Estimating Smoking-Attributable Mortality in the United States: Geographic Variation	Tobacco is the largest single cause of premature death in the United States. While evidence linking cigarette smoking to mortality is abundant, researchers have also developed methods for estimating the total number of deaths attributable to smoking in a population. We employ an indirect method that uses the statistical relationship between lung cancer and other causes of death across populations to estimate the impact of smoking on mortality. We apply our method to the United States and the nine Census divisions between 1990 and 2004. In 1990, smoking accounted for 29.6 percent of deaths among men aged 50+ compared with 14.3 among women. By 2004, these were 22.1 and 19.1 respectively. Across divisions, attributable fractions ranged from 11.6 percent in the West North Central to 36 percent in the East South Central. Our method has significant advantages in simplicity and robustness while producing results consistent with those of other techniques.	Andrew	 Fenelon	Sam	 Preston
2010	5	Marriage and Union Formation	Are Student Loans a Reverse Dowry?  The Dynamics of Debt Repayment and Marriage Formation in Young Adulthood	This paper examines the dynamics of student loan debt and family formation in young adulthood using a nationally representative sample of bachelor’s degree recipients (N = 9,380). Drawing upon contrasting perspectives on economic resources and family formation, we examine whether student debt expedites the transition to marriage as predicted by the economic independence perspective, or delays the transition to marriage as predicted by the reverse dowry perspective. We find that total loan debt is unrelated to marriage, but that the dynamics of loan repayment are related to marriage timing. As loan debt decreases, the odds of marriage increase. This relationship is stronger for women than for men, and attenuates over time. These findings lend support to the reverse dowry perspective, which posits that the financial weight of monthly loan repayments acts as a reverse dowry, impeding family formation in the years immediately following college graduation.	Robert	 Bozick	Angela	 Estacion
2010	5	Marriage and Union Formation	How College Shapes Union Formation Processes	Recent work by Brand and colleagues demonstrates variation in the effects of education on economic returns to schooling (Brand and Xie Forthcoming) and fertility (Brand and Davis 2009). College has a greater (positive) effect on economic outcomes and a more deterring effect on fertility among those least likely to attend and complete their degrees, i.e., among those with the fewest socioeconomic advantages. We extend recent lines of inquiry into differential college effects and ask how they apply to union formation. Using data from the 1979 NLSY, we find that college effects are strongest in encouraging marriage and discouraging cohabitation among socially advantaged men and women with the highest propensity to attend college (cohabitation differences statistically significant for men only). These results question an “affordability” model of marriage positing the largest effects of college where the economic gains are greatest. The implications of our results for the changing meaning of marriage and cohabitation are discussed.	Kelly	 Musick	Jennie	E. Brand	Dwight	R Davis
2010	5	Marriage and Union Formation	Early Marriage and Subsequent Economic Well-Being: A U.S.-Japan Comparison	We use comparable data from nationally representative surveys of women in the U.S. and Japan to estimate the extent to which early marriage is associated with subsequent income. We evaluate differences in this relationship across countries and by educational attainment. Results indicate that marriage before age 22 is associated with substantially lower income in both countries, that this relationship is partially explained by the higher likelihood of divorce among early marriers, and by the concentration of early marriage among women with lower levels of educational attainment. Education-specific analyses provided more support for expectations that the association with lower income should be weaker when the prevalence of early marriage is higher. In the U.S., we found a negative relationship between early marriage and income only among the most highly educated women whereas the coefficient for early marriage was significantly negative for Japanese women in all educational groups except the lowest.	James	 Raymo	Miho	 Iwasawa	So-jung	 Lim
2010	5	Marriage and Union Formation	Cohabitation and Remarriage in Later Life: The Role of Financial Resources and Generational Transfers in Shaping Union Choices	Economic resources play a critical role in union formation during young adulthood. Their role during older adulthood is less clear because our knowledge of later-life union formation is meager. Using the 1998–2006 Health and Retirement Study, this research examines the risks and economic factors associated with remarriage and cohabitation among older Americans (aged 50+). By focusing on wealth and financial transfers instead of education, employment, or income, this study offers a more nuanced assessment of older adults’ resources. Event history models reveal that wealthier older adults are more likely to cohabit or remarry than stay single, though wealthier persons are no more or less likely to remarry than cohabit. Further, older women who make financial transfers to family are more likely to stay single or cohabit than remarry. Last, older female (but not male) cohabiters appear economically disadvantaged compared to the remarried, which is due to differences in homeownership between older cohabiting and remarried women.	Jonathan	E. Vespa
2010	6	Population and Environment	Environmental Degradation: Issues and Concerns in India	Degradation of the environment today not only impacts human health but also has a negative influence on the global environment. Rapid population growth has been the main cause of environmental degradation. For instance due to the rapid increase of motor vehicles in India, the emissions have grown with the population. India has only 2.4 per cent of the total land area of the world, but, is home to 16.7 per cent of the world’s population. With this in mind, an attempt has been made in the present investigation to understand the environmental degradation causes by the growth of the population in India and its States. The three major aspects like deforestation, growth of industries and growth of registered motor vehicles have been selected for the study. A detailed investigation has been done to understand the state-wise environmental degradation and to link it with population growth. Further an attempt has been made to prepare an environmental degradation index (EDI) by using appropriate methodology.	CM	 Lakshmana
2010	6	Population and Environment	Inequality and Household Energy Consumption in Urban Mexico	Studies conducted in some developing countries suggest that income distribution improvements have a direct impact on energy consumption levels, particularly when they reflect the rising living standards of the low-income population. Other studies point to the role of middle- and upper-income household in driving increments in energy demand because of their life styles and income levels. It is unclear, however, whether any of these trends are present in Mexico where inequality remains salient at the same time that energy household consumption increased over the last decade. Using 1998 and 2008 household income and expenditure surveys, this paper analyzes trends in the stratification of energy consumption of urban households. In particular, it explores to what extent energy spending follows inequality patterns. It analyzes the determinants of the level of energy households' demand and compares its composition by income strata (low, middle, high) and across time.	Landy	 Sanchez
2010	6	Population and Environment	The International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and Structural Adjustment: A Cross-National Analysis of Forest Loss	Traditional explanations view population growth as the primary cause of forest loss among poor nations. However, such explanations tend to ignore how trade policies affect the environment. We seek to address this gap in the literature by testing competing hypotheses drawn from dependency theory and neo-liberal economic theory regarding the effects of International Monetary Fund and World Bank structural adjustment on deforestation. In doing so, we analyze cross-national data for a sample of sixty-one nations from 1990 to 2005. We find substantial support for dependency theory that both International Monetary Fund and World Bank structural adjustment lending are associated with higher rates of forest loss. We also find that a number of other factors help to explain deforestation. These include non-governmental organizations, population growth, democracy, data quality, and tropical climate. We conclude with a discussion of the findings, theoretical implications, methodological implications, policy implications, and possible directions for future research.	John	 Shandra	Eric	 Shircliff	Bruce	 London
2010	6	Population and Environment	Revising the Demographic Transition Model for the Volatile Horn of Africa: Population, Poverty and Human Development in Ethiopia	The incipient demographic transition in Ethiopia is progressing more quickly than expected into the 21st century, but in an unorthodox manner that challenges the classical model of a positive, development-related demographic transition. Surprisingly, most of the demographic, social and human development MDGs are now on track, even while the country has been facing the persistent poverty and food insecurity. Our revised model looks at both population structure, economic-socio-cultural-environmental nexus, as well as the micro community and household demographic responses (fertility, marriage, mortality, migration and labor mobility). Micro demographic responses to increasing structural vulnerability to both natural and human hazards are a result of both positive (i.e., improvements in education, gender and health) as well as negative (i.e., food insecurity, land pressure, unemployment, governance, climate change, etc.). We use multi-level sources of secondary and primary data and triangulation of the most reliable sources to anticipate either the demographic dividend or impoverishment.	Charles	H. Teller	Assefa	 Hailemariam	Eshetu	 Gurmu	Tesfayi	 Gebreselassie
2010	7	Fifty Years of Demography in Africa	Fertility	This paper charts the trajectory of the African fertility decline over the past 50 years and provides a critical assessment of the scholarly perspectives that have characterized the approach to African fertility since the 1960s. It examines published literature, with a focus on analyses of the demographic surveys (WFS and DHS) conducted over this period. Issues that have been in the forefront and featured in this paper include: high and declining fertility; pauses and stalls in fertility decline; wanted and unwanted fertility; neighborhoods and fertility; and the notion of a four-birth African reproductive regime. The paper offers a synopsis of the empirical pattern of African fertility decline to date while at the same time challenging some of the dominant scholarly approaches in the past and the present.	Samuel	 Agyei-Mensah
2010	7	Fifty Years of Demography in Africa	Mortality and Morbidity		Eliya	M. Zulu	Nyovani	 Madise
2010	7	Fifty Years of Demography in Africa	Reproductive Health		Akinrinola	 Bankole
2010	7	Fifty Years of Demography in Africa	Research, Training, and Capacity Building		Alex	C. Ezeh
2010	8	Immigrant Labor Market Investment and Skills	Two Dimensions to Immigrants’ Economic Incorporation:
Soviet Immigrants in the Israeli Labour Market	The present research examines the economic integration of immigrants from the Former Soviet Union in the Israeli labour market in terms of occupational mobility (decreasing occupational disparities) and earnings mobility (decreasing earnings disparities) in comparison with several Israeli Jewish sub-populations. The data were taken from the Income Surveys conducted between the years 1995 and 2006. Analysis of the data reveals little occupational and earnings mobility of Soviet immigrants throughout the period and substantial occupational and earnings disadvantages compared to all Jewish sub-populations. Although Soviet immigrants have experienced some socioeconomic advancement over the years, fifteen years after arrival in Israel, they are still lagging behind all Jewish sub-populations, especially behind Jews of European-American origin, in attainment of socioeconomic outcomes. The findings are discussed in light of the assimilation model suggesting that the socioeconomic circumstances associated with the arrival of Soviet immigrants in Israel have long lasting consequences for their economic assimilation.	Anastasia	 Gorodzeisky	Moshe	 Semyonov
2010	8	Immigrant Labor Market Investment and Skills	Entry Earnings of Canada’s Immigrants Over the Past Quarter Century: The Roles of Changing Immigrant Characteristics and Returns to Skills	We examine whether the factors associated with the rise in the Canadian born - immigrant entry earnings gap played different roles in the 1980s, 1990s, and early 2000s. We find that for recent immigrant men, shifts in population characteristics had the most important effect in the 1980s when their earnings gap expanded the most, but this compositional effect diminished in the 1990s and early 2000s. The effect of changes in returns to Canadian experience and education was small for men, but stronger for women in all three periods. During the early 2000s the IT bust, combined with a heavy concentration of immigrants in IT-related occupations, was the primary explanation of the increase in their earnings gap. Furthermore, returns to foreign experience declined in the 1980s and 1990s, but recovered moderately in the early 2000s. In contrast, the relative return to immigrant education declined in the early 2000s.	Feng	 Hou	Garnett	 Picot
2010	8	Immigrant Labor Market Investment and Skills	Testing the Family Investment Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence	This paper presents a new test for the family investment hypothesis (FIH). We show that a simple two-period labor supply model produces testable implications on the work hours and occupational choices for married women. In credit-constrained households, to support the family, married women work in dead-end jobs that do not necessarily require much skill. The support decreases as they overcome credit-constraints. We analyze the occupation choices for married women using a first-order Markov switching model. Our findings, based on the matched March CPS for 1996-2002, are consistent with the FIH. We replicate the annual hours worked specifications used in previous papers and demonstrate that the conventional results get reversed when the sample is confined to women who work in dead-end jobs.	Seik	 Kim	Nalina	 Varanasi
2010	8	Immigrant Labor Market Investment and Skills	The Impact of Legal Status on Immigrants' Human Capital and Earnings: Evidence from the Pre-1982 Amnesty Program	This paper analyzes the impact of IRCA 1986, a U.S. amnesty, on immigrants’ human capital development and labor market outcomes. Because of IRCA, the 1975-1981 arrivals were all legalized by 1990. However, many of the 1982-1986 arrivals remained illegal. Using the California Latino immigrants in Census 1990, I find that the 1975-81 arrivals on average outperform the 1982-86 arrivals in men’s wage, women’s labor force participation rate, and English-speaking ability. This finding is not a general trend of labor market conditions, because the analysis using refugees and U.S.-born Latinos, which are two comparison groups without legal status issue, indicate no difference in outcomes between pre-1982 and post-1982 cohorts.	Ying	 Pan
2010	9	How Do Early Life Conditions Affect Fertility and Mortality? Consensus and Controversies	Early Origins of Fertility and Longevity Among Siblings: Pre-Natal Exposures to Drought and Food Shortages Among Early Utah Pioneers		Ken	R. Smith	Heidi	 Hanson	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Diana	 Lane Reed	Alison	 Fraser
2010	9	How Do Early Life Conditions Affect Fertility and Mortality? Consensus and Controversies	The Long Term Legacy of Early Life Conditions in Historical Quebec: Assessing the Role of Disease Load and Food Deprivation on Fertility and Longevity		Alain	 Gagnon
2010	9	How Do Early Life Conditions Affect Fertility and Mortality? Consensus and Controversies	Developmental Effects of the 1918-19 Flu Pandemic on Late-Life Mortality: Reconciling Disparate Findings		Alan	A. Cohen
2010	9	How Do Early Life Conditions Affect Fertility and Mortality? Consensus and Controversies	Anthropometric Measures of Childhood Health for the Study of Adult Health and Mortality		Douglas	 Ewbank
2010	10	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Providing For Parents: Is It a Family Affair?	This paper considers how siblings coordinate care, both at a point in time and over the longer run. Because few studies include information from siblings about their relationships with their parents and each other, it has been difficult to determine whether children coordinate care for their parents. We look within families and explore whether and how siblings share caregiving responsibilities, asking: What characteristics of siblings and their families predict whether siblings take turns helping parents? What factors affect the coordination of care as parents age? We use data on families with more than one child from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey, a panel study of 1957 high school graduates and siblings. Preliminary findings show that nearly forty percent of parents receive help from more than one child in the form of time, money or emotional support. Our findings also suggest that daughters coordinate care that they and their siblings provide parents.	Esther	M. Friedman	Judith	A. Seltzer
2010	10	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Geographic Proximity and Transfers of Time and Money among Family Members Over the Life Cycle	This paper uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine the evolution of geographic proximity over the life-cycle. I focus on how the history of geographic proximity relates to transfers from parents to children and from children to parents and examine the relationship between transfers received and transfers given asking three related questions: (1) How does geographic proximity among family members evolve over the life course? (2) How do transfers received and transfers given at different points in the life cycle relate to one another? (3) What is the relationship between family histories of geographic proximity and transfers of time and money among family members? This paper provides a basic exploration of how transfers and geographic proximity evolve over the life course. It is largely descriptive in nature but has the potential to shed light on the motivations behind time and money transfers and geographic proximity among family members.	Emily	 Wiemers
2010	10	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	The Intergenerational Transmission of Smoking and Schooling	Across birth cohorts of Americans, education and smoking status in families of origin have become more aligned. Over time, men who smoke became more likely to marry women who smoke, especially among couples with less schooling. We examine how much this alignment of smoking and education matters for children’s life chances. We use a two-sex demographic projection model, which accounts for the statuses of both men and women, combined with simulations to examine how changes in assortative mating affect the distribution of smoking and education in future generations. The model incorporates assortative mating, differential fertility, and the transmission of status. Preliminary findings show that intergenerational results depend on which cohort’s marriage and fertility rules are applied and whether we consider smoking status as a binary status or a quantitative one. But these differences, though descriptively important, are modest. Mobility across generations dominates the effects of assortative mating in the population.	Vida	 Maralani	Douglas	 McKee
2010	10	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Extended Families and Child Development: Evidence from Indonesia	How intergenerational transfers affect child wellbeing is poorly understood. We provide empirical evidence on whether and how grandparent resources affect child health and education using uniquely rich longitudinal survey data from the Indonesia Family Life Survey. IFLS contains information on resources under the control of each individual within households, and resources of individual family members who are not co-resident. Contrasting the impact on child outcomes of parental resources, grandparent resources and resources of other family members, we provide direct evidence on the role that intergenerational transfers play in human capital accumulation. Estimates are placed in the context of a theoretical model of family resource allocation that imposes few restrictions on preferences of individuals within a family. We thereby assess whether co-resident and non co-resident family members make allocation decisions cooperatively, and can identify departures from efficiency in resource allocation. The results are important for understanding family behavior and intergenerational exchanges.	Daniel	R. LaFave	Duncan	 Thomas
2010	11	Economic Recessions and Demographic Outcomes	Immigrants’ Labor Market Performance: Growth and Change over the Business Cycle	After figuring prominently in U.S. economic growth for decades, immigrants have been hit hard by the current recession. Employment and incomes have fallen more among immigrants than natives, while unemployment and poverty rates have risen more among immigrants. After documenting the excess sensitivity of immigrants’ labor market outcomes to the business cycle, this paper examines why immigrants have more cyclical outcomes than natives. There are a number of potential explanations since immigrants differ from natives in many ways: they tend to have less education and to work in different industries and occupations, for example. A closer look at some of these factors suggests education plays a large role. Immigrants who lack a high school degree have the highest cyclicality of economic outcomes. College-educated immigrants also have significantly more cyclical outcomes than college-educated natives, however, raising the question of whether employment-based immigration policies have created a particularly market-sensitive labor pool.	Pia	 Orrenius	Madeline	 Zavodny
2010	11	Economic Recessions and Demographic Outcomes	The Effect of Unemployment Rates on Non-Custodial Parents' Provision of Child Support.	This paper examines the effects of unemployment rates on the provision of child support by non-custodial parents (NCPs) using data from the Current Population Survey - Child Support Supplement. It is motivated by the growth of single parent families and the accompanying importance of the child support system. Also, economic forces may prove particularly important in light of vast increases in unemployment rates in the current downturn. Finally, proposals to expand the federal EITC to NCPs require that NCPs be current with their child support to receive the credit, and so unemployment rates might impact anti-poverty policy in unexpected ways. Analysis finds that the unemployment rate is associated with significant decreases in the odds that parents receive the full amount of child support due to them. This effect persists with the inclusion of state fixed effects and is limited to families where the custodial parent is Hispanic of any race.	Ronald	B. Mincy	Daniel	P. Miller
2010	11	Economic Recessions and Demographic Outcomes	Retorno Masivo? The 2008 Economic Crisis and Return Migration from the U.S. to Mexico	Researchers in the U.S. and Mexico have variously asserted that return migration from the U.S. to Mexico has increased substantially, remained unchanged, or declined slightly in response to the 2007-2009 U.S. recession and global financial crisis. The present study addresses this debate using microdata through mid-2009 from a large-scale, quarterly Mexican household survey, the National Survey of Occupation and Employment (ENOE), after first validating the ENOE against return migration estimates from a specialist demographic survey, the 2006 National Survey of Demographic Dynamics (ENADID). No evidence of increased return migration is found. Statistically significant declines in return migration, however, are found between the immediately pre-recession 2006/07 year and the 2008/09 recession year, and between the fourth quarter of 2007 and the fourth quarter of 2008 when the global financial crisis had just been triggered.	Michael	 Rendall	Peter	 Brownell	Sarah	 Kups
2010	11	Economic Recessions and Demographic Outcomes	The Economic Crisis is Dangerous to Our Health	We use a new unique nationally representative cross-national data set to report an unexpected consequence of the financial crisis: a reduction in individuals’ utilization of health care. We show that large shares of the populations of the US, UK, Canada, France, and Germany have reduced their use of routine medical care since the onset of the crisis. This reduction is especially large in the US where 27% of Americans have reduced their use of routine care. We show that reductions in care are strongly associated with the exogenous shocks of wealth loss and unemployment. However, variation in the severity of the economic impact of the crisis by country does not explain the gap in care reduction between the US and other countries. Our analysis provides new evidence for the causal connection between economic status and health care utilization, especially in a regime where individuals are more financially responsible for care.	Annamaria	 Lusardi	Daniel	 Schneider	Peter	 Tufano
2010	12	Immigrant Destinations	How Skilled-Immigrants Influence Economic Opportunities in  Metro- and Micropolitan Destinations	Whereas high-skill immigrants may impact the provision of public goods and services to a smaller extent than lower skill immigrants, their potential for increasing employment competition for native workers is high. Changes between 1990 and 2007 in the area profiles of economic opportunities are examined for 144 largest U.S. metro- and micropolitan new and traditional immigrant-receiving areas. Annual measures of 1) unemployment by low- and high-skill industrial sector, 2) underemployment rates and wage growth for high-skill workers, and 3) out-migration of native-born low- and high-skill workers are evaluated using growth curve modeling to demonstrate trajectories of change. Employment-related and out-migration outcome measures are created from the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Census and post-2000 annual American Community Survey through 2007. Places are identified as new versus traditional immigrant destinations according to our recently developed typology of U.S. metropolitan areas.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Gordon	F. De Jong
2010	12	Immigrant Destinations	Immigrant Incorporation and Fertility in New Hispanic Destinations	This paper evaluates comparative patterns of Hispanic fertility in new Hispanic destinations and established Hispanic gateways. Data from the 2005-2007 files of the American Community Survey (ACS) are used to address three specific objectives. First, we document recent patterns of Hispanic fertility, while illustrating the usefulness of the new fertility question (i.e., whether women had a birth in the past 12 months) now available annually on the ACS. Second, we document whether childbearing in new destinations is concentrated disproportionately among culturally and economically disadvantaged Hispanic groups. Third, we address whether patterns of differential fertility (e.g., by immigrant status, education, etc.) are consistent with new theoretical models of Hispanic assimilation and cultural incorporation. Specifically, our analyses assesses whether differential fertility is located in the demographic makeup of Latinas (i.e., social characteristics hypothesis), in the cultural context of Hispanics in new destinations (i.e., immigrant and ethnic composition of receiving areas), or both.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Kenneth	M. Johnson	Richard	N. Turner	Allison	 Churilla
2010	12	Immigrant Destinations	Will They Stay? Foreign-Born Out-Migration from New Destinations	Foreign-born living in new destinations in 1995 were 2.5 times more likely to have moved by 2000 than foreign-born living in traditional places. This paper looks at two competing explanations for differential internal migration, namely compatriot affinity versus labor market context. Utilizing confidential Census data for 1990 and 2000, we examine 741 labor markets that cover the entire country and develop new destination classifications specific to the growth and composition patterns of foreign-born from 24 origins. Logistic regression models estimate the relative importance of foreign-born labor market context (wages, employment change, housing rent), origin group context (growth and composition; group size) net of individual human capital characteristics. We find that origin group context has the strongest effect on out-migration but does not act independently of labor market context. Foreign-born are least likely to leave labor markets where large numbers of their compatriots live and that are also striving economically.	Douglas	T. Gurak	Mary	M. Kritz	Min-Ah	 Lee
2010	12	Immigrant Destinations	Immigrant Educational Outcomes in New Destinations: An Exploration of High School Attrition	This study examines how young immigrants are faring in New Destinations using individual level data from the 2000 IPUMS to assess the relative roles of race/ethnicity, nativity, country of origin, and place on the likelihood of not being enrolled in high school for youth aged 15-17. I find that place plays a nuanced role in the risk of non-enrollment that varies by nativity as well as other household characteristics. While children in general have higher risks of dropping out in New Destination communities relative to those in Established Immigrant communities, the risks to immigrant children are even greater. I find that Mexican and Guatemalan origin immigrants are particularly vulnerable, especially in places with the largest increases in the percent foreign born. The implications of these findings for both immigrants and their communities are discussed in the conclusion.	Mary	J. Fischer
2010	13	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health	Community Context and Obesity among Chinese Adults: A Longitudinal and Multilevel Analysis	Overweight and obesity have posed a public health challenge not only to populations in developed countries but also those in developing countries such as China. Community context has been related to individual overweight and obesity risks in developed countries. It is unclear whether these associations will hold for the Chinese populations. Previous cross-sectional multilevel studies also ignore that community context is not constant, but may change over time. This study addresses these literature gaps by conducting a longitudinal and multilevel analysis of community effects on body weight status among the Chinese adults. Three-level random intercept multinomial regression is used to model the risks of overweight and obesity, taking normal weight as the reference. Preliminary descriptive statistics show an accelerated increase in the prevalence of overweight and obese Chinese adults and community context changes that may affect individual weight. The issue of intensive computation will be addressed in the next-step of this analysis.	Hongwei	 Xu	Tao	 Liu
2010	13	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health	Transit-Oriented Urban Economic Development and Changes in Crime and Drug Use	Neighborhood-level interventions provide an opportunity to better understand the impact that neighborhoods have on health. We used an exogenous source of neighborhood change in Medellín, Colombia--the construction of a gondola in 2004 to connect residents in the periphery to the urban center--as a natural experiment to study the effect of neighborhood change on health. We used a pre-post design with intervention neighborhoods (n=22) matched to control neighborhoods (n=27) and residents (n=599) interviewed in 2003 and 2009. Treatment group residents experienced significantly more change over time in the following outcomes: (a) trust in the police (+), (b) perceptions of collective efficacy (+), (c) ratings of the quality of neighborhood infrastructure (+), (d) perceptions of neighborhood violence (-), (e) use of alcohol (-); and (f) homicide (-). This is one of the first attempts to capitalize on exogenous changes to evaluate the impact that neighborhood characteristics have on health.	Magdalena	 Cerda	Kimberly	 Tessari	Ana	 Diez Roux
2010	13	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health	The Effects of Neighborhoods on Child Health: New Data and Results from Wave 2 of the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey	In this paper, we present results from examining race/ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in children’s health and the role of neighborhood factors in accounting for these disparities using new data from Wave 2 of the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (L.A.FANS-2), a comprehensive longitudinal survey of children, families, and neighborhoods in L.A. County. In L.A.FANS-2, new biomarkers of stress and health were collected for children and adults along with a rich set of individual, family, and neighborhood measures. Among the biomarkers that we examine are measures of obesity, blood pressure, spirometry, chronic disease (C-reactive protein, hemaglobin A1c, and cholesterol), and stress (Epstein-Barr virus antibodies and Cortisol).	Anne	 Pebley
2010	13	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Health	The Importance of Neighborhood Crime, Household Assets, and Sanitation Facilities for Systolic Blood Pressure among South African Adolescents	This paper models associations between household socio-economic status (SES) in infancy and at 16 years, neighborhood SES at 16 years, and systolic blood pressure (SBP) as well as systolic prehypertension (SPH) in 16 year old South Africans using data from a sub-sample of the 1990 born Birth to Twenty cohort (n= 429, 75% Black, 52% male). Models controlled for sex, ethnicity, maternal age, birthweight, parity, smoking, term birth, height/weight and BMI at 16 years. Results show SPH prevalence was 11%. Neighborhood crime prevention, household sanitation facilities at birth/16 years, and ownership of some consumer durables at birth/16 years were associated with SBP/SPH risk. Where associations between SES and SBP were observed, low SES households/neighborhoods consistently had increased SBP/SPH risk. Targeting crime reduction, helping neighborhoods to feel protected from crime, ensuring good indoor sanitation facilities, and optimal wealth of individuals from infancy to adolescence could improve adolescent SBP in similar environments.	Paula	 Griffiths	Zoe	A. Sheppard	Noel	 Cameron	John	M. Pettifor	Shane	 Norris
2010	14	Formal Demography and Survival Analysis	A Simple Approach to Assess Group Differences in Estimated Baseline Survivor Functions from Cox Proportional Hazards Models	We develop a heuristic approach to generate the expected events that would occur under a Cox proportional hazards model and illustrate how the results can be used to test for group differences in the resulting risk-adjusted survivor distributions. The estimated baseline survivor functions from a Cox proportional hazards models fit separately for two groups are used to construct the expected number of events occurring at each event time, the expected number of interval-censored observations, and the adjusted risk set corresponding to the expected decrements due to events and censoring for each group. Differences in the resulting expected survival distributions can be tested using log-rank and generalized Wilcoxon tests. This method should also prove useful for making other kinds of comparisons of adjusted life tables.	Daniel	A. Powers
2010	14	Formal Demography and Survival Analysis	New Methodology for Multivariate Analysis of the Total Fertility Rate and Its Components Based on Birth-History Data	A discrete-time survival model is used to model parity progression from woman’s own birth to first marriage, from first marriage to first birth, from first birth to second birth, and so on, with one model for each parity transition. Predictor variables include woman’s age and duration in parity as well as socioeconomic characteristics. Collectively the models yield estimates of birth probabilities by age, parity, and duration in parity — denoted Pait — by socioeconomic characteristics. The Pait allow calculation of “global life tables”, which yield both period and cohort estimates of PPRs, ASFRs, mean and median ages at first marriage, mean and median closed birth intervals, mean and median ages at childbearing (both overall and by child’s birth order), TFR, and TMFR. Because the Pait are multivariate, the global life tables are multivariate, as are all measures calculated from them.	Robert	D. Retherford	Hassan	 Eini-Zinab	Naohiro	 Ogawa	Rikiya	 Matsukura
2010	14	Formal Demography and Survival Analysis	Cohort Postponement and Period Measures	We introduce a new class of models in which demographic behavior   such as fertility is postponed by differing amounts depending only   on cohort membership. We show how this model fits into a general   framework of period and cohort postponement that includes the   existing models in the literature, notably those of Bongaarts and   Feeney and Kohler and Philipov. The cohort-based model shows the   effects of cohort shifts on period fertility measures and provides   an accompanying tempo-adjusted measure of period total fertility in   the absence of observed shifts. Simulation reveals that when postponement is governed by   cohorts, the cohort-based indicator outperforms the Bongaarts and   Feeney model that is now in widespread use.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Thomas	 Cassidy
2010	14	Formal Demography and Survival Analysis	Multistage Model of First Marriage and Birth: An Extension of the Coale-McNeil Nuputiality Model	In this study, I first focus on the potential profile of the Coale-McNeil nuptiality model (CM model) as a multistage model of vital events such as the first marriage and birth separated by birth order. The convolution structure of the CM model can be regarded as an expression of a multistage process consisting of attainment of marriageable age, and several waiting time to the goal. This interpretable nature of the CM model is carefully examined here and the corresponding equivalent convolution model is presented. The critical problem is that the assumption of the model over independence between the sub-processes is not satisfied in the reality according to my survey results. Hence I proposed new model by introducing liner relationships among parameters so that realistic associations of the sub-processes be reproduced. It is applicable to describe latent processes such as age at becoming marriageable and marriage market population, for instance.	Ryuichi	 Kaneko
2010	15	Work Environment and Work-Family Conflict	Family Structure, Employee Role Strain and Work-Family Balance	This study investigates the relationship between employer policies and family structure on conflicts between work and family. Using data from workforce module of the 2006 General Social Survey, we use ordinal and multinomial logistic regression models to explore the importance of work-family balance policies regarding flexibility: telecommuting, adjusting one’s schedule, and ability to be absent from work for family needs. We examine these policies considering family structure, that is, for employees with and without children, and for married and non-married employees. Results indicate that the presence of children in the household is the most important family structure factor, regardless of marital status, such that having children increased the likelihood of work-family conflict. Of the three family-friendly policies, enabling employees to leave work for family needs and events is the most important for increasing work-family balance. Suggestions for other employer policies are provided.	Leora	 Lawton	David	 Tulkin
2010	15	Work Environment and Work-Family Conflict	Depression Risk among Employed and Non-Employed Mothers of Young Children: The Impact of Preferences, Labor Force Status and Job Quality	Objective. This study explores the relationships among mothers’ desire for employment, employment status, job quality and depression. Methods. The analysis uses the longitudinal NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development (SECCYD) and employs ordinary least squares models with multiple imputation to estimate these relationships controlling for prior depression. Results. Employment is associated with reductions in depression only among mothers who are employed in high-quality (not low-quality) jobs. But this reduction in depression is equally evident for mothers who desire and do not desire employment. Non-employed mothers have elevated depression levels only if they desire employment. Conclusions. The findings provide strong evidence of the benefits of multiple roles for mothers. Our results further demonstrate that neither employment nor non-employment is best for all mothers of young children, but rather that mental health depends on mothers’ employment preferences and the quality of their jobs when they do work for pay.	Rachel	 Gordon	Xue	 Wang	Anna	 Gluzman
2010	15	Work Environment and Work-Family Conflict	Making Changes or Feeling Like You Can: How Parents Respond to a Workplace Culture Change Initiative	Though research is prolific on work-family conflict, there is little research demonstrating how employers impact time-use patterns and can support working parents. This study uses data from a natural experiment to investigate the relationships between a culture change initiative (Results Only Work Environment – ROWE), work-time control, time at work and with children, work-time behaviors like telecommuting and telecommuting variability, and work-family conflict among working parents. Using longitudinal data from 215 working parents in a white-collar workplace, we examine the effect of workplace changes in time spent at work and with children as well as investigate which is more important, work-time behaviors like telecommuting or perceived control over work time for work-family conflict. We find that ROWE does not influence time-use but increases the likelihood of telecommuting and increases subjective perceptions of work-time control. Only perceived control over work time is significantly predictive of reduced work-family conflict for working parents.	Rachelle	 Hill	Eric	 Tranby	Erin	 Kelly	Phyllis	 Moen
2010	15	Work Environment and Work-Family Conflict	The Effect of Individual, Family and Employer Support on Feelings of Burnout and Satisfaction: a Multi Actor Approach	What kind of support do people have to meet current work and family demands and how do they affect experiences of quality of life? Within this paper I will focus on the experiences of Dutch workers with respect to burnout and satisfaction, by concentrating not only on the role of direct workplace support but also by considering support in the family and support provided by the employer. The general research question is: to what extent do employee support, family support and employer support explain levels of work related burnout and job satisfaction? Hypotheses will be tested using Time Competition survey (2004). Data were collected using a multi-stage sample of 1114 employees from 30 Dutch firms. Extensive information is available on work and family support, work and family demands as well as indicators of burnout and satisfaction from both spouses. Multilevel analyses will be used to test our hypotheses.	Tanja	 Van der Lippe
2010	16	Sub-National Estimates and Projections	Estimating Small Area Income Distributions
and Income Statistics via the Inequality Process (IP)	The distribution of earned income in a public use microdata area (PUMA) can be estimated from the American Community Survey’s (ACS) public use microdata sample (PUMS). The ACS also publishes this distribution for some sub-PUMA areas along with several scalar statistics of earned income. This paper uses conventional techniques to estimate the distribution of earned income in each sub-PUMA area in the vicinity of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina using the PUMA level distribution and the scalar statistics of earned income in each sub-PUMA area as the source of “strength”, pretending that its earned income distribution is unknown. The paper then compares the estimates of the conventional small area estimator to those of an unconventional parametric estimator of income distributions, the Macro Model of the Inequality Process.	John	 Angle	Kenneth	C. Land
2010	16	Sub-National Estimates and Projections	Household and Population Projections at  Sub-Nationals Levels: An Extended Cohort-Component Approach	This paper describes the core methodological ideas and data/estimation issues of an extended cohort-component approach to simultaneously project household composition and population distributions at sub-national levels. We assess this approach by using projections from 1990 to 2000 and from 2000 to 2006 and comparing the projected with the census-observed estimates in 2000 and ACS-observed estimates in 2006 for 50 states and DC, and three sub-state areas. The comparisons show that most absolute errors between 1,475 pairs of indices of household and population projections and corresponding census and ACS observations are small – less than three percent – and almost all errors are less than ten percent. We then report illustrative household projections 2000-2050 for 50 states and DC, and household/housing projections for the small town of Chapel Hill 2000-2015. The aging of American households over future decades across all states and aging of housing market in Chapel Hill are particularly striking trends in the projections.	Yi	 Zeng	Zhenglian	 Wang	Danan	 Gu
2010	16	Sub-National Estimates and Projections	The Methods and Materials Used to Generate Two Key Elementsof the Housing Unit Method: (1) Vacancy Rate and (2) Persons Per Household	The U.S. Census Bureau is considering the implementation of the Housing Unit Method (HUM) for use in its annual post-censal population estimates program. This paper provides an examination of methods that can be used to estimate the average number of persons per household (PPH) and vacancy rates (VR), variables used in the HUM. It compares the results of using the Census Bureau’s current method for estimating PPH and VR with alternative methods. The report includes an evaluation of the methods along with description of each method, its underlying theory and logic and an example, where feasible, in the form of an illustrative calculation. Each method is assessed relative to a set of evaluation criteria. Results suggest that the Census Bureau continue with its development of a comprehensive system based on the HUM for the annual estimates of county populations nationwide.	David	A. Swanson
2010	17	Health and Dependency at Older Ages	The Last Year of Life in Europe: Regional Variations in Functional Status and Sources of Support	Our paper provides an initial account of the life circumstances of older Europeans in the year prior to death, focusing on regional variations in functional limitations and sources of support. We analyze 523 end-of-life interviews, collected as part of the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe, using logistic regression. Functional limitations are spread fairly evenly across Northern, Central, and Southern Europe. Significant regional differences exist with regard to decedents’ main sources of support and location of death. Northern Europeans were least likely to receive help by their family only and most likely to be supported by non-kin. They also exhibited the highest risk to die in a nursing home. In Mediterranean countries, a pattern of exclusive family support and dying at home prevails. Our findings support the notion of a ‘mixed responsibility’ of families and welfare states as providers of support for the elderly.	Karsten	 Hank	Hendrik	 Juerges
2010	17	Health and Dependency at Older Ages	Old-Age Healthy Dependency Ratio in Europe	We discuss the prevalence of morbidity among the elderly in Europe in 1995-2001 and propose a state-of-health specific (additive) decomposition of the old-age dependency ratio into the old-age unhealthy dependency ratio and old-age healthy dependency ratio to discuss the weight of morbidity at older ages on the working-age population. About 50% of the population at age 65 and older in Europe lives without chronic physical or mental health problem, illness or disability. In most of the countries the value of the old-age healthy dependency ratio is higher than the corresponding figure for the unhealthy dependency ratio. As the number of people aged 65+ in good health is larger than the number of retired people in bad health, the burden on the people at working ages to finance social security systems could be relaxed if those elderly who are still in good health remained in the labor force for longer periods.	Magdalena	 Muszynska	Yeonjoo	 Yi	Roland	 Rau
2010	17	Health and Dependency at Older Ages	The Disablement Process among Elderly Chinese	The prevalent model of disablement is one in which functional limitations mediate the pathway between pathologies/impairments and disability, defined as having difficulty acting “in necessary, usual, expected and personally desired ways in [one’s] society” (Verbrugge and Jette 1994). Disability is posited to be moderated by both environmental and personal factors (ibid). This paper uses data from two waves of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Study to pose the following questions: Does the disablement process among Chinese elderly support the prevalent model of disablement or does it differ from that observed among US seniors (Lawrence and Jette 1996; Peek et al. 2003)? Do living arrangements and attitude matter? Structural equation models are estimated to test the hypotheses that (a) functional limitations moderate the relationship between impairments and disability; (b) one environmental factor (coresidence) moderates disability; and (c) one personal factor (optimism) moderates disability among this sample of Chinese elderly ages 78-115.	Deborah	 Lowry
2010	17	Health and Dependency at Older Ages	Recent Trends in Health and Disability 
among the Older Population in England	The decline in late-life disability prevalence in the United States over the past quarter-century is well documented. Less is known about trends in other countries over recent decades. Using data representative for all of England for the period 1992-2007, and focusing on the population 65 and older, we examine trends in the prevalence of measured blood pressure, cholesterol, and C-reactive protein, as well as self-reported prevalence of selected health behaviors, general health status, chronic conditions, sensory and physical functioning, and limitations in usual activity and self care. We also explore trends by three education and five social class groups. Finally, we compare these findings with the evidence from the United States.	Robert	 Schoeni	Linda	G. Martin	Patricia	 Andreski
2010	18	Demographic Consequences of Economic Downturns	Demographic Dividends, Depopulation, and Importance of Agriculture in Japan: the Past, the Present, and the Future	We investigate the effects of demographic change on agriculture and non-agriculture in Japan while considering capital accumulation and total population and labor. Combining the overlapping generations model with the three generations and general equilibrium growth accounting models, we simulate the effect of demographic change on agricultural and non-agricultural inputs and outputs. Our simulation analyses show that demographic change greatly influenced agriculture and non-agriculture through capital accumulation although the influences of total population and labor were not negligible. Remarkable demographic dividends like the decline of young dependents and increase of adult longevity greatly influenced capital accumulation in Japan in the 1950s to the 1990s, which decreased the importance of agriculture. In the future, aggregate capital in Japan will presumably decrease due to a decline of the working age population, which may result in the disappearance of the advantages of non-agriculture and an increase of the importance of agriculture.	Tomoko	 Kinugasa	Mitoshi	 Yamaguchi
2010	18	Demographic Consequences of Economic Downturns	Employment Retention in the Recession: Some Microeconomic Evidence on the Effects of Short-Time Work in Germany	The short-time work programme in Germany allows firms in a recession to keep their staff and to claim short-time work compensation for the working-time reduction paid by the public unemployment insurance. In the current recession, the programme covers more than one million workers with an average time reduction of 34%.     	Although the programme is very substantial, only little is known about its individual or firm effects or long-term outcomes. This paper estimates such outcomes using data for short-time workers of the recession 1993/94. It follows matched individual employment biographies of short-time workers and comparable other workers and finds evidence of a transitory employment effect lasting for about two months. In addition, there are significantly lower wages for short-time workers in the long run indicating that positive employment effects in the short run may reduce labour reallocation towards production with higher profitability and higher wages in the long run.	Stefan	S. Speckesser
2010	18	Demographic Consequences of Economic Downturns	After the First Child: Job Stability and Having Another Child	This study investigates the childbearing behavior of women during turbulent economic times. Using hazard models of Russian GGS data, as well as retrospective histories from the Employment and Education Survey, we find that women who experienced unemployment after having their first child were at a lower risk of having a second child from 1991-2004. We consider the following explanations for this relationship: 1) The cost of childbearing may be perceived as too high when women have not been contributing to household income; 2) negative labor market experiences may appear related to having become a mother, which may dampen desire for another child; 3) uncertainty may be high due to recent unemployment experiences; 4) these women may be a select group that are particularly career-oriented, or; 5) the length of leave taken may have depreciated human capital, increasing the significance of an unemployment spell after a first child has been born.	Sunnee	 Billingsley	Oxana	 Sinyavskaya
2010	18	Demographic Consequences of Economic Downturns	The Great Recession and Material Hardship	The current recession began in December, 2007 and is predicted to be the worst in the US since the Great Depression. The Great Recession, as it is now referred to in the media, is likely to have a large impact on the health and well-being of mothers, fathers, and children in vulnerable families. Material hardship is an alternative indicator to poverty of economic well-being and the two measures are not highly correlated. Hardship reflects the effects of real resources not captured by income and the effects of ability to manage resources as well as the level of resources. We use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FF) to study the effect of the Great Recession on poverty and material hardship and to sort out the relationship between these two measures of economic well-being.	Natasha	 Pilkauskas	Irwin	 Garfinkel	Janet	 Currie
2010	19	Social Inequality and Health Outcomes	The Intersection of School Racial/Ethnic Composition and Student Race/Ethnicity on Adolescent Depressive and Somatic Symptoms	Our study investigates how school segregation, as measured by school-level racial/ethnic composition, influences depressive and somatic symptoms among a representative sample of U.S. adolescents, and whether the association differs by race/ethnicity. We analyzed data from Wave I of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, resulting in a sample size of 18,419 students attending 132 junior and senior high schools in 1994/5. In our multilevel analyses we found that black students experienced more depressive symptoms and greater log-odds of high somatic symptoms as the percentage of white students at their school increased. These results were no longer significant, however, after we controlled for students’ perceptions of discrimination and attachment to their school. Our findings suggest that attending predominately-minority schools may buffer black students from discrimination and increase their attachment to their school, which in turn may reduce their risk of experiencing depressive and somatic symptoms.	Katrina	M. Walsemann	Bethany	A. Bell	Debeshi	 Maitra
2010	19	Social Inequality and Health Outcomes	Differential Health Outcomes among Hispanic Immigrants Reporting Chilling Effects	Increased restrictions on immigration and immigrants’ access to resources are hypothesized to reduce the willingness of immigrants to seek medical care or other public services. This study provides new insight into the association of such ‘chilling effects’, including perceived increases in discrimination towards immigrants or fears about providing documentation on health outcomes. The data come from a unique, ongoing study in Phoenix, Arizona focused on the effect of immigration enforcement and the economic downturn on access to public resources, food security and health care. Outcomes in this analysis include insurance coverage, access to health services, and self-reported health. Results suggest that immigration status and perceptions of discrimination are associated with reduced health care coverage and service. The paper reflects on the implications of these results for vulnerable populations with decreased access to health care resources.	Nicole	 Weller	Jennifer	E. Glick	Seline	 Szkupinski-Quiroga	Alexandra	 Brewis Slade	Ben	 VanderMeer
2010	19	Social Inequality and Health Outcomes	How Far Socio-Economic Determinants Affect the Demographic and Health Inequalities in Urban India: Evidences from NFHS-3	In general, urbanization is defined as a process of structural changes in social, economic and demographic aspects of life in a given society. However, have the urbanites living in India been influenced by the same changes? Do they have the same access to urban amenities irrespective of their caste, religion and economic status? This paper used an analytical framework which explains the socio-economic stratification in accordance with cultural context of India and its influence on demographic and health outcomes. This paper presents evidence that, in spite of being urbanized, socio-economic inequalities  still persist in India. Moreover, they significantly influence demographic outcomes and access to public health services. Though on average urban people have better health than rural counterparts, the odds of a logistic regression after controlling for other background variables shows variation in demographic and health indicators of different socio-economic groups within urban India.	Srinivas	 Goli	Prashant	K. Singh	Arokiasamy	 Perianayagam
2010	19	Social Inequality and Health Outcomes	Social Exclusion as a Determinant of Health Inequalities	Despite decades of universal health insurance coverage, most developed countries are still faced with glaring health inequalities. Social exclusion is a complex concept that has been less studied in the social health inequalities literature. Using the Canadian Household Panel Survey–pilot conducted by Statistics Canada in 2008, the objective of this study is 1/ to develop conceptually and test the statistical properties of an index of social exclusion in Canada and 2/ to assess the association between health status and this index compared to usual measures of socioeconomic position. Three main dimensions will be used: material resources, financial risks and financial products. The prevalence of social exclusion by age, sex, migration status and living arrangements will allow us to define excluded or vulnerable groups in the Canadian society. This work will provide key evidence and propose orientations for future public health and social policies.	Emilie	 Renahy	Beatriz	 Alvarado Llano	Sam	 Harper	Amélie	 Quesnel-Vallée
2010	21	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions	Spatial and Temporal Changes in Fertility Behavior of Cohorts in Recent Times and Future Prospects: India	In the present work we have attempted to study fertility experience of cohorts in different regions in India, who are crossing childbearing age in different calendar years in recent years i.e., 1993-2012 to understand the spatial and temporal changes in their fertility behavior. We have also forecasted fertility behavior of females who are going to cross childbearing age in various calendar years during 2013-2025. For the present study we have used selected portions of data from all the three National Family Health Surveys that were conducted in India. A special form of Gompertz curve, whose parameters are easy to interpret has been used for this study. Estimated CTFR for females who are going to cross childbearing age in 2024 in the South India, the West India, the North-East India, the North India, the East India and the Central India are 2.3, 2.8, 3.2, 3.3, 3.6 and 4.7 respectively.	Samba	Siva Rao  Pasupuleti	Prasanta	 Pathak
2010	21	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions	Ongoing Fertility Transition in Kinshasa: Evidence from the 2007 DHS	This paper examines fertility transition in Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and second-largest city in sub-Saharan Africa. Shapiro (1996) documented the onset of fertility transition in Kinshasa, using data from 1990. Women’s education was strongly inversely related to fertility, beginning with secondary-level schooling, and increases in women’s educational attainment that had taken place were important in initiating fertility transition in the city. This paper uses data from the 2007 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) to examine fertility in Kinshasa and assess fertility transition since 1990. During the early 1990s the DRC experienced an acute economic crisis, with pillaging and looting in 1991 and 1993 contributing to substantial shrinkage of the modern sector of the economy and extremely poor economic performance throughout the 1990s. Data from the 2007 DHS allow us to assess how fertility and several of its determinants have changed since 1990.	David	 Shapiro
2010	21	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions	Educational Choice, Labor Market Entrance, and Family Career – In that Order?	Few get children while enrolled in higher education, nevertheless one fourth of female university students in Sweden has children. In Sweden as in many other countries enrollment periods have been prolonged and allocated to later parts of life. In this paper we explore the composition of students with respect to parenthood, investigate allocation of studies and the study length, and examine potential outcomes after studies have ended. Using a large longitudinal register micro data set containing educational achievement we find indications that female students with children seem to be more efficient in their studies as they reach a diploma faster. However compared to those that study without children they register fewer diplomas and have a somewhat lower wage income growth after they have finished their education. The dropouts seem to be driven by failures in the initial period at higher level rather than dropping out of university later.	Daniel	 Hallberg	Thomas	 Lindh	Jovan	 Zamac	Ying	 Hong	Daniel	 Avdic
2010	21	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions	When Comes Baby in the Baby Carriage? Historical Changes in Three Dimensions of Age at Parenthood	The age of parents at the birth of their children may have profound implications for the subsequent life course of parents, the functioning of the family, and for child health and well-being. Using historical census data from the Integrated Public Use Micro Series, this research explore three dimensions of parental age: chronological age, social age, and relationship age from the early 1900s until 2008. Little is known about long-term historical shifts in these dimensions of age, and to our knowledge, there has been no systematic investigation of their interdependence. This research addresses the transformation of family life by investigating historical change in three dimensions of parental age and the ways in which the dimensions are woven together.	Ann	 Meier	Steven	 Ruggles	Catherine	A. Fitch
2010	22	Methodological Aspects of Health and Mortality Analysis	A Systematic Review of Retirement as a Risk Factor for Mortality	The relationship between retirement and health is not well established. Research examining retirement as a risk factor for mortality is sparse and heterogeneous in terms of the definition of retirement, the analytic methods used and consequently the findings reported. A systematic literature review using a modified Cochrane and ‘best evidence synthesis‘ approach answered the question―Does the research literature support the view that type of retirement is a risk factor for mortality? We identified 1,126 studies related to retirement and mortality. After exclusions based on content and quality, 13 studies remained for data extraction and evidence synthesis. We found a strong and sufficient level of evidence suggesting that all-type retirement is a risk factor for mortality. However, there is only mixed evidence regarding the relationship between specific types of retirement (i.e., on-time, early and health-related) and mortality. No conclusion can be made about specific retirement types and mortality.	Matthew	J. Shim	David	 Gimeno	Sandi	 Pruitt	Christopher	 McLeod	Margaret	J. Foster	Benjamin	 Amick
2010	22	Methodological Aspects of Health and Mortality Analysis	Methodological Aspects of Studying Human Aging, Health and Mortality	In this paper we develop a methodology for studying human aging, health and mortality using a mathematical model describing age-trajectories of human biomarkers, changes in health status, and mortality in a cohort of individuals participated in longitudinal study. The model contains jumping and continuous components. The jumping component represents changes in health/well-being status. It is described in terms of a finite state continuous time (non-Markov) random process with transition intensities depending on current values of continuous component. The continuous component, represents gradual aging related changes in physiological state. It is described by stochastic differential equations, where coefficients depend on current value of jumping component. Gaussian approximation of conditional distributions of continuously changing component is described. The approaches to analyses of longitudinal data on aging, health and longevity using this model and three different observational plans are developed. The use of developed approaches in the joint analyses of different datasets is discussed.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Igor	 Akushevich	Alexander	 Kulminski	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva
2010	22	Methodological Aspects of Health and Mortality Analysis	Do Reporting Differences Bias the Measurement of Health Inequalities in U.S. Adults? Evidence Using Anchoring Vignettes from the Health and Retirement Survey	The accurate measurement of population health is crucial for monitoring health levels and trends across different groups. Measures of health inequalities based on self-reports may be biased if individuals from different groups have systematically different expectations or reporting standards for health. This paper tests for reporting heterogeneity in self-reported disability measures by level of education and race/ethnicity in the U.S. using anchoring vignettes from the Health and Retirement Survey in the domains of mobility, sleep, pain, memory, shortness of breath, and depression. We then estimate inequalities in each health domain by education and race/ethnicity before and after adjustment for reporting heterogeneity to quantify the magnitude of potential biases in health reporting using self-reported measures. Preliminary results suggest strong evidence of reporting heterogeneity in self-reported health measures by level of education and race/ethnicity, with models that do not account for reporting differences strongly underestimating health inequalities by education and race/ethnicity.	Jennifer	 Dowd	Megan	 Todd
2010	22	Methodological Aspects of Health and Mortality Analysis	Model Uncertainty Over the Life Course: The Case of Early Health and Socioeconomic Attainment	Identifying the pathways that link early health to socioeconomic attainment remains an elusive goal across the social and health sciences. Although birth cohort studies often have extensive information for examining the life course, their results point to conflicting pathways depending on the hypothesized causal ordering of exposures linking health with subsequent outcomes. This paper introduces a method that accounts for model uncertainty in studying health over the life course. We first demonstrate the sensitivity of estimates of adolescent cognition among a set of structural equation models that vary in their hypothesized indirect and direct pathways relating birth weight and socioeconomic attainment. We then implement a model averaging approach to generate estimates of adolescent cognition and behavioral outcomes which are robust to model specification. The results highlight the sensitivity of model estimates to the secondary indirect effects in life course studies and the importance of non-cognitive pathways over the life course.	Robert	G. White	Lane	 Burgette
2010	23	New Data and Methods in Migration	Creating Valid Immigration Entry Statistics	What does the time trend of immigration to the United States look like? Researchers who don't typically do work on immigration often use immigration statistics put out by the Office of Immigration Statistics. Unfortunately, both the data used and the conclusions drawn can be dangerously incorrect. These statistics, on the number of immigrants entered as Lawful Permanent Residents (the only immigrant category), include both new entrants to the United States and people who have changed their status to Lawful Permanent Resident. These status adjusters are typically 30 to 80 percent of all new immigrants.    In this paper I use status adjuster information to estimate the time of immigration and to create a valid time series of immigration statistics and to discuss the changing incentives that drive different kinds of migration.	Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2010	23	New Data and Methods in Migration	Application of the Network Scale-Up Method to Estimate Hard-to-Count Populations: The Case of Brazilian Immigrants in Florida, USA	According to the US Census Bureau there were 212,428 Brazilian immigrants in the country in 2000 but concurrently the Brazilian government (extra-officially), the media and varied researchers argued that this is an underestimate and claimed different numbers ranging from 400,000 to 1,500,000. In this study we propose to estimate the subpopulation of Brazilian immigrant residents in Florida, USA (including estimates about Mexican immigrants) based on the network scale-up (NSU) method. This method aims to estimate the size of (hard to count) unknown subpopulations assuming that the fraction of these subpopulations presented in the averaged active social networks of the general population members could be scaled up to their real sizes. In this paper we present the NSU rationale, explain its general application to a case study and conclude with remarks about the use of NSU in demography.	Dimitri	 Fazito	Chris	 McCarty
2010	23	New Data and Methods in Migration	Rethinking the Effect of Duration on Immigrant Health: Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey (2006-2008) and the New Immigrants Survey (2003)	It is well documented in the health literature that the longer immigrants have lived in the U.S., the worse their health and the higher the risk of death to their infants. Despite evidence suggesting that acculturation can greatly benefit immigrant by improving their socioeconomic standing, previous studies consistently have failed to evidence a positive relationship between duration and immigrant health. My paper aims to investigate this contradiction. First, I theoretically examine how the choice of using duration to measure acculturation constitutes a methodological weakness that compromises the conclusions reached. That is, how duration captures is the net effect of two countervailing forces of acculturation on health over time. Second, by employing two national datasets, I further take this problem apart and provide an evidence-based explanation for why we always find negative duration effects on health. Results have significant implications for the “negative acculturation” hypothesis.	Jing	 Li
2010	23	New Data and Methods in Migration	Who in the United States Sends and Receives Remittances? An InitialAnalysis of the Monetary Transfers Data from the August 2008 CPS Migration
Supplement	In August 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau fielded a supplement to the monthly    Current Population Survey (CPS) base questionnaire. The Migration    Supplement included questions on remittances (monetary transfers) and four    additional topics – citizenship, year of entry, residence one year ago, and    residents and emigrants abroad. The monetary transfers section is    especially significant because it represents the first time questions on    both the giving and receiving of transfers were included on a large,    federally sponsored, nationally representative survey in the United States.    It is also significant because the questions were administered to all    households, both native and foreign born. The purpose of this paper is    twofold. First, it will describe the CPS Migration Supplement, a new source    of migration-related data. Second, it will discuss the quality of the    monetary transfers data and present some initial results on the prevalence,    frequency, and amount of transfers sent and received.	Elizabeth	 Grieco	G.	Patricia  de la Cruz	Rachel	 Cortes	Luke	J. Larsen
2010	24	Aspects of the Transition to Parenthood	Childlessness in the United States, 1970-1995: The Role of Compositional Changes in Explaining Time Trends	Childlessness among American women nearly doubled between 1980 and 2000. The same period saw dramatic changes in women’s lives, notably in educational attainment and marriage rates, as well as in the race-ethnic composition of the United States population. This extended abstract uses data from the June Fertility Supplement of the 1995 Current Population Study to examine changes in childlessness among five 5-year birth cohorts of American women and to assess the role of compositional changes in explaining time trends. (The full paper will use additional Fertility Supplements to extend analyses through the early 21st century.) Preliminary results suggest that changes in marriage and, to a lesser extent, educational attainment explain about half of the population-level increase in childlessness between the mid-1970s and the mid-1990s, but that trends were different for different population subgroups.	Sarah	R. Hayford
2010	24	Aspects of the Transition to Parenthood	The Impact of Employment Instability and Education on the First Parenthood Transitions	This paper advances our understanding about the impact of unemployment, career instability and education on fertility behaviour. From the theoretical perspective, the expected sign is ambiguous. Empirical research also reached contradictory results due to relying on different institutional contexts, measures and selective samples with left-censoring. In this paper, we address these theoretical and methodological issues. We use German Life History Study (GLHS) data 1971 cohort. Using monthly information, we adopt a Cox Model to identify the timing of fertility for both men and women. We compare East and West Germany where institutional contexts, labor markets and values exhibit almost orthogonal patterns. Our preliminary results show that unemployment has a strong negative effect for men everywhere and for women only in West Germany and career instability affects negatively only the women in East Germany. We also present results for the variation in the impact of covariates by education and partner’s characteristics.	Berkay	 Ozcan	Karl	Ulrich  Mayer	Joerg	 Luedicke
2010	24	Aspects of the Transition to Parenthood	Educational Attainment, Romantic Relationships, and Non-Marital Fertility	While two-fifths of births in the United States occur outside of marriage overall, nearly seventy percent of births to women with less than a high school education are non-marital compared to seven percent of those to college educated women (Mincieli, Manlove, McGarrett, Moore, and Ryan 2007). We focus on improving our understanding of this variation by examining the role of dating, cohabiting, and marital relationships in educational differences in non-marital fertility. Non-marital fertility may be influenced by differences in relationship formation or the effects of relationships that are formed due to fertility. For example, more highly educated women may delay forming relationships and/or the relationships they form may have a lesser influence on non-marital fertility compared those formed by women with less education. We use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 cohort and examine non-marital fertility for female respondents in the first three years after leaving school.	Kimberly	A. Daniels
2010	24	Aspects of the Transition to Parenthood	Teenage Cohabitation, Marriage and Parenthood	Research has integrated cohabitation into the family life course of Americans. However, little work has specifically examined the role of cohabitation among teenagers. The National Survey of Family Growth (2002) is used to examine changes in teenage (ages 15-19) women’s family formation in terms of cohabitation, marriage, and birth. Analyses indicate that there has been in increase in teenage cohabitation among recent cohorts with about one-quarter of teenagers having cohabited and the growth in cohabitation has offset declines in teenage marriage. In fact, during adolescence, cohabitation is the most common family formation activity to occur. Cohabitation is increasingly linked to teenage marriage and teenage childbearing. It appears that cohabitation has become an important part of the landscape of the adolescent years.	Wendy	D. Manning
2010	25	Demography of Educational Attainment	Women’s Education, International Migration and the Educational Attainment of the Next Generation: The Tale of Two Countries	I examine the role of migration in the reproduction of education in Mexico and the U.S. Specifically, I investigate how women’s education shape their migration behavior and how the resulting changes in migration affect marriage, fertility, and offspring’s education. To accomplish this goal, I construct a demographic model that takes into account transmission of education, migration, marriage, and fertility. I then use the constructed demographic model to simulate the effects of hypothetical changes in the educational characteristics of women in Mexico and estimate their effects on the distribution of schooling in the next generation in Mexico and the U.S. Improvements in women’s education in Mexico have beneficial effects on the distribution of schooling in both countries. The beneficial effects are offset by the lower rates of fertility among better educated women, but reinforced by the more favorable matches that women make. Migration reinforces the effects in the U.S. and offsets the effects in Mexico.	Kate	H. Choi
2010	25	Demography of Educational Attainment	Credit Constraints and the Racial Gap in Post-Secondary Education in South Africa	This paper analyzes the impact of household income and scholastic ability on post-secondary enrollment in South Africa. Using longitudinal data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS), we analyze the large racial gaps in the proportion of high school graduates who make the transition into post-secondary education. CAPS administered a baseline literacy and numeracy exam, allowing us to at least partially control for scholastic ability during secondary school. Our results indicate that baseline income and ability are strong predictors of post-secondary enrollment and statistically account for all of the black-white difference in enrollment. Controlling for parental schooling and baseline scholastic ability reduces the estimated impact of household income on enrollment, but the effect of income continues to be large. The results suggest that credit constraints may be an important factor explaining the large racial and income differentials in post-secondary enrollment.	David	 Lam	Cally	 Ardington	Nicola	 Branson	Kendra	 Goostrey	Murray	 Leibbrandt
2010	25	Demography of Educational Attainment	Is the Demographic Dividend in Fact an Education Dividend?	We will use new data on populations cross-classified by age, sex and four levels of educational attainment for some 140 countries from 1960 to 2010 as estimated by IIASA/VID. These data have recently been used to demonstrate for the first time unambiguously that increases in human capital are a key driver of economic growth (Lutz etal., Science 2008,Vol.319:10047-48). In this paper we will apply similar models to the above described panel data to study the interactions between changes in the age structure of the population and its educational structure with respect to their effect on economic growth. Since in many countries the decline in youth dependency ratios occurred simultaneously with the improvement in educational attainment of the adult population we will study which of these factors has been more important in generating the observed economic growth that under the traditional demographic dividend approach is exclusively attributed to changing dependency ratios.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Jesus	 Crespo Cuaresma	Warren	C. Sanderson
2010	25	Demography of Educational Attainment	The Educational Returns to Immigrant Youth Participation in After-School Activities	Youth participation in organized activities has received attention from scholars and policymakers because of its potential to aid in social, cognitive, and emotional development. Specific benefits of participation in out-of-school extracurricular activities include the reinforcement of pro-social norms, an increase in work ethic and self-esteem, and the development of ties to adults and mentors who provide supervision and guidance. But few studies to date have focused on the extent to which immigrant youth participate in organized activities outside of school. In this paper, we analyze a sample from the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS) to understand patterns of participation in non-school extracurricular activities across immigrant generations, and the effects of such participation on future educational outcomes. Preliminary results suggest that patterns of participation differ for first and second generation immigrants, and these differences may have an impact on the educational achievement of this rapidly growing segment of the youth population.	Dina	G. Okamoto	Cassie	 Hartzog	Daniel	 Herda
2010	26	Gender and Child Health Outcomes in Developing Countries	Gender Inequality in Child Care in India: Is It Narrowing Down?	This paper aims to assess disparities in child care practices in India and its major states. Attempts are also made to investigate whether the discrimination has declined over the time or not. For this purpose data are taken from three rounds of National Family Health Surveys (NFHS) conducted in 1992-93, 1998-99 and 2005-06. The indicators of child-care considered in this study are: duration of breastfeeding, health care of sick children, nutritional status, immunization of children, mortality of children in different ages, and their educational attainment. Sopher’s (1974) methodology is used to compute a gender disparity index for each indicator, and finally a composite overall disparity index is computed. Results of the study illustrate that gender disparity is declining in some aspects of child care. For instance, differences in the proportion of male and female children who received full immunization increased between first and third round NFHS.	Ravendra	K. Sharma	Manju	 Rani	Sandeep	 Sharma
2010	26	Gender and Child Health Outcomes in Developing Countries	Aren’t You Glad Your Ma Went to School? The Linkages between Maternal Education and Childhood Immunization	While the correlations between parental education and child health have been observed to be moderate to strong in diverse parts of the world, the causal pathways remain far from clear. The proposed paper seeks to examine the possible pathways that mediate between maternal education and childhood immunization. We argue that acquisition of education leads to better human, social and cultural capitals among the mothers. This is then reflected in better immunization status for their children. Additionally, we seek to test whether higher education of the mother is associated with greater physical and decision-making autonomy for her within the household, which leads to better health outcomes for the child. We use the India Human Development Survey 2005, which is a nationally representative survey, rich in detailed measures of each pathway which we hope to explore in this paper.	Kriti	 Vikram	Sonalde	B. Desai	Reeve	 Vanneman
2010	26	Gender and Child Health Outcomes in Developing Countries	Access to Water as a Determinant of Women’s Work
and Child Outcomes	A common claim is that investments in water infrastructure can enhance poor rural women’s participation in market-based work or time spent on child care. We propose a new approach for dealing with the endogeneity of infrastructure placement and enable a test of the proposition that reducing women’s time in water collection will augment their participation and time in income earning activities. We also test for impacts on child schooling and health outcomes.	Gayatri	 Koolwal	Dominique	 van de Walle
2010	26	Gender and Child Health Outcomes in Developing Countries	Context or Women’s Religious Disempowerment: Explaining Muslim and Non-Muslim Differences in Child Health Outcomes in India	Although post-ICPD discourse highlighted women’s empowerment as a means of demographic change, there is increasing anxiety over a diminishing welfare state and an overemphasis on individual responsibility. This is especially relevant in politicized discussions about religion and child health outcomes among Muslims in India, that tend to focus on individual-level explanations suggesting the restrictive nature of Islam on women’s empowerment, rather than macro-level factors such as infrastructure or socioeconomic development. By using multi-level models and data from the 2005/06 India DHS and the 2005/06 IDHS, our paper will address this macro-micro debate through the following question: are Muslim/non-Muslim differences in child health outcomes reflective of group membership or the indirect effect of discrimination due to group membership? Moreover, do health differences vary from locale to locale in India and hence, must be contextualized, or are they consistent across all settings?	Sangeeta	 Parashar	Tannistha	 Samanta
2010	27	Multilevel Models of Health	Neighborhood Context and Social Disparities in Waist Size and Body Mass Index	This study assesses the role of neighborhood context in explaining racial/ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in both waist size and obesity, using data from the Chicago Community Adult Health Study, a sample of 3105 adults aged 18 and over, living in the city of Chicago, IL and stratified into 343 neighborhood clusters. The initial results reveal that neighborhood context accounts for a modest share of black-white differences in waist size and BMI, and a larger share of educational disparities in both outcomes. Both racial and educational disparities are more pronounced among women compared to men, and neighborhood context plays a larger role in accounting for obesity-related disparities among women compared to men. Affluent/gentrifying neighborhoods appear to provide some protection against having larger waist sizes and higher BMI. Neighborhood disadvantage, the focus of much of the literature on neighborhoods and health, was not significantly related to either waist size or BMI.	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	Katherine	Y. Lin	James	S. House	Michael	 Elliott
2010	27	Multilevel Models of Health	Neighborhood Effects on Adolescent Health and Risk Behaviors	Neighborhood context – risk and protective factors – is important in behavioral outcomes during adolescence. This paper uncovers the role of neighborhoods (e.g., disadvantage and resources) on health and risk behaviors. Outcomes of interest include mental health (depression, hopelessness, anxiety, and suicide risk behaviors), substance use (alcohol, marijuana, and illicit drugs) and delinquent behavior (assault, theft, vandalism, and trouble with police). Using hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) we assess the impact of positive and negative neighborhood context on outcomes for youth. The base dataset comes from the Reconnecting Youth prevention research studies that provide a stratified (by high risk) random sample of high school aged youth in Seattle. The secondary data comes from the United States Census and other public data sources. Preliminary results suggest that measures of neighborhood disadvantage are associated with less substance use while it serves to increase emotional distress. Comparative analysis will reveal the robustness of these findings.	Karen	A. Snedker	Jerald	 Herting
2010	27	Multilevel Models of Health	Individual and Community-Level Effects on Child Mortality: An Analysis of 27 Demographic and Health Surveys In Sub-Saharan Africa	While researchers have devoted considerable attention to the impact of individual-level factors on child mortality, less is known about how community characteristics and institutions affect health outcomes for children, even though they have a prominent role in theoretical models. Yet to fully understand the factors that affect child mortality is key to further reduce their levels, which is one of the objectives stated by the Millennium Development Goals 2015. Using data from the latest round of Demographic Health Surveys for all countries in sub-Saharan Africa, this study used multivariate and multilevel discrete-time event history analysis to systematically examine the impact of contextual factors on the risk of dying before age 5, and their relative importance in relation to individual factors. Findings suggest that the introduction of community-level factors indeed significantly reduces the impact of individual-level factors on infant and child mortality.	Adébiyi	Germain  Boco
2010	28	New Sources and Methods for Data Collection	Subjective Risk Assessment and Reactions to Health-Related
Information: Evidence from Bangladesh	Arsenic-contaminated drinking water is a serious public health problem in several countries, including Bangladesh. We use data purposely collected in Araihazar district, Bangladesh, to analyze the relationship between the provision of information about arsenic levels of tubewell water, elicited perceptions about health risks and choice of source of drinking water. We document widespread awareness about the health risk of arsenic and its cumulative negative effects. Perceptions of health risk are strongly related to increases in the arsenic level and help explain the decision to switch to alternative sources. In addition, we describe the results of a field experiment. A random subsample of households was informed of the arsenic content of their water using a message that only emphasized whether water was safe, while with other households the message stressed the importance of choosing the source with the lowest arsenic level. Unexpectedly, the experimental communication mode decreased the response to the new information.	Alessandro	 Tarozzi	Soumya	 Balasubramanya	Lori	 Bennear	Alex	 Pfaff
2010	28	New Sources and Methods for Data Collection	Doubling Up When Times Are Tough: A Pilot Study of Obligations to Share a Home in Response to Economic Hardship	This paper uses innovative new data to investigate attitudes about the desirability of intergenerational coresidence in the United States. We conducted a pilot vignette study on the internet with a national probability sample of adults. The vignette varies whether an older mother or adult child needs a place to live, duration of coresidence, adult child’s marital and cohabitation status, whether the child is a (single) parent, and the child’s gender. We analyze closed-ended responses to the vignette, an open-ended follow-up question asking respondents to explain why co-residence is (un)desirable, and standard attitude questions drawn from major face-to-face surveys and randomly placed before or after the vignette. Based on preliminary analysis, respondents’ explanations for why coresidence is (un)desirable are consistent with motivations in theories about intergenerational transfers, including the degree of need, short-term exchange and long-term reciprocity for earlier help, family role obligations, ill-defined obligations of cohabiting unions, and relationship quality.	Judith	A. Seltzer	Suzanne	M. Bianchi	Charles	Q. Strohm
2010	28	New Sources and Methods for Data Collection	Panel Conditioning in Longitudinal Social Science Surveys	Does participating in one wave of a longitudinal survey affect respondents’ reports of their social and economic well-being in follow-up survey waves? If survey participation does alter respondents’ subsequent answers to questions about their social and economic well-being, then this calls into question the validity of information derived from any number of widely used data resources. In this paper, we estimate the magnitude of what methodologists have called panel conditioning or “time-in-survey” effects. Previous efforts to estimate the magnitude of panel conditioning effects have utilized methodologically weak designs and have focused on consequences for a limited range of measures. We use a stronger research design and use large-scale survey data on a wide range of measures of individuals’ social and economic well-being to test a series of theoretically derived propositions about the circumstances under which panel conditioning effects should be most severe.	John	R. Warren	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners
2010	28	New Sources and Methods for Data Collection	Measuring Lethal Counterinsurgency Violence in Amritsar District, India Using a Network Referral-Based Sampling Technique	When evaluating the magnitude and pattern of conflict-related mortality during armed conflicts, demographers rely on either available population census data, convenience sample data, retrospective mortality data or a combination of these data sources. By its nature, each source is vulnerable to bias and error. Existing quantitative claims about enforced disappearances and extrajudicial executions in Punjab (India) between 1984 and 1996 are not based on defensible demographic or statistical methods. We present results from a retrospective mortality survey in rural Amritsar designed to measure lethal counterinsurgency violence. The survey uses a hybrid sampling design which combines probability-based random sampling with referral-based network sampling. This paper explores the dynamics of referral-based sampling through a presentation of the social-network-analysis metrics and the referral chains. This analysis is the basis for determining the coverage rate of the referral-based sampling in villages within which caste and socioeconomic status may influence social knowledge and social relations.	Romesh	 Silva	Jeff	 Klingner	Scott	 Weikart
2010	29	Marriage in Later Life	Finding Love After Loss: Remarriage in Later Life	Although a number of scholars argue that the benefits to marriage may tend to change over the life course, remarkably little is known about patterns of remarriage in later life. This study will take advantage of three waves of data from the National Survey of Families and Households to examine patterns of remarriage in the later life course. First, we plan to document patterns of remarriage for individuals over age 45. Next, we will use Cox proportional hazard models to examine the determinants of remarrying. Throughout the analysis, particular attention will be paid to potential variation in the process of remarriage by gender and by route into later-life singlehood (divorce vs. widowhood).	Kathryn	 Coursolle
2010	29	Marriage in Later Life	Elder’s Marital Transition and Change in Living Arrangement: Intergenerational Coresidence or Nursing Home?	Change in marital status is a major life course event experienced by the older population. Using data from the 1998 to 2006 Health and Retirement Study, this project examines whether marital transition results in differing levels of need and adjustment in living arrangements for the population age 65 and older. Multivariate logit and discrete time hazard models controlling for elders’ demographic characteristics, family support, economic constraints, and health status are employed to examine the question. The analyses show that having the ability to work for pay is related to a higher propensity to co-reside with adult child regardless of the type of marital dissolution. Transition to widowhood and health deterioration significantly affect nursing home residence. All else being equal, divorce is not significantly associated with intergenerational co-residence or nursing home residence.	Ching-Yi	A. Shieh
2010	29	Marriage in Later Life	Partner Caregiving in Older Cohabiting Couples	Older adults are increasingly likely to live together unmarried in an intimate heterosexual relationship. Although researchers have documented formally married spouses’ preeminence as caregivers to a disabled partner, no prior research has examined the extent to which older cohabitors provide care to a disabled partner. This study extends research on spousal caregiving to older cohabitors by examining differences between formally married and cohabiting elderly with similar levels of disability and associated need for care in (a) the likelihood of receiving care from their partner and (b) partners’ relative involvement in their care. The analysis is based on pooled time-series data from the Health and Retirement Study (2000, 2002, 2004 and 2006). Results indicate that older cohabitors are less likely than their formally married counterparts to receive care from a partner. However, among disabled elderly receiving partner care, cohabiting partners’ participation is greater than married partners’ involvement.	Claire	M. Noel-Miller
2010	29	Marriage in Later Life	Does Informal Care Mediate the Association between Functional Disability and Depression?	The study provides a longitudinal examination of the mediating effect of informal care on the association between functional disability and depression among community-dwelling older adults. This study answers four questions: (1) whether functional disability mobilizes or exhausts informal care, (2) whether informal care, once mobilized, reduces or increases depression, (3) whether depression mobilizes or exhausts informal care, and (4) whether informal care, once mobilized, reduces or increases disability. This study uses five-wave panel data from the Health and Retirement Study that follows a nationally representative sample of older adults for a decade. Results show that informal care from spouses and unrelated others reinforces the effect of disability on depression, whereas the receipt of care from spouses and adult children reinforces the effect of depression on disability. The role of informal care as a mediator between functional disability and depression does not remain constant over time, nor does its effect.	I-Fen	 Lin	Hsueh-Sheng	 Wu
2010	30	Immigration and the Labor Force	The Impact of High-Skilled Immigration on Wages of U.S. Natives	This paper examines the effect of high-skilled immigrants on wages of U.S. natives using the Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) and multiple econometric approaches. The first method estimates the elasticity of substitution between immigrants and natives using a general equilibrium model. The second method uses individual-level instrumental variable (IV) regressions to calculate the impact of increased immigration on wages of natives. Empirical evidence cannot reject the hypothesis that immigrants and natives are perfect substitutes within the same skill group. Furthermore, IV estimates suggest that high-skilled immigration in science and engineering (S&E) reduces wages of similarly educated native workers. These results are consistent with theoretical predictions that increased labor supply puts downward pressure on wages. Moreover, this essay sheds light on wage consequences of immigration in science and engineering and has implications for U.S. policy on high-skilled immigration.	Serena	Hsueh-Chin  Huang
2010	30	Immigration and the Labor Force	Anti-Immigrant Sentiments and Job Competition in Contemporary Japan	Japan recently joined a group of nations hosting a substantial number of international migrants and is also expected to increase the number of immigrants it accepts. Yet little information is available on Japan as an immigrant host country. The first key contribution of this paper is to investigate variations in general anti-immigrant sentiments among the Japanese using the Japanese General Social Survey, 2006. To examine the presence of variation, we test the hypothesis that antagonism towards immigrants is structured by job competition. Is anti-immigrant sentiment spread evenly across all levels of job competition? Or is it higher in industries and occupations with greater job competition in the local labor market? The second contribution of this paper is an investigation of the race/ethnic specificity of antagonistic sentiments. Finally, we provide cross-national comparative statistics from the International Social Survey Program (ISSP), 2003.	Hiromi	 Ono	Hiroshi	 Ono
2010	30	Immigration and the Labor Force	An Examination of the Effect of Place of Education on Job Placement: Major- Occupation (Mis)Match among U.S.- and Foreign-Educated Immigrants	For many years, the finding of the overeducation of Asian Americans for economic parity had puzzled scholars of immigration and generated a wealth of research. Recently, place of education was identified as the missing link solving this paradox. While the puzzle has been solved, questions still remain, including the mechanism governing the link between place of education and earnings. In this study, I explore major-occupation mismatch as a possible mechanism and examine whether foreign- and US-educated degrees lead to differential job placements. I employ a two-step approach to test the mismatch hypothesis. First, using loglinear models, I assess the association between major, occupation and place of education with goodness of fit statistics. Because loglinear models have limited usefulness in multivariate analysis, I then run conditional logit models – which take into account the occupational choice set – as job placement is a function of both individual and occupational characteristics.	Lulu	 Chen
2010	30	Immigration and the Labor Force	Legal Status and Wage Disparities for Mexican Immigrants	This paper employs a unique method of imputing the legal status of Mexican immigrants in the 1996-1999 and 2001-2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation to provide new evidence of the role of legal authorization in the U.S. on workers’ wages. Using growth curve techniques, we estimate wage trajectories for four groups: documented Mexican immigrants, undocumented Mexican immigrants, U.S-born Mexican Americans, and native non-Latino whites. Our estimates reveal a 17 percent wage disparity between documented and undocumented Mexican immigrant men, and a 9 percent documented-undocumented wage disparity for Mexican immigrant women. We also find that in comparison to authorized Mexicans, undocumented Mexican immigrants have lower returns to human capital and slower wage growth. These findings suggest possible discriminatory practices in the wage determination of undocumented Mexican workers.	Matthew	 Hall	George	 Farkas
2010	31	Parental Employment, Early Education and Development	Mothers' Employment and Educational Attainment, Parenting, and Children's Academic Trajectories	A compelling body of research links mothers’ and children’s educational pathways through pro-academic parenting. At the same time, education also grants mothers access to higher-status segments of the labor market. These high status jobs provide mothers with resources (e.g., high wages, flexible schedules) to help promote their children’s successful passage through the educational system, but they also often demand mothers work long hours or return to work shortly after giving birth, which can have negative consequences for mothers’ parenting and children’s achievement. Thus, whether the employment-related returns to maternal education ultimately enhance or diminish mothers’ parenting and widen or narrow socioeconomic gaps in children’s achievement remain unclear. This study uses data from the NICHD Study of Early Childcare and Youth Development (n = 1004) to investigates whether mothers’ employment histories modify (in size and direction) the effect of maternal education on parenting and, through parenting, on children’s early academic outcomes.	Jennifer	M. Augustine	Robert	 Crosnoe
2010	31	Parental Employment, Early Education and Development	Effects of Maternal Employment and Child Care on Children's Obesity Risk: Do Child Care Arrangements Matter?	Since the dramatic rise in childhood obesity rates in the late 1970s, a large number of empirical studies have examined the impact of environmental, behavioral, and societal factors on childhood obesity. Surprisingly, very little attention has been devoted to estimating the impact of two notable changes that occurred concurrently with the rise in obesity prevalence: an increase in maternal employment and in child care usage. Furthermore, current studies have yet to address the potential differences in the effect of child care by type of arrangement. Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey, this study evaluates the effects of maternal employment and child care, by arrangement type, on the risk of obesity. Using several econometric approaches that control for observable and unobservable child, parental, and geographic characteristics, results from the preferred model show that full-time employment reduces the risk of obesity whereas child care with relatives or babysitters increases the risk.	Mai	N. Hubbard
2010	31	Parental Employment, Early Education and Development	Which Children Benefit from Non-Parental Care?	Although randomized experiments have shown the positive impact of high-quality, early-intervention programs on disadvantaged children, there is little consensus on the effect of more widely available, ordinary childcare. This study investigates the relationship between children’s behavioural outcomes and their exposure to center-based care in the Australian childcare market. In order to address possible endogeneity of the childcare choice, propensity score matching and instrumental variable methods are used. Results show that exposure to center-based care is associated with increased reactivity or tantrum. This association is largest among low socio-economic-status (SES) households. A possible explanation for these results is that low-SES parents use center-based care of low quality. We plan to extend this research by investigating whether this negative relationship is concentrated among children who use center-based care of low quality, using measures such as the proportion of qualified staff and scores under the national accreditation system.	Chikako	 Yamauchi	Andrew	 Leigh
2010	31	Parental Employment, Early Education and Development	New School, New Child Care: The Role of Child Care During the Transition to School and Child Well-Being	Kindergarten is an important period of transition to formal school. Yet, the vast majority of American children have already experienced some formal schooling prior to kindergarten entry through participation in formal child care or preschool. For nearly half of all children, the transition is not merely moving from preschool or child care to kindergarten, but rather to a combination of kindergarten and out of school child care. This study aims to examine the role that child care plays in a child’s transition to school. This study uses a nationally representative sample of kindergartners (ECLSK) to examine the role of continuity and change in child care during the transition to school, paying particular attention to important subgroups of children who might have more difficulty with the transition. This study will help inform school readiness and child care policy; illuminating potential ways to help children successfully transition to school.	Amy	E. Claessens
2010	32	Statistical, Spatial, and Network Methods	Spatio-Temporal Trends of Infant Mortality in Brazil	Infant mortality in Brazil has declined appreciably: 79.7% during 1970-2005. These declines do not necessarily indicate that inequalities in infant mortality were equally reduced. We investigate spatio-temporal trends in infant mortality between 1980-2005, utilizing indirectly estimated IMRs for micro-regions. Inequality was assessed through: (i) ratios that compare extremes in IMR (a measure of relative gap in the regional distribution), and (ii) concentration index, considering the municipal GDP as an income indicator, and IMR as the health variable. Clustering patterns of IMR and of the relative change in IMR were assessed through local Moran’s Ii. Our analysis demonstrates that the clustering pattern of IMRs remained roughly unchanged over time. However, the spatial pattern of changes in IMR was dramatically transformed during the 2000-2005 period, when significant reductions were clustered in poorest areas. Declines in IMR were not accompanied by reductions in inequality, with infant deaths disproportionally concentrated in poorest areas.	Marcia	C. Castro	Celso	 Simoes
2010	32	Statistical, Spatial, and Network Methods	Município-Level Estimates of Child Mortality for Brazil: 
A New Approach Using Bayesian Statistics	Previous efforts to estimate child mortality levels in smaller geographical areas have been hampered by the relative rarity of child deaths which has often resulted in unstable and noisy estimates. However, with a spatial smoothing process based upon Bayesian Statistics it is possible to “borrow” information from neighboring areas in order to generate more stable estimates of mortality in smaller areas. The objective of this study was to use a spatial smoothing process to derive estimates of child mortality at the level of the município. Using data from the 2000 Brazil Census we derive both Bayesian and non-Bayesian estimates of mortality for each município. In comparing the smoothed and raw estimates of this parameter, we find that the Bayesian estimates yield a clearer spatial pattern of child mortality with smaller variances in less populated municípios, thus, more accurately reflecting the true mortality situation of those municípios.	Sarah	 McKinnon	Joseph	E. Potter	Carl	P. Schmertmann
2010	32	Statistical, Spatial, and Network Methods	The Spatial Dimension of Educational Inequality in Mexico in the Beginning of the Twenty-First Century	Educational inequality in Mexico has been accompanied and recreated by the distinct spatial distribution of resources devoted to education and of educational services. Furthermore, additional factors that influence the educational trajectories of the youth such as the labor market, migration patterns and the income distribution also have a geographical component. This paper analyzes the role of the spatial dimension in explaining the relationship between the expected years of schooling for children living in Mexico who completed elementary school and the dynamics of the labor markets, migration and the characteristics of the educational services available.	Edith	Yolanda  Gutiérrez Vázquez	Silvia	 Giorguli-Saucedo	Landy	 Sanchez
2010	32	Statistical, Spatial, and Network Methods	Spatial Variations in Fertility: Geographically Weighted Regression Analyses for Town-and-Village-Level TFR in Japan	To re-examine previous research on fertility variations in Japan and to assess heterogeneity of the relationships between regional fertility rates and their covariates, we estimated geographically weighted regression models that allows us to take spatial autocorrelation into account. Our analytical samples are 2,311 towns and villages based on 2005 administrative boundaries. Our explanatory variables include socio-economic conditions, female labor participation, political measures on childcare, and household structure, that come from a database based on census. The result suggests that most coefficients for covariates on total fertility rates have statistically significant geographical variations, and in some regions, sign shifts in the opposite direction from what it is in the global model. We conclude that fertility response to external forces may vary across regions because of their historical and geographical settings, and results of the global model may not be appropriate to uniformly apply for each region.	Kenji	 Kamata	Kimiko	 Tanaka
2010	33	Risk Factors Associated with Adult Mortality	The Functional Form of the Relationship between Educational Attainment and All-Cause Adult Mortality Risks in the United States	A vast literature has repeatedly documented the inverse association between education and U.S. adult mortality risks, but given little attention to identifying the optimal functional form of the association. A theoretical explanation of the association hinges on our ability to empirically describe it. Using the 1979-1998 National Longitudinal Mortality Study for non-Hispanic white and black adults aged 25-100 years, we evaluated 13 functional forms across race-gender-age subgroups to determine which form(s) best captured the association. Results revealed that a functional form that includes a linear decline in mortality risks from 0 to 11 years of education, followed by a step-change reduction in mortality risks upon attainment of a high school degree, at which point mortality risks resume a linear decline but with a steeper slope than that prior to a high school degree was generally preferred. Thus, the complex mediating pathways likely encompass both credential and pure human capital mechanisms.	Jennifer	Karas Montez	Robert	A. Hummer
2010	33	Risk Factors Associated with Adult Mortality	Socioeconomic Risk Factors for Adult Mortality in a Middle-Income Country: The Costa Rican Longitudinal Mortality Study 1984-2007	The Costa Rican Longitudinal Mortality Study (CR-LMS) is a unique new database that prospectively tracks 24-year mortality in a national sample of approximately 20,000 Costa Ricans who were aged 30 and over in the 1984 census. About 5,000 deaths had occurred by December 2008, mirroring death rates from national life tables. Numerous checks suggest that the death registry is extremely high quality; for example, the cohort that started over age 85 is now extinct, an indication that the death registry is complete. We estimate socioeconomic gradients in all-cause and cardiovascular adult mortality using hazard regressions, something rarely accomplished in a developing country population. The data indicate that SES gradients are weak throughout this 24-year period, even among the younger adults. College education is protective but rare, while completing primary or secondary education carries little mortality advantage. Adults in rural areas have lower mortality than in urban areas, an intriguing result.	William	H. Dow	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby
2010	33	Risk Factors Associated with Adult Mortality	Depression and Mortality Risk among Older Adults	The evidence on whether depression has an independent causal effect on the mortality of older adults is mixed. Some findings demonstrate that associations between depression and mortality persist net of subjective health, disability, physical illness, or other controls, whereas in other work the associations disappear. Other studies have sought to disentangle depression–mortality relationships by examining the factors that comprise the CES-D and other depression scales. Most of the various approaches have not addressed multi-directional causality whereby depressive symptoms may directly contribute to disability or physical health, each of which may simultaneously augment or alleviate depression. Using waves 4 through 8 from the Health and Retirement Study, a population-based sample of Americans over 50, this analysis uses proportional hazard and structural equation modeling to answer whether, how, and to what extent depressive symptoms operate through, on, or resulting from physical health and disability.	Stacie	 Carr
2010	33	Risk Factors Associated with Adult Mortality	Suffocation Deaths among the Elderly	Suffocation is the third leading (unintentional) injury-related cause of death among older persons. Among persons 85 and older, there are more deaths attributed to suffocation as an underlying cause than to motor vehicle traffic accidents. Many more deaths among this age group list suffocation as a contributing cause of death. Suffocation as a cause of death is poorly understood and often overlooked in research on old age mortality. We examine the sex and age patterns of suffocation deaths and analyze the multiple causes of death associated with suffocation. Suffocation death rates are higher among men than women, and a larger proportion of these deaths occur in hospitals and nursing homes compared with deaths from all causes. Suffocation as a contributing cause of death is associated with chronic conditions such as Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s disease, and stroke. We discuss these findings and their implications for medical care and for mortality research.	Ellen	A. Kramarow	Judi	 Wong	Li	Hui  Chen	Margaret	 Warner
2010	34	Intergenerational Exchanges across Countries and Societies	Unequal Giving: Monetary Gifts to Children Across Countries and Over Time	Parental gifts of money to adult children may assist with financing education, a first home or a transitory income shock. Financial transfers however, may extend economic disparities across generations if wealthy parents give resources to their children while middle and lower income households do not. We examine annual gifts of money from parents to adult children in the United States and ten European countries. Utilizing the panel of the Health and Retirement Study, we study the long-run behavior of giving to children across and within families. In the short–term parents gave money to compensate for children’s low earnings or schooling needs. With time, the amount of money children in the same family received and across families became more equal. Over time, the amount received was not enough to affect distribution of resources within or between families across generations although the timing of transfers for education may have a significant impact.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	James	P. Smith
2010	34	Intergenerational Exchanges across Countries and Societies	The Gender and Generational Consequences of the Demographic Transition and Population Policy: An Assessment of the Micro and Macro Linkages	The direct and indirect effects of welfare programs should be evaluated together; programs have direct effects on say child health, schooling, family planning, and reproductive health, and spillover to affect other interdependent family outcomes of social importance. For example, having fewer children may contribute to healthier and better-educated children, and may allow women to allocate more time to market work and accumulate more wealth. A long-term quasi-experiment in maternal and child health and family planning in Matlab subdistrict, Bangladesh, documents that program benefits differ by gender and generation, specifically in terms of fertility, investment in human capital, and accumulation of physical assets. Program effects are estimated, first, based on unconditional local average intent-to-treat effects, assuming treatments are uncorrelated with other determinants of these outcomes, second, observed exogenous family and village constraints are suitably controlled, and third, program effects are allowed to differ across types of families and villages.	T.	Paul  Schultz
2010	34	Intergenerational Exchanges across Countries and Societies	Generational Economics in a Changing World	In hunter gatherer societies, children were nutritionally dependent until age 20, and transfers of food flowed downward from adults of all ages including the elderly. Under intensive agriculture, perhaps due to property rights in land, the elderly became net consumers in a stage of partial retirement, sustained in part by transfers of food from their adult children, but net transfers were still downward. As agriculture gave way to industry, retirement came earlier and was more complete. As societies industrialized and the welfare state grew, transfers to the elderly for pensions and health care became increasingly important. Population aging has interacted with these public programs for the elderly, leading to a reversal of the historical pattern of resource flows across age, from downward to upward.	Ronald	 Lee	Andrew	 Mason
2010	34	Intergenerational Exchanges across Countries and Societies	Patterns and Determinants of Intergenerational Transfers in Rural Malawi	High levels of HIV/AIDS morbidity and mortality in sub-Saharan Africa   have profound and immediate impacts on multiple aspects of individuals’   and their extended families’ life, including patterns of monetary and   non-monetary transfers between kin members that are vital to alleviating   the effects of economic and health shocks on households. Sub-Saharan   countries provide unique opportunity to investigate the transfer   mechanisms individuals develop in a context characterized by a high risk   disease environment combined with virtually non-existent institutional   social support systems. We use extensive multi-generation micro-data   from Malawi to investigate patterns and determinants of   intergenerational transfers. We analyze the age pattern of transfers and   investigate how transfers change between generations when a kin member   experiences a health shock such as HIV infection. We describe how   transfers relate to demographic determinants such as fertility,   mortality and family structure.	Iliana	V. Kohler
2010	35	Family Leave Policies	Are There Gendering Effects of a Gender Neutral Parental Leave Policy?	Although Sweden has had a gender-neutral parental leave in place since 1974, the division of leave is still heavily skewed towards women. We investigate whether the existing policy, in which the pay follows labor market income, matters for partners’ division of leave. By using a specific part of the parental leave, the Care for Sick Children benefit, the couples’ decision-making process can be studied explicitly in that the eligibility regulations are taken into account. We use individual-level register data for 2005-2006. The results show that the partner with higher income claims, regardless of gender, the smallest part of the leave. Moreover, the division of leave is unaffected by a reform giving substantial economic incentives to a more equal division. The division could thus be seen as the result of a process governed by absolute and relative earnings or other factors that follow income, but only to lesser degree by gender.	Helen	 Eriksson
2010	35	Family Leave Policies	The Work-Life Balance In Crisis: Leave Taking among Employed Women in the United States	This paper presents the results from a quantitative analysis of women’s leave taking across time and among different types of leave, both paid and unpaid. Data are used from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). A descriptive analysis is used to examine the rates of leave taking among working women (n=38,197) by educational attainment, income level, marital status and race/ethnicity. A multivariate regression analysis and trend analysis are used to examine the significance of the differential rate of leave taking among women, after controlling for other worker, employer, economic, and policy control variables. The results show that patterns of leave-taking magnify inequalities among women. For example, low-skilled and low-income women are more likely to permanently leave a job after childbirth rather than take leave. Only 38% of employed women have access to paid leave. This rate decreases for low-skilled and low-income women.	Emily	 Saunoi-Sandgren
2010	35	Family Leave Policies	Going Back Part-Time: Federal Leave Legislation and
Women's Return to Work	The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) guarantees eligible women job protection and health benefits for 12 weeks surrounding childbirth. This paper tests whether the FMLA may have afforded women more bargaining power with which to negotiate flexible work arrangements, such as return to work at part-time status. Data show that the percent of women working full-time during pregnancy who return to part-time work at the same employer after their first birth doubles, from 8 percent in the early 1990s, prior to FMLA's passage, to 16 percent in the early 2000s. This paper finds that the implementation of the FMLA is significantly associated with a higher odds of returning to part-time relative to full-time work, among first-time mothers working full-time during their pregnancy. Furthermore, eligibility for a greater number leave weeks (state and federal leave combined) is significantly associated with a higher odds of part-time as opposed to full-time return.	Whitney	 Schott
2010	35	Family Leave Policies	Does Paid Leave Promote Employment Stability?	This study examines whether employee access to paid leave is associated with the probability of job retention. Paid leave is understudied relative to other job characteristics, yet it is theoretically plausible that workers with paid leave are better able to address family responsibilities without having to quit a job or risk being fired. In fact, this is one of the compelling, but unsubstantiated, arguments in favor of several current state and federal initiatives aimed at mandating paid leave. Using two panels of the nationally-representative Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component, I estimate logistic regression models predicting the probability of retaining a current job in four future rounds of data collection as a function of the availability of paid leave, controlling for observed and unobserved worker and job characteristics. Results suggest that access to paid leave increases the probability of holding the same job five months later by six percentage points.	Heather	D. Hill
2010	36	Return Migration and Migration Systems	Embarrassing Variety of Choice: Modeling Mexican Return Migration Decisions	This work investigates the utility of applying various models for return migration decisions. I study alternative models that fall in a broad class of polytomous choice models widely used when outcomes consist of categories of choices. The three conceptually plausible models considered are the classical multinomial logit, the nested logit and the sequential logit models. The statistical concepts underlying these models are described and investigated, with a special focus on the assumption of independent irrelevant alternatives, and then an application to data of Mexican return U.S. migration is provided. I use the complete set of individual records of the 2005 Mexican Population Count. I find that these models are dependent on how researchers think of these decision processes and that, for this specific type of application, the sequential logit model offers more flexibility in terms of defining the decision structure and in terms of comparison and interpretation.	Claudia	 Masferrer
2010	36	Return Migration and Migration Systems	Reconsidering Multiplicity Surveys on Emigration from the United States	In the late 1980s, special surveys provided data for the population by nativity and immigration, for family members, and for emigrants and Americans living abroad. These data were collected primarily for emigration component in evaluating decennial census coverage. This paper reconsiders this comprehensive survey approach for studying individuals and family networks by nativity and residence. Those analyses suggested increased Mexican emigrants during the IRCA legalization programs, and, subsequently, Mexican Migration Project researchers found elevated rates of Mexican return migration in 1990-1994 as newly legalized immigrants could travel more easily. The discussion focuses on the likely value that surveys with multiplicity sampling have for depicting trends in return migration and resolving gaps in modeling emigration.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield
2010	36	Return Migration and Migration Systems	Age Effects on Migration Schedule by Migration Type: Primary, Repeat, and Return Migration	The main purpose of this study is to examine whether or not age effects on schedules of migration are different by migration type. This study categorizes migrations into three types including primary migration, onward migration, and return migration employing the data from the 1979 Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY79). The findings present the diversity of age effects on schedules of migrations. Primary migration rates plummet from very high levels at early adult ages to similar levels with other migration types at middle ages, while rates of onward migration decrease steadily with age at low levels. With return migration, however, migration rates increase as people get older. This study explains the diversity of age effects on migration schedules using the concept of  'psychological conservatism in migration decision', that they are more likely to avoid new surroundings as they age. Such a psychological approach has been ignored by mainstream migration studies.	Sanglim	 Lee	E.	Helen  Berry	Michael	B.  Toney	Jang-young	 Lee
2010	36	Return Migration and Migration Systems	International Migration Systems: Evidence from Harmonized Flows Data	Proponents of migration systems theory maintain that empirical evidence specifically from data on bilateral migration flows is central to determining the existence and properties of migration systems; yet, in their available forms, these data lack a meaningful unit of analysis given discrepant systems of data collection and employed validation criteria at the level of the nation-state. The current project therefore attempts to marshal evidence on the properties of migration systems from harmonized data on bilateral migration flows. We consider harmonized estimates of bilateral flows within the European Union from 2003-2007 and assess the theoretical expectation that migration systems are structured hierarchically. Fixed effects variable decomposition permits the estimation of time-invariant effects associated with origin-destination pairs – e.g., shared national/colonial origins, common official language(s), and joint pre-2000 EU tenure – and confirm their explanatory primacy relative to the contributions of origin and destination factors, respectively.	Jack	 DeWaard	Keuntae	 Kim	James	 Raymer
2010	37	China’s One Child Policy after 30 years – Time for a Change?	China's Looming Demographic Crisis: Causes, Prospects, and Policy Options	In the closing decades of the twentieth century, China’s national fertility level dropped to well below the replacement level. The realization of such a demographic shift in the world’s largest population did not come without much confusion and controversy. The role of China’s three-decade long one-child policy has often been assumed to be a major reason for the recent low fertility. This paper introduces the recent evolution of the policy, reviews the drastically changed demographic and social landscape in recent years, and by using results of population projections under varying scenarios, explains why the continuation of the policy will push China over a demographic cliff that has profound implications for China as well as the world.	Feng	 Wang
2010	37	China’s One Child Policy after 30 years – Time for a Change?	A Journey of Eight Years: A Study of China's Fertility Policy	At the turn of the century, a number of Chinese scholars and former government officials in charge of birth control came to the recognition that it was time to put phasing out China’s then two-decade long one-child policy on the research agenda. The research group began its work by arguing the necessity and feasibility of revising the current fertility policy in China. Between 2001 and 2004 they formulated a proposal on policy change and submitted it to the Chinese government in early 2004. That proposal faced many challenges, mainly questions about the relationships between fertility policy and fertility level, between fertility policy and sex ratio at birth, and between fertility policy and the family planning program. To respond to these challenges, the research group carried out field investigations in some areas with a two-child policy since the mid-1980s, as well as the field surveys in selected locales in Jiangsu and Hubei provinces. With these studies, the group drafted and submitted another policy change proposal to the government in early 2009 to argue for the urgency and possibility of policy change. This paper introduces the work by the research group in the eight years. The research group’s call for policy change has encountered much resistance not only from the governmental agencies but also the society at large. Such a resistance reveals that the debate on the policy reflects a lack of understanding of the newly arrived low fertility in China, and requires work to engage the public in recognizing the new demographics of China, and of the world.	Baochang	 Gu
2010	37	China’s One Child Policy after 30 years – Time for a Change?	Below Replacement Fertility in China: How Important is the One Child Policy?	Will China experience a substantial baby boom should the one-child policy be abandoned? By using the results of Jiangsu Fertility Intention and Behavior Survey (JFIBS), this paper examines childbearing behavior, intention, and opinion of Chinese couples who are eligible to have two children according to the local birth control policy. The survey was conducted during 2006-2007 in Jiangsu province of China and collected information on fertility desire, attitude of childbearing, childbearing plan, fertility history, and socioeconomic and demographic factors affecting fertility. The main findings indicate that the ideal number of children, fertility intention and actual fertility are far below the replacement level, and also less than the number of children required by the birth control policy in the studies area. Birth control policy still affects people’s fertility desire and behavior, but is no longer the most important determinant; childbearing decision is influenced jointly by economic, social, and cultural factors. With a focus on the cost and benefit of childbearing from the women’s perspective, it is found that spiritual satisfaction is the most important reason for having a child, but the cost of childrearing became the major consideration for having the second one. With women’s social-demographic characteristics controlled for, economic constraint, opportunity cost and perceived cost of childbearing all have significant effects on women’s childbearing plan of the second child. A follow-up survey is planned by the end of 2009, allowing a further exploration of the relationship between intended and actual childbearing.	Zhenzhen	 Zheng
2010	37	China’s One Child Policy after 30 years – Time for a Change?	The Transformation of China's Birth Control Policy: An Institutional Perspective	With its controversial effects on Chinese fertility and Chinese society, China’s 30-year long one-child policy has created an indisputable heavy institutional footprint: a top-down bureaucratic apparatus with over 300,000 on its payroll. Any discussion on changing China’s birth control policy will have to answer two critical institutional questions: what to do with the birth control apparatus and how will the birthing control apparatus respond to such a change? Changing China’s birth control policy therefore becomes not only a social policy decision, but also a political decision. Using data collected from a survey of birth control officials in four provinces, this paper takes an institutional perspective to assess Chinese birth control officials’ understanding of the current population and birth control situation, to evaluate their reactions to the proposed policy change, and to provide suggestions on how to devise a smooth transition out of the one-child policy.	Yong	 Cai
2010	38	Evaluation of the 2010 Census Using Demographic Analysis Estimates	The Census Bureau’s Plans for Using Demographic Analysis to Evaluate the 2010 Census		Jason	 Devine	Renuka	 Bhaskar
2010	39	Gender, Couple Context and Reproductive Health	Waiting to Have Sex: The Timing of First Sexual Intercourse within Young People’s Relationships	This study examines the timing of first sexual intercourse within adolescent partnerships, which has important consequences for health and development outcomes. Using life history calendar data from a sample of Kenyan youth, we examine the effects of relationship characteristics on the timing of first sexual intercourse within partnerships. We also distinguish between transitions to first sex with and without consistent condom use because of their implications for reproductive health. We examine not only the transition to first sexual intercourse within first relationships but repeated transitions across youth’s multiple partnerships. Preliminary analysis finds that young people decrease the delay to sexual intercourse after they have accumulated experience within previous relationships, leading to event dependence across multiple partnerships. We also find that risk factors operate in opposing directions by gender; stronger commitment to relationships accelerates the timing of first sex for young women while it delays it for young men.	Hongwei	 Xu	Nancy	 Luke	Caroline	 Kabiru
2010	39	Gender, Couple Context and Reproductive Health	The Impact of Unequal Gender Relations on Sexual and Reproductive Behavior of Young Women from Different Social Class in Belo Horizonte, Brazil	We investigated how unequal gender relations decreasing young women’s autonomy in different spheres of live affect their sexual and reproductive behavior. Using data from a survey with a sample of 648 young women between 15 and 24 years of age (292 were living in middle class neighborhoods and 356 were living in slums), we identified how the presence of control and violence from a partner, a low level of access to financial resources and a low degree of control over their sexuality reduced young women’s probability of condom use and increased their chance of getting pregnant before 19. Even when controlling for young women’s age, income and education, lower levels of autonomy were associated with a smaller probability of condom use and also with a higher prevalence of teenage pregnancy. Our results reinforce the importance of understanding the impact of gender inequality on women’s sexual and reproductive behavior and health.	Alessandra	S. Chacham	Malco	 Camargos	Mônica	B. Maia
2010	39	Gender, Couple Context and Reproductive Health	Effects of Relationship Characteristics on Contraceptive Use and Unintended Pregnancy	It is commonly accepted that relationship context influences contraceptive use and unintended pregnancy but little is known about these potential influences. Data were collected as part of a longitudinal study on hormonal contraception among unmarried women who wanted to avoid pregnancy for at least one year, recruited at family planning clinics in low-income San Francisco Bay area communities. Baseline and follow-up surveys were completed at 3, 6, and 12 months. Among 1,089 participants in sexual relationships, higher quality relationships, measured by an 11-item scale, were associated with reduced risk of contraceptive discontinuation (AHR=0.91, p1 year was protective against contraceptive discontinuation. Neither living with a partner nor relationship length was associated with pregnancy risk. Unintended pregnancy interventions should consider the influence of relationship context.	Ushma	D. Upadhyay	Tina	 Raine-Bennett
2010	39	Gender, Couple Context and Reproductive Health	Condom Use Negotiation and Practice among Married Women in Vietnam	This study examines associations between condom negotiation and use among married couple in Vietnam, where traditional values are on women’s being subordinate to men. It tests a hypothesis that women who reported being able to negotiate condom use with their husband would be more likely to use condoms at last sex and consistently within the last 12 months. Data came from the Vietnam Population and AIDS Indicator Survey (VPAIS) 2005; the study sample includes 4,632 married women aged 15-49. Education, watching TV, listening to the radio, and knowledge of condom use to prevent HIV were important to women’s condom negotiation. The capability to negotiate condom use was the strongest predictor of both condom use at last sex and consistent use in the last 12 months. The study provides implications for programs aimed to improve knowledge and practice of HIV prevention, as well as those promoting condoms for family planning purposes.	Mai	 Do
2010	40	Sexual Behavior, Condom Use and STIs	Building for the Future: Enhancing Health, Social and Economic Capabilities of Highly Vulnerable Adolescents	This paper presents longitudinal findings from a randomized control study of a program in KwaZulu Natal that seeks to build the health, social, and economic capabilities of highly vulnerable youth in a severely HIV and AIDS-affected environment. Many programs aim to improve the lives of youth, but few target those who are most vulnerable with specific skills tailored to their circumstances. This program, Siyakha Nentsha, has been tracked for 18 months with over 1,000 young people. Preliminary analysis shows the program has had an impact on young people’s gender attitudes, improved their knowledge of HIV prevention and transmission, and increased their skills and confidence in financial matters like saving money and budgeting. Research indicates a link between saving for the future and safer sexual behaviors, especially among females. This program has immediate effects on young people’s lives and can give them enhanced skills to face and shape their futures.	Kelly	 Hallman	Eva	 Roca
2010	40	Sexual Behavior, Condom Use and STIs	Pathways to Extramarital Sex in Shanghai during the Transition from State to Market	Several scholars have claimed urban China is undergoing a “sex revolution” in tandem with economic transformations. The reforms have had profound implications for social organizations, group affiliation and personal lives, especially for changing environments that may affect perception of self and sexual behaviors. We explore the characteristics of extramarital sexual behavior with data from a recent citywide sexual behavior and sexual networks survey representative of the Shanghai urban population age18-49. The survey contains unique information on respondents’ marital and sexual histories, their current and previous occupation and employer’s economic ownership sector. Both rare-events logistic regression and event-history analysis are used to describe the role that changing social and work environments have on the risk of extramarital sex. We will conclude with a discussion of the implications of our findings for the changing regime of sexual relations and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases in the world’s largest population.	Feng	 Tian	Giovanna	 Merli
2010	40	Sexual Behavior, Condom Use and STIs	Circumcision, Information, and HIV Prevention	Despite that fact that male circumcision may be an important HIV prevention strategy, many countries have been slow at adopting or promoting male circumcision as a core HIV prevention strategy. One concern is that circumcised men may engage in riskier sex after learning that they are less at risk. Among a sample of 896 circumcised and 320 un-circumcised rural Malawian men, we randomly disseminated the information about HIV transmission risk and male circumcision. We then sold condoms to measure the demand for safe sex in response to learning the new information. One year later, we returned to interview the same men and again sell condoms. We report the responses by treatment arm.	Rebecca	L. Thornton	Alister	 Munthali	Susan	 Godlonton
2010	40	Sexual Behavior, Condom Use and STIs	Perceptions of Risk and Sexual Behavior Change Following Adult Male Circumcision in Urban Swaziland	Male circumcision has been shown to reduce the risk of heterosexual transmission of HIV infection in men by up to 60% in three randomized controlled trials. However, little is known about the sexual behavior change of men who have been circumcised and whether the protective effect of circumcision leads to riskier sexual behavior among circumcised men. This study uses qualitative in-depth interviews to understand men’s sexual behavior after circumcision. Men in urban Swaziland, circumcised in the last 12 months, were recruited and asked about their perceptions of sexual risk, and sexual behavior post-circumcision. Although behavioral disinhibition was investigated, results show that men report greater sexual responsibility and sexual satisfaction after the procedure. Results also indicate that HIV counseling and testing may act as a barrier to men seeking circumcision, which reinforces the need for consistent messaging supporting HIV counseling and testing practices with male circumcision scale-up.	Jonathan	 Grund	Monique	M. Hennink
2010	41	Immigrant Generations and Mobility	Intergenerational Mobility of the Children of Mexican Immigrants: Converging to a Mainstream Differentiated by Gender and Region	Intergenerational mobility of the Mexican-origin population is viewed as advancement of children relative to parents or alternatively as degree of convergence to the mainstream. This paper assesses parents, children and the mainstream (proxied by white native born) at the same age (25 to 41, statistically adjusted to 35) in the 1980 census and 2003/05/07 CPS. A suite of 6 socioeconomic outcomes are evaluated separately for men and women. Analysis distinguishes residents in California and Texas, which account for two-thirds of all the second generation Mexican-Americans, and which offer different educational, earnings and housing opportunities. Tests of lifetime mobility into and out of these states reveal relatively closed second-generation populations and minimal selection effects except for the mainstream. Results find much greater advancement by women than men in education and earnings, with men lagging especially in Texas. Variation over time in the mainstream standard is important for enabling or denying convergence.	Dowell	 Myers	Julie	 Park	Tomas	 Jimenez
2010	41	Immigrant Generations and Mobility	A Moving Paradox: A Binational Comparison of Residential Mobility and Health	This paper takes a unique approach to the study of nativity differentials in obesity and self reported health. Mexican origin immigrants and US-born Spanish-speaking residents in one urban setting in the United States are compared to residents in a similar urban setting in Mexico. Our data allow for the test of standard indicators used to proxy acculturation - duration of residence in the United States and home language use- among Mexican immigrants in the United States. But we go beyond this to examine residential mobility among all three groups (Mexican-Americans, Mexican immigrants and Mexicans in Mexico). Thus, we can examine whether health differentials are mediated not only by immigration, but also by residential mobility. In other words, we ask if moving is bad for your health regardless of whether the move takes individuals across international borders.	Jennifer	E. Glick	Scott	T. Yabiku	Steven	A. Haas
2010	41	Immigrant Generations and Mobility	Race, Origins and Poverty Across Immigrant Generations in the U.S.	The humble origins of many recent immigrants combined with sharp declines in manufacturing jobs and persistent patterns of racial discrimination have led scholars to take pessimistic stances on the future of immigrants in the US. This paper uses 1980 and 2000 US Census data to track the incidence of poverty across two generations of Post-Civil Rights era immigrants and determine whether this pessimism is warranted. Results indicate that the incidence of poverty is high in the first generation but very low in the second. The humble origins of immigrant parents seem not to inhibit the movement of their children out of poverty. However, intergenerational advancement out of poverty is most pronounced for white immigrants and least pronounced for black immigrants leaving black adults of the new second generation more likely than white and other immigrants to experience poverty. Implications of these findings are discussed.	Amon	 Emeka
2010	41	Immigrant Generations and Mobility	Immigrant Integration and Financial Well-Being: 
The Role of Race/Ethnicity, Generation Status, and Place of Education	Immigrants’ integration into American society has occupied the interest of both scholars and the general public throughout the nation’s history. Race/ethnicity and nativity status are well known stratifying factors that differentially affect immigrants’ ability to integrate into society. This paper considers an additional influence: where immigrants complete their education (place of education). This paper argues that racial/ethnic and educational stratification will differentially affect patterns of immigrant wealth attainment. Racial stratification is the dominant social process for blacks and Hispanics, independent of their nativity status and/or place of education. Among whites, first generation status separates the wealth attainment of immigrants from that of the native-born. In contrast, Asian immigrants experience a more nuanced stratification system. Both their race and place of education govern their incorporation pattern and ability to accumulate wealth. These findings attest to the unique ways that racial/ethnic and educational stratification affect immigrant integration patterns.	Matthew	A. Painter II
2010	42	Internal Migration	Spatial Dislocation and Return Migration Among New Orleans Residents After Hurricane Katrina	In this paper, we used new data from the restricted version of the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) to examine the location of pre-Katrina residents of New Orleans in the year after the hurricane. The aim is to describe the displacement and return or resettlement of this population and to analyze the factors that shaped these individuals’ location choices. The ACS data provide a unique opportunity to examine the geographic dispersion of New Orleans residents throughout the U.S. in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. We found major disparities in return migration, with blacks much less likely to return than whites. Flood damage appeared to be a key factor in shaping the likelihood of return and in accounting for the observed disparities by race.	Narayan	 Sastry	Jesse	 Gregory
2010	42	Internal Migration	Relative Deprivation and Black Return Migration to the South	Studies of internal migration within the U.S. tend to focus on the absolute gains (usually earnings) resulting from migration. Research in developing countries and international migration, however, highlights that migration is also driven by relative considerations. We argue that relative deprivation is instrumental for explaining recent Southern Black migration. The analysis compares both the absolute and relative earnings and housing gains associated with migration, controlling for selection into migration, employment, and homeownership. We evaluate how the benefits from migration differ by region of origin and destination, and how local conditions such as unemployment and minority/foreign born concentrations affect migration decisions. Overall, we find that migration-related absolute and relative gains do not work in the same direction. Instead, they systematically vary across types of moves. North-South moves are notable in their absence of improvement in absolute earnings but substantial improvement in relative social position. The reverse is true for South-North moves.	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2010	42	Internal Migration	Compositional Threat? An Analysis of the Return Migration and Southern Poverty	Contemporary return migration and changes in racial inequality in poverty make the U.S. South a particularly intriguing case in which to assess the effects of migration on the racial dimensions of poverty. Spatially-informed random effects panel Tobit regression analysis of racial inequality in county poverty rates for southern households shows African American in-migration has important compositional effects. In-migration affects inequality in poverty by modifying the size (which could aggravate inequality) and characteristics of the African American population (which could ameliorate or aggravate inequality). Racial inequality in poverty is lower for counties with higher African American in-migration rates, net of the influence of racial concentration and other structural characteristics. Moreover, the aggravating influence of racial concentration is lower in counties with higher in-migration rates. Overall, results suggest in-migration contributed to the declining inequality in southern poverty in recent decades, and demonstrate the significance of macro-level forces in shaping, or re-shaping, structural inequality.	Katherine	J. Curtis	Jack	 DeWaard
2010	42	Internal Migration	Immigration and Native Mobility in Established, New, and Nongateway Metropolitan Areas	Drawing from the literature on the effects of immigration on natives' regional pattern of internal migration, as well as from recent residential segregation and attainment research, this study offers a neighborhood-level assessment of how native flight from local immigrant concentrations varies according to metropolitan immigrant destination type. By combining panel data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics with tract-level data from four censuses, we explore how the effects of foreign-born populations in the immediate neighborhood of residence and surrounding neighborhoods on the natives' residential mobility decisions differs in Established, New, and Nongateway destination areas.	Matthew	 Hall	Kyle	 Crowder	Stewart	E. Tolnay
2010	43	Genetics and Demographic Behavior	Selection Biases and Choices in Assisted Reproduction Markets	A major ethical question about the commercialization of Assisted Reproduction Technologies (ART) is the concern that prospective parents desire, and can buy, “designer babies”. In this paper I analyze preferences for babies’ characteristics when traditional reproduction is replaced by commercialized components and assess the ‘value’ of different characteristics. I ask whether ‘value’ in the market reflects gender stereotypes.    I address three bias questions. How are sperm and egg donors different from the general population of potential donors? What are the determinants of donor selection? How are the determinants of choice different for men (sperm) and women (eggs)?    The work uses a large sample of both egg donors and sperm donors. The data sets contain information on physical characteristics (like height, weight, eye color, and hair color), education, intelligence and skill characteristics, and other information like race, ethnicity, and religion that are compared to a nationally representative sample.	Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2010	43	Genetics and Demographic Behavior	Social Demographic Change and Autism	Parental age at child’s birth – which has increased for children born in the 1992-2000 birth cohorts is strongly associated with an increased risk of autism. By turning a social demographic lens on the historical patterning of concordance amongst twin pairs, we identify a central mechanism for this association -- de novo mutations -- changes in DNA in the germ cells that are not present in the parents’ DNA. We show that a demographic eye on the rising prevalence of autism gives rise to three major discoveries. The first is that we show that social demographic change can yield genetic changes that at the population level combine to contribute to the increased prevalence of autism. The second is that the estimated heritability of autism has been dramatically overstated. Third, we show that heritability estimates can change over remarkably short periods of time due to increases in germ-cell mutations.	Kayuet	 Liu	Noam	 Zerubavell	Peter	S. Bearman
2010	43	Genetics and Demographic Behavior	The Role of Mother’s Genes and Environment on Postpartum Depression	To date studies of gene and environment interactions on depression have found conflicting results, and none have focused on postpartum depression (PPD)—a form of depression that should be particularly interesting to demographic researchers. The conflicting results may stem from not accounting for the variation in daily stress due to social status. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we examine the interaction of the 5-HTTLPR and STin2 polymorphisms of the serotonin transporter gene with indicators of mother’s early social status (measured as the parents highest level of education) and her own current social status (education and economic situation) during the first year after birth on risk of PPD. We find that the risky alleles are really reactive alleles, so that in high social status environments the risky alleles protect against PPD, but in lower social status environments the risky alleles predict higher probabilities of PPD.	Colter	 Mitchell	Daniel	A. Notterman	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn	Iulia	 Kotenko	Kate	 Jaeger	John	 Hobcraft	Irwin	 Garfinkel	Sara	 McLanahan
2010	43	Genetics and Demographic Behavior	Public Policy and the Genetics of Smoking	In this paper we explore the effect of historical and public policy changes in the genetic influences on smoking desistence. Using a sample of adult twins (nmz=363, ndz=233) from a large population registry, we estimate Cox proportional hazards models that describe similarity in the timing of smoking desistence among adult twin pairs and find that MZ twin pairs are significantly more likely to quit smoking in the same time frame, identified by policy changes, compared to DZ twin pairs. The results provide strong support for the social push perspective for this phenotype. Specifically, we show that genetic factors for smoking desistence increase in importance following restrictive legislation on smoking behaviors that occurred in the early and mid 1970s. These findings make important contributions to the social demography and genetic epidemiology of smoking as well as the gene-environment interaction literatures.	Jason	D. Boardman	Fred	C. Pampel	Peter	 Hatemi	Andrew	 Heath	Lindon	 Eaves
2010	44	Education Policy and Child Well-Being	Black Male Students in New York City and Their Educational Trajectories	We will analyze the variation in educational trajectories of Black male students to better understand the different ways these students successfully or unsuccessfully navigate NYC schools and the school characteristics that contribute to successful academic outcomes. Using longitudinal student-level data from New York City's Department of Education, we first seek to identify common patterns or trajectories among the Black male student population over time. The study will analyze Black male students from one cohort from the time they entered the public school system until the time they left (grades 4 -12). Here, we ask, “What are the patterns of educational trajectories of Black male students in New York City Schools?” At the end of our analysis, we will be able to make policy recommendations about education policy reforms and practical interventions for Black male students, as well as outline important next steps for future research and follow-up.	Ronald	B. Mincy	Afshin	 Zilanawala
2010	44	Education Policy and Child Well-Being	Teacher Certification and Race/Ethnic and Economic Disparities in Early Academic Achievement	As an exploration of some of the major provisions of No Child Left Behind, this study applies the resource substitution perspectives to the early years of elementary school and conceptualizes aspects of teacher certification type as potential compensatory resources for segments of the child population deemed at-risk for early academic problems because of their race/ethnicity, economic status, or both. Applying multilevel modeling and other statistical techniques to data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort revealed that poor and non-poor Black children were consistently the most at-risk groups in math between kindergarten and third grade and in reading by the end of third grade. Poor Black and poor Hispanic children, however, appeared to benefit more from teachers who had regular and/or elementary certification than their peers. In general, Hispanic children, regardless of economic status, tended to be the most responsive to teacher-based resources in the early grades.	Madlene	 Hamilton
2010	44	Education Policy and Child Well-Being	In School and Out of Trouble? Compulsory Schooling and Juvenile Crime	Despite popular accounts that link school attendance to keeping youth out of trouble, little systematic research has analyzed the contemporaneous relationship between schooling and juvenile crime. Using county-level arrest data, this paper examines the connection between the minimum age at which youth can legally leave school and juvenile arrest rates by exploiting variation in state dropout laws. The evidence suggests that minimum dropout age requirements have a significant and negative effect on property and violent crime rates for youth aged 16 to 18 years-old. The results are consistent with an incapacitation effect; school attendance decreases time available for criminal activity.	D.	Mark Anderson
2010	44	Education Policy and Child Well-Being	What Are the Effects of School Openings and Closings 
on the Educational Outcomes of Nearby Students?	The overarching goal of this project is to detail the effects of major structural changes— specifically school openings and closings— on a variety of student outcomes. Typically absent from the literature is a discussion of the impact of these structural school changes on students who do not move, yet remain in environments that change drastically due to a nearby school opening or closing change. Using rich panel data on North Carolina’s public school students from 1995-2007, it is possible to identify students who face a major disruption to academic life, due to largely changing student bodies when nearby schools open or close and student bodies change substantially. Preliminarily, there is suggestive evidence that observably different (disadvantaged) schools and students are most affected by nearby openings and closings. There do appear to be substantial changes in school-level student demographic compositions and achievement that accompany nearby school openings and closings.	Sara	 Pilzer
2010	45	Social Determinants and Consequences of Body Weight	Distribution of Malnutrition in India; Effects of Socio-Economic Characteristics and Economic Development on Being Underweight and Overweight	The prevalence and distribution of malnutrition in a society have implications for public health outcomes and policy formulation. Body Mass Index provides an indication of nutritional status. In adults, the normal BMI range is 18.5 – 24.9. Lately, there have been shifts in the global distribution of malnutrition. In high and middle income countries, problems associated with overweight and obesity have risen alarmingly. In low income countries, under-nutrition coexists with rising overnutrition and associated chronic diseases, brought about by increasing urbanization, and changes in diet and lifestyle due to globalization and economic development. Using NFHS-3, this paper examines the determinants of under and overnutrition amongst adult women and men in India. In particular, the paper focuses on indicators of economic inequality - income inequality and asset inequality. Preliminary analysis suggests that economic inequality matters for both under and overweight, but the effects across various inequality measures are not similar.	Arnab	 Mukherji	Divya	 Rajaraman	Hema	 Swaminathan
2010	45	Social Determinants and Consequences of Body Weight	Obesity by Length of Residence among Mexican-Origin Adults in the U.S.	High obesity rates pose economic and health costs. As the fastest-growing racial/ethnic group, obesity rates among Latinos are important in determining the overall burden of obesity in the country. This paper examines the role of level of exposure to the U.S. in predicting obesity among the Mexican origin population and how sociodemographic factors affect the odds of obesity for immigrants whose exposure is determined by their age at immigration and length of residence and for natives. While obesity rates rise with length of residence for both male and female Mexicans, the results of logistic regression models indicate that education and poverty play different roles in predicting obesity across levels of exposure for males and females. Low educational status and poverty increase the risk of obesity for immigrant females with less exposure to the U.S. No such relationship was found for males or for females with more exposure.	Anne	 Driscoll
2010	45	Social Determinants and Consequences of Body Weight	Educational Differences in Excess Body Weight: A Closer Look	The overweight or obese prevalence among U.S. adults has increased from about 50% in the 1970s to over 66% currently. Excess weight was projected to be reached by all adult Americans by 2048. Population heterogeneities with respect to body weight is a critical issue, but poorly understood. Educational and income weight differences were found to have declined since the 1970s; and it was even claimed that the most rapid increase in obesity occurred in the more advantageous social groups. This paper uses the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey series to examine educational differences in body weight and their change over time. Preliminary analysis indicated continued educational weight patterning, and among women, there has been no decline. Despite the secular trend, today's most educated women are still less likely to be overweight than the least educated thirty years ago.	Yan	 Yu
2010	45	Social Determinants and Consequences of Body Weight	Social Network and Weight Misperception among Adolescents	Public health interventions targeted towards changing lifestyle behaviors to reduce overweight is a considerable challenge. It is important that individuals recognize their overweight status to be a health risk in order for an effective change in lifestyle behaviors to occur and growing evidence suggest that actual weight and perception of weight status often do not match especially among adolescents. This paper examines the extent to which adolescents that are exposed to overweight parent and peers are likely to misperceive their weight status. Using data from a nationally representative sample of adolescents we estimate instrumental variable models with school level fixed effects to account for bi-directionality of peer influence and environmental confounders. Our results indicate that individuals who live in an environment that exposes them to obese parent and heavier peers are more likely to misperceive their weight status and think of themselves to be of lower weight than they actually are.	Mir	 Ali	Aliaksandr	 Amialchuk	Franceso	 Renna
2010	46	The Elderly and Their Kin:  Contact, Care and Social Support	Bargaining Power and Intergenerational Coresidence: 
Adult Children and Their Disabled Elderly Parents	In this paper, we use a game-theoretic framework of families’ living and care arrangements to formulate an empirical model of the effects of changes in parent-child coresidence on transfers by adult children of unpartnered disabled elderly parents. Our theoretical framework suggests that children recognize that if they coreside with the parent, then their siblings may respond by reducing their transfers to the parent. Our results support the notion that coresidence reduces the bargaining power of coresiding children relative to their non-coresident siblings. We observe significant reductions (increases) in the likelihood of providing informal care and in the intensity of care provided by children with siblings who begin (cease) to reside with their parent relative to children with no sibling who lived with a parent in either point in time. These findings highlight the importance of understanding the dynamics of family interactions when evaluating long-term care policies.	Liliana	E. Pezzin	Robert	A. Pollak
2010	46	The Elderly and Their Kin:  Contact, Care and Social Support	Shocks to Maternal Health, Caregiving, and Geographic Proximity among Family Members in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics	This paper uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine the relationship between the health of aging unmarried mothers and geographic proximity to their adult children. We examine whether the onset of poor health affects proximity of mothers and children. Our hypothesis is that as parents fall into ill health and require care, children may move closer to their parent—or parents to their children—to more easily provide the needed care or alternatively, to supervise the provision of paid (formal) care. In particular, we focus on the relationship between past proximity and current proximity between mothers and their children when mothers begin to age and become sick. Among those with more than one child, we examine which child is most likely to move closer (or which child is the mother most likely to move closer to) when health declines.	Kathleen	 McGarry	Emily	 Wiemers
2010	46	The Elderly and Their Kin:  Contact, Care and Social Support	Intergenerational Transfers in Latin American Countries	The main purpose of this paper is to test alternative theories of intergenerational  support using data from the Latin American and Caribbean region. We use data from the  SABE surveys carried out in seven large cities in Latin America and the Caribbean,  MHAS a two wave study of elderly in Mexico, and PREHCO a two wave study of  elderly Puerto Ricans. We propose two sets of models. The first set of models examines  only transfers from non-coresident children to parents using a simultaneous system of  three equations for (a) intergenerational coresidence, (b) elderly labor force participation  and (c) transfers (goods, services, money) from non coresident children to parents. The  second set of models formalizes simultaneously exchanges from parents to children and  from children to parents using a biprobit model. The results of our estimation are much  more consistent with altruistic theories than with exchange theories.	Guido	 Pinto	Rebeca	 Wong	Jason	R. Thomas
2010	46	The Elderly and Their Kin:  Contact, Care and Social Support	Does Family Care for the Young Come at the Expense of the Old?	Using panel data from five waves (1998-2006) of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), this study’s aims are: (a) Estimate age patterns of simultaneous intergenerational money transfers by middle-aged respondents both up the generations (to aging parents) and down the generations (to children/grandchildren); (b) Compare the magnitude of giving among those giving to both generations and those giving exclusively to one generation; and (c) Identify factors associated with the various giver types and those not giving at all. We find that of all households, about ten percent give money to both the young and the old, about thirty-seven percent give money only to children/grandchildren, and about seven percent provide only to parents. The magnitude of monetary transfers to parents is not diminished among respondents who give to both generations compared to respondents who give exclusively to parents. Multivariate models reveal that different factors are associated with the various giver types.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Daphna	 Gans
2010	47	Case Studies in Applied Demography 	Inaccurate Age and Sex Data in the Census Pums Files: Evidence and Implications	We discover and document errors in public use microdata samples (PUMS files) of the 2000 Census, the 2003-2006 American Community Survey, and the 2004-2009 Current Population Survey. For women and men ages 65 and older, age- and sex-specific population estimates generated from the PUMS files differ by as much as 15% from counts in published data tables. Moreover, an analysis of labor force participation and marriage rates suggest the flawed PUMS samples are not representative of the population at individual years of age for those ages 65 and over. These problems were an unintentional by-product of the misapplication of a newer generation of disclosure avoidance procedures carried out on the data. The resulting errors in the public use data could significantly impact studies of people ages 65 and older, particularly analyses of variables that are expected to change by age.	Trent	 Alexander	Michael	 Davern	Betsey	 Stevenson
2010	47	Case Studies in Applied Demography 	Estimates and Projections of Nazi Victims of the Holocaust Currently Residing in Canada, the United States, Central & Eastern Europe and Western Europe, 2010 - 2030	This analysis focuses on the methodology used to create a set of estimates and projections of the number of surviving Jewish victims of the Nazi Holocaust in four major world regions: Canada, the United States, Central & Eastern Europe and Western Europe. We discuss the variety of data sources used to estimate the population of survivors in 2010 and then project forward the population of Nazi victim survivors through 2030 using a cohort component methodology and age-specific mortality rates for Jews the same age living in Israel. In addition, we plan to present estimates and projections of the number of Nazi victims who are likely to have the greatest need for assistance, focusing on those in economic distress an/or physical disability.	Berna	M. Torr
2010	47	Case Studies in Applied Demography 	An Assessment of the New Legislation on Migration Control in Spain: From Amnesties to Regular Avenues for Legal Migration	The characteristics of the new immigration legislation implemented since 2004 have expanded the channels for legal migration in Spain. In this paper we provide an analysis of the transition from illegal to legal migration and the other way around by taking into consideration a case study in the province of Barcelona. First, we demonstrate the potential of using administrative-based data on migrants’ work and residence permits to undertake quantitative longitudinal analysis. Second, we provide an evaluative case study of the new immigration legislation on the trajectories of new migrants. We then highlight how, even if illegal migration has reduced as a result of the economic downturn, non-nationals who reside legally could switch to an illegal status caused by the same economic recession, in particular for those whose work permits are not renewed upon their expiration.	Andreu	 Domingo	Albert	 Sabater	Xavier	 Franch
2010	47	Case Studies in Applied Demography 	Estimating Head Start Enrollment and Eligibility with Census Bureau Surveys	Head Start is one of the largest federally funded early education programs. Today, Head Start serves more than 900,000 children and has been shown to provide positive outcomes for children. However, estimating the number of children who are served by Head Start programs has not been successful. This study examines the quality and comparability of Head Start and early education data obtained from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the American Community Survey (ACS), and the Current Population Survey (CPS). Preliminary analysis shows that SIPP under estimates the number of children in Head Start. We investigate if it is possible to indirectly estimate the number of children eligible for Head Start using the ACS or the CPS and if our estimates can be used to improve the SIPP data. Recommendations for how to collect higher quality data on Head Start and other child care issues will also be discussed.	Lynda	L. Laughlin	Jessica	W. Davis
2010	48	Motherhood and Work	The Wage Penalty for Motherhood in a Cross-National Perspective: The Importance of Work-Family Policies and Cultural Attitudes	The relationship between family policies and the size of motherhood penalties cross-nationally is not clearly understood. Using newly collected policy data and microdata from the Luxembourg Income Study, we estimate multi-level models across 22 countries to examine the relationship between country-level family policies and the motherhood wage penalty. We find that, net of individual factors and national public sector size, publicly funded childcare for infants is linked to lower wage penalties. In addition, job-protected parental leave has a curvilinear relationship with motherhood penalties: short leaves are associated with smaller penalties while long leaves are linked to higher wage penalties. Notably, paid paternity leave is also linked to smaller motherhood penalties. In light of findings for other policies, we conclude that despite varying socio-political contexts, family policies that serve to maintain new mothers’ continuous connection to the labor force are most strongly linked to reductions in motherhood wage inequalities.	Michelle	J. Budig	Joya	 Misra	Irene	 Boeckmann
2010	48	Motherhood and Work	The Motherhood Penalty at Midlife: The Long-Term Impact of Birth-Timing on Women’s Careers	A growing body of research has shown that mothers pay a significant wage penalty for having children, especially while their children are young. In this paper, we take a life course perspective to study the long-term impact of both the number and timing of births on women’s wages and occupations at midlife. We use data from the Young Women’s cohort of the National Longitudinal Study to examine the motherhood gap for women as they age through their forties and fifties. Our underlying question is whether the career penalty (especially for women with early first births) grows narrower or wider as women grow older. In addition to incorporating human capital measures reflecting accumulated work experience and training, we also consider the impact of women’s attitudes reflecting their preferences about gender roles, the value of work and the importance of the family.	Joan	R. Kahn	Javier	 Garcia-Manglano	Suzanne	M. Bianchi
2010	48	Motherhood and Work	Partnership Characteristics and the Motherhood Wage Penalty: The Influence of Sexual Orientation	The existence of a motherhood or family wage gap in the labor market has been well-documented but a population sub-group for whom researchers have not fully explored the wage effects of parenthood is the same-sex unmarried couple population. The purpose of this paper is to determine whether a motherhood wage penalty exists for same-sex unmarried partner (SSUP) parents using PUMS data from the U.S. census and the American Community Survey to compare four different partnership types: married, two-sex unmarried partners, female SSUP and male SSUP. The hypothesis is that a motherhood penalty would exist for SSUP parents of both sexes but would be significantly smaller than that for the general female population. Preliminary findings indicate that having a dependent child actually has a positive (negative) association with the wages of female (male) SSUP parents which is contrary to current knowledge on the effect of parenthood on earnings.	Pearl	 Kyei
2010	48	Motherhood and Work	To Publish or Parent? Continued Childbearing among PhDs in Sweden, 1991–2005.	This paper studies the fertility of PhDs and explores how continued childbearing vary among men and women regarding to field of research. Previous research show that in Sweden, couples in which at least one partner is a PhD do not have the same problems of combining research and a family as peers in other countries. The determinants of second and higher-order births are analyzed multivariately using longitudinal data on couples from different population registers in Sweden, 1991–2005. Preliminary results indicate that field of research affects higher-order fertility in a highly gendered way, in line with hypotheses about how educational and occupational orientation may reflect work-family conflicts in different academic fields. The results also indicate that the couple context is very important as it reflects the relative power balance within the couple. Belonging to a dual-academic couples seem to have a mediating effect on the common found academic work-family incompatibility.	Maria	A. Stanfors
2010	49	The Demographic Impact of Pandemics	Cholera in the Mediterranean Sea in the XIXth Century	During the XIXth century, many epidemics threatened the Mediterranean basin. Cholera, in particular, focused the international attention, as the rapid steam boats made it possible to transport the disease from its endemic homeland in India to Europe in a few weeks.   The research is organized into three sections. The first one describes the demographic crisis caused by cholera epidemic in the Mediterranean in the XIXth century. The second part discusses the restrictive hygienist measures that were taken by Europe at that time. This part will focus on the different thoughts between the various European nations, explaining why Britain adopted such a specific policy and entered into conflict with France, Italy and Germany. The last part of the paper deals with the reactions of the colonized governments, but also by the local populations. The issue of the restrictions to the Mediterranean routes to Mecca will also be examined in this part.	Sofiane	 Bouhdiba
2010	49	The Demographic Impact of Pandemics	Exposure to the 1918 Pandemic and Later Mortality by Cause: Evidence from the NHIS Data	Accumulating evidence suggests that exposure to disease in utero is associated with negative adult outcomes, such as decreased educational attainment and higher disability rates, and potentially also with excess mortality. However, existing research looking at the long-term effects of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic has failed to find any mortality effects. We use a large sample from the National Health Interview Surveys to study whether mortality of cohorts exposed in utero to the 1918 Influenza Pandemic is elevated. We find that cohorts born right after the peak of the epidemic have excess all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality when compared to the neighboring birth cohorts. The results suggest that late in utero exposure to disease may have increase mortality decades later. These findings are especially important in the light of contemporary disease epidemics, suggesting that an epidemic is not necessarily over once the incidence rates decline.	Mikko	 Myrskylä	Neil	 Mehta	Virginia	W. Chang
2010	49	The Demographic Impact of Pandemics	The Effect of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic on Orphanhood and Kinship Structure in Zimbabwe. Results Based on Formal Demography and Microsimulation	The paper analyzes the effect of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on orphanhood probabilities and kinship structure in Zimbabwe. An approach based on the formal demography of kinship is used to obtain insights on the effect of the epidemic on maternal orphanhood. The approach relies on demographic rates that are widely available across countries and can thus be used for comparative purposes. A microsimulation model based on SOCSIM, with larger data requirements, is calibrated to the Zimbabwean setting to quantitatively assess the crisis of care. Estimates and projections of the number of orphans, and key kinship resources available to them, are obtained for the period 1980-2050. The paper gives a methodological contribution to the literature that analyzes the material basis of traditional kin relations in sub-Saharan Africa. Substantively, it documents the extent of the orphanhood crisis in Zimbabwe, its evolution over time, and the progressive erosion of kinship resources available to orphans.	Emilio	 Zagheni
2010	49	The Demographic Impact of Pandemics	A Parametric Investigation of Mortality at All Ages in a Rural, South African Population	Throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century, southern Africa experienced increasing adult mortality, which researchers have linked to escalating HIV prevalence over this period. In this paper, we utilize a parametric model, the Heligman-Pollard law of mortality, estimated via a Bayesian Melding procedure, to assess rapidly changing mortality schedules for men and women in a rural population of South Africa. Despite having been used in a variety of other, mostly economically developed contexts, the Heligman-Pollard model has been under utilized in the analysis of mortality in high HIV-prevalence settings. The ability of parametric models to easily summarize changes in mortality over time via elegant demographic parameter interpretations, make these methods especially valuable for researchers concerned with dynamic mortality profiles in the presence HIV/AIDS. This paper also reports on the relationship between growing HIV prevalence in this region and the change in the Heligman-Pollard parameters over this time period.	David	J. Sharrow	Samuel	J. Clark
2010	50	Social Differentials in Biological Parameters	The Effect of Compulsory Schooling on Health. Evidence from Biomarkers	Using data from the Health Survey for England and the English Longitudinal Study on Ageing, we estimate the causal effect of schooling on health. Identification comes from two nation wide increases in British compulsory school leaving age in 1947 and 1973, respectively. Our study complements earlier studies exploiting compulsory schooling laws as source of exogenous variation in schooling by using biomarkers as measures of health outcomes in addition to self-reported measures. We find a strong positive correlation between education and health, both self-rated and measured by blood fibrinogen and C-reactive protein levels. However, we find ambiguous causal effects of schooling on women's self-rated health and insignificant causal effects of schooling on men's self-rated health and biomarker levels in both sexes.	Hendrik	 Juerges	Eberhard	 Kruk	Steffen	 Reinhold
2010	50	Social Differentials in Biological Parameters	The SES Gradient of Biomarkers of Cardiovascular Disease Risk in Longevity Areas in China	This paper uses recently collected survey and biomarker data from the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey (CLHLS). The sample is comprised of older adults (ages 60-100+) living in seven designated “longevity areas” in China. We examine the SES gradient of biomarkers (obtained from blood and urine samples) of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. Our data are unique, a population survey with relatively rich biomarker data collected in a developing country. The biomarkers used as dependent variables in our study include: waistline, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, cholesterol ratio, blood pressure, and glycosolated hemoglobin. Results from regression analysis show that educated individuals are more likely to have high triglycerides and a high cholesterol ratio giving evidence of a positive relationship between biomarkers of CVD risk (worse cardiovascular health) and SES, the opposite of the gradient that we see in developed countries.	Melanie	 Sereny	Linda	K. George	Xiaoming	 Shi	Zhaoxue	 Yin
2010	50	Social Differentials in Biological Parameters	The Differential Impact of Subjective and Objective Aspects of Social Engagement on Cardiovascular Risk Factors	This paper provides new insights into the impact of objective and subjective components of social engagement on CVD risk factors. We hypothesized that objective (social participation and social ties) and subjective (emotional support) aspects of social engagement are independently associated with objective measures of CV risk.   Data from the English Longitudinal Study on Ageing (ELSA) were analyzed. The effects of social participation, social ties and emotional support on hypertension, HDL, HBA1c, hsCPR, and Fibrinogen were estimated by logistic regression controlling for age, sex, education, depression, cardiovascular disease, other chronic diseases, BMI and smoking. Regression analysis shows that social participation is a consistent predictor of low risk for all five risk factors, even after adjusting for a wide range of covariates. Social ties are associated with lower risk for hypertension. Emotional support provided by spouse is associated with three of the cardiovascular risk factors (serum HDL, hypertension and HbA1c).	Yumiko	 Kamiya	Brendan	 Whelan	Virpi	 Timonen	Rosanne	 Kenny
2010	50	Social Differentials in Biological Parameters	Perceptions and Knowledge of Underlying Health Conditions in Mexico	This paper analyze knowledge of health conditions in Mexico by comparing measured health indicators with self reported indicators. We use anthropometric information in the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS) to analyze the extent to which people are knowledgeable of their health conditions, in particular regarding weight, height, blood pressure and glucose levels and the extent to which what individuals report correlates with their actual measures. Reporting errors may derive from lack of knowledge about true health conditions or embarrassment in reporting, such as in the case of weight. We use the MxFLS to estimate the variables associated with reporting errors focusing on the impacts of socio economic variables as well as those reflecting access to health care.	Susan	 Parker	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel
2010	51	Factors Influencing Health in Later Life: Evidence from Developing Countries	Parity and Parents’ Health in Later Life: The Gendered Case of Ismailia, Egypt	In this paper, we investigate the relationship between reproduction and functional health in later life among women and men in the resource-poor and gender-stratified setting of Ismailia governorate, Egypt. Analyses of survey data collected in 2003 show a statistically significant positive association between parity and difficulty with activities of daily living (ADLs), controlling for demographic and socioeconomic factors and other co-morbid conditions. We also find that the number of daughters (but not sons) is associated with worse physical functioning, and this association is more pronounced for older fathers than for older mothers. Our results indicate that both biological and social pathways link fertility and later-life health in this context, and that prescribed familial roles may underlie the differential impact of sons and daughters on the health of mothers and fathers in later life.	Michal	 Engelman	Emily	M. Agree	Kathryn	M. Yount
2010	51	Factors Influencing Health in Later Life: Evidence from Developing Countries	Explanations for Education Gradients in Depression	Our objective is to examine educational gradients in depression and to identify underlying mechanisms of how education might affect depression. We use a nationally representative sample of community-residing older adults aged 45 and older from the 2006 Korean Longitudinal Study of Aging, which collected information about depressive symptoms and education. Using tobit regression, we estimate the effect of education on depression and examine what can explain the education gradients by controlling for proxy variables of different pathways linking education to depression. We found strong age-adjusted education gradients in depression. We were able to explain all of the education gradients by cognitive ability, economic resources, social status, social network, and health behavior. Spouse’s education is found to be particularly important for women. Children’s educational achievement influences parents’ depression as well. Education affects depression through different underlying mechanisms, and the single most important pathway is through developing cognitive ability.	Jinkook	 Lee
2010	51	Factors Influencing Health in Later Life: Evidence from Developing Countries	Left Behind: The Effects of Children’s Migration on Elderly Parents’ Health	Family disruption due to migration represents a stressful event for the parents left behind with serious implications for their mental health. This paper has four aims. First, we investigate how adult children's migration affects the mental health of elderly parents left behind. Second, we investigate if this effect varies by type of migration, internal vs. International. Third, we examine if this effect varies by elderly parents’ characteristics such as physical health, childlessness, widowhood, living arrangements, urban/rural residence, and education. Fourth, we examine if this effect is mitigated by the impact of receiving financial transfers from their children. Finally, we ask whether the impact of migration on mental health varies by migrant children’s characteristics such as sex, education, and birth order. We use representative longitudinal data from the Mexican Family Life Survey which includes a wide array of mental and physical health measures, elderly parent’s and children characteristics.	Erika	 Arenas	Jenjira	 Yahirun
2010	51	Factors Influencing Health in Later Life: Evidence from Developing Countries	Disability among Urban and Rural Elderly in China: Explaining Disparities Using Individual- and Community-Level Characteristics	It is known that living standards and ways of life differ between people in urban versus rural areas of developing countries. These differences likely have implications for health. There is, however, little research to date that has examined this in the context of development. Therefore, we use China as an example, and first contrast disability status among older adults in urban versus rural areas and then examine a series of individual- and community-level factors that may account for the differences in disability by place of residence. Our preliminary results show urban residence is inversely associated with disability in old age, while SES, social support, healthcare resources, and health related behaviors, both at individual- and community-levels, are important in predicting old age disability and explaining the urban-rural disparities. Given global trends in population aging and urbanization, these results have implications for policies on improving overall health.	Toshiko	 Kaneda	Zachary	 Zimmer	Kaiti	 Zhang
2010	52	Migration and Divorce	Divorce Risks of Immigrants in Sweden	Migration is a stressful life event that may be related to subsequent marital instability. However, while the demographic dynamics related to the fertility and mortality of migrants have been studied in great detail, we still lack accurate analyses of divorce risks of immigrants in Europe. The present study improves on this situation by investigating the divorce risks of immigrants in Sweden. It focuses on immigrants who married subsequent to migration to Sweden and tests the relative importance of cultural background and socio-economic status in explaining the divorce behavior of immigrants. Both factors turn out to be important. For groups for which divorce risks are elevated, this can often be explained by immigrants’ relatively poor labor-market status. Other groups of immigrants rather have depressed divorce risks. Our study is based on population register data on the resident population of Sweden and covers the fifteen most common immigrant groups in this country.	Gunnar	 Andersson	Kirk	A. Scott
2010	52	Migration and Divorce	Does Intermarriage Increase the Risk of Divorce? 
The Impact of Human Capital and Cultural Dissimilarity on Divorce Risks for Immigrants in Sweden 1990-2005	In this paper the connection between intermarriage (exogamy with a native) and divorce is analyzed using individual level register data for all immigrants moving to Sweden after 1968 and getting married between 1990 and 2000. Using event history models we study the impact of type of marriage (endogamous, exogamous with a native, exogamous with another immigrant) and cultural distance between the spouses (based on a 10-category country grouping reflecting language, religion and level of development) on divorce risks, controlling for standard human capital and demographic characteristics of the spouses. Our main hypotheses are that intermarriage increases divorce risks, and that this effect increases with a greater cultural distance between the spouses. The results have implications not only for our understanding of divorce patterns but also of the societal integration of immigrants in Western societies, and the role of marriage choices in this process.	Martin	 Dribe	Christer	 Lundh
2010	52	Migration and Divorce	Remarriage and Migration in Rural Malawi	The HIV/AIDS epidemic has had a dramatic effect on marriage patterns in sub-Saharan Africa. Research consistently shows that individuals who are HIV positive are more likely to experience marital dissolution, either through divorce or widowhood. However, much less is known about what happens after marital dissolution. Are HIV positive individuals less likely to remarry than HIV negative? Since at least one spouse typically migrates after a marriage ends, such questions related to remarriage are difficult to address using longitudinal data, due to potential selection bias of migrants. Using a unique set of longitudinal data that includes a sample of migrants, we investigate the relationship between HIV infection and remarriage among rural Malawians. With these data, we examine remarriage patters for HIV positive individuals, and address whether HIV positive individuals who migrate are more likely to remarry than HIV positive individuals who remain in their residence.	Philip	A. Anglewicz	Georges	 Reniers
2010	52	Migration and Divorce	A Longitudinal Analysis of the Effect of Migration on Union Stability in Mexico	The stability of a marital union can be affected by cultural, economic, and demographic factors. Although less studied, migration also affects union stability, and the mechanism can involve both disruptive and adaptive effects. The physical absence that accompanies migration jeopardizes social cohesion since friendship relations and primary associations are disrupted. Likewise, the stressful nature of the moving itself increases the odds of union dissolution. Migration also provides women with opportunities to come across more egalitarian gender norms and different marriage ideals. Adaptation to prevailing cultural and social norms in communities of destination can also affect union stability. This paper uses longitudinal data to examine the effect of migration on the likelihood of union dissolution in the context of Mexico. Preliminary results from the baseline survey show higher proportions of union dissolution among men and women with post-marital migration experience to urban and international destinations compared to rural migrants and non-migrants.	Adriana	 Lopez Ramirez
2010	53	Neighborhood Influences on Health: Exploring Mechanisms	Exploring Pathways between Neighborhood Built Environment and Inflammation	This study examines the role of the built environment in racial disparities in C-reactive protein (CRP), a biomarker of inflammation associated with cardiovascular disease. A probability sample of adults representative of Chicago neighborhoods, yielded CRP measures for 610 persons. Little work has explored neighborhood variation in CRP, and no studies have explored the potential role of the built environment. However, CRP is known to be associated both with physical activity and with ambient air pollution, and thus may be related to the built environment through either or both mechanisms. Initial results show blacks have significantly higher CRP than whites. Traditional controls for neighborhood context does little to reduce the racial disparity, but neighborhood-level measures of land use along with socioeconomic controls do explain the black-white gap. Continued work will seek to identify a mechanism (pollution, mental health, walkability) by which land use may influence CRP.	Katherine	 King
2010	53	Neighborhood Influences on Health: Exploring Mechanisms	The Sociogeography of Sleep among Legal and Unauthorized Migrants Residing in Metropolitan Boston	We employ 2007 Harvard-UMASS Boston Metropolitan Immigrant Health & Legal Status Survey and 2000 U.S. Census data to investigate how household and neighborhood environments influenced sleep among Brazilian and Dominican migrant adults. Specifically, controlling for individual demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, various other health behaviors, and interpersonal networks of reciprocity, we estimate the relative influence of household characteristics (e.g., number of children, sleeping arrangements) and neighborhood context (e.g., disorder, noise) and composition (e.g., ethnoracial diversity, trust) on several measures of sleep quality. Regression results suggest that both household and neighborhood environments influenced sleep duration, sleep debt, and overall sleep quality similarly regardless of legal status. Having been married and residing in a home with fewer children reduced the probability of poor sleep, and residing in a neighborhood with more social disorder raised it. We conclude by discussing whether objective or subjective neighborhood metrics are more important for understanding sleep outcomes.	Enrico	 Marcelli	Orfeu	 Buxton
2010	53	Neighborhood Influences on Health: Exploring Mechanisms	Does Sleep Quality Mediate the Association Between Neighborhood Disorder and Self-Rated Physical Health?	We examine whether the association between perceived neighborhood disorder and self-rated physical health is mediated by sleep quality. We use data from the 2004 Survey of Texas Adults (n = 1,323) to estimate a series of nested multivariate models. We find that both neighborhood disorder and poor sleep quality are associated with poorer self-rated health, even with controls for exercise, diet quality, smoking, obesity and a host of relevant sociodemographic factors. Using our series of nested models, we observe that the inverse association between neighborhood disorder and self-rated physical health is partially mediated by sleep quality. Poorer sleep among residents of high disorder neighborhoods may contribute to the cause of the poorer self-rated physical health in these neighborhoods. Interventions to improve sleep quality among residents of neighborhoods with high levels of disorder should be explored. Future research on the causal relationships between neighborhood disorder and sleep quality is needed.	Lauren	 Hale	Terrence	D. Hill	Amy	M. Burdette
2010	53	Neighborhood Influences on Health: Exploring Mechanisms	Neighborhood Stressors and Health: Crime Spikes and Short-Term Variability in BMI	Disparities in the prevalence of overweight and obesity across sociodemographic characteristics remain a source of enduring concern for social scientists, clinicians, and policy makers. We apply neighborhood theory to understanding variation in short-term changes in body mass index (BMI), focusing on the role that neighborhood social cohesion and rapid increases in the crime rate (“crime spikes”) play in influencing weight gain. Data on BMI change for adults ages 30-65 are drawn from the 2000-2002 Dallas Heart Study. Results from multilevel linear models indicate that crime spikes increase short-term weight gain while social cohesion exerts a protective effect. However, social cohesion amplifies the positive impact of crime spikes on weight gain, suggesting that cohesive neighborhoods more efficiently disseminate stress-inducing information about local crime rates. These findings shed light on the contextual processes that influence changing health status and offer a rigorous design for the investigation of neighborhood effects.	Christopher	 Browning	Kathleen	A. Cagney
2010	54	Economic Crisis and Gender Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Impact of Poverty on Health and Well-Being in Rural Malawi	This paper isolates the causal link of poverty on health status and subjective well-being of the rural population in Malawi using three waves of household panel data spanning the period 2004-2008. Several suitable instruments for economic resources, e.g. rainfall and the price of salt, are employed in both instrumental variables and fixed effects strategies to consistently  address endogeneity of the wealth to health relationship. This link is examined in the context of Malawi, a low-income country with high background morbidity and mortality,  as well as an AIDS epidemic, high fertility, and poor reproductive health. The analyses show that a doubling of income improves general health status by 23.6% and well-being by 20.4% of rural Malawians. Economic hardship has health and well-being implications to individuals and families in rural Malawi that are also likely found in  other regions and countries in sub-Saharan Africa facing a novel set of critical development challenges.	Brian	 Chin
2010	54	Economic Crisis and Gender Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa	Gender, Economic Well-Being and Children’s Access to Schooling in Kinshasa: Evidence on the Consequences of Prolonged Economic Crisis	Previous research on the effects of gender and economic well-being on children’s access to schooling in Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the second-largest city in sub-Saharan Africa, has documented the importance of both of these factors as relevant to who goes to school in the city and progress made in school. That research utilized data from a 1990 survey. Beginning soon after that survey was carried out, the DRC experienced a protracted period of economic crisis, characterized by an unbroken 12-year stretch during which GDP per capita declined each year. This paper uses data from the Demographic and Health Survey carried out in the DRC in 2007 to examine these same factors – school enrollment and progress in school – to see how, if at all, the relationships between gender, economic well-being, and school attendance and progress have changed since 1990.	David	 Shapiro
2010	54	Economic Crisis and Gender Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa	Nuptiality Trends in Western Africa: a Double Standard?	Western Africa is the Subsaharan area where family changes are the slowest. This is specially the rule for nuptiality trends: women’s age at first marriage is lower than elsewhere, age gap between spouses are large, polygamy is common. However recent data show a mixed picture between Sahelian and Coastal countries. Countries located in the Guinean Gulf show faster changes than the Sahelian ones, concerning first marriage patterns as well as polygamy. The paper aims to ascertain this double standard and to explore the explanation of these diverging trends. Are differentials in socio-economic development a possible explanation? What is the role of economic recession? Is there a true divergence between the countries or rather a different timing? Analysis will be done in a systematic way, using the statistical tables from the censuses and national surveys realized since the 1950s in the 15 West-African countries, ie about 120 operations.	Véronique	 Hertrich	Kokou	 Vignikin	Mouftaou	 Amadou Sanni
2010	54	Economic Crisis and Gender Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa	Sources of Inequality within the Cameroonian Labor Market: Sociodemographic versus National Economic Contexts	Like other developing regions, Africa has witnessed progress in women’s schooling, delaying marriage, and reducing fertility in the past decades. Theoretically, these trends could improve employment prospects for women and reduce gender inequalities at the level of the family, labor market, and society. Yet, the evidence on Africa has been spotty and weak. Combining discrete-event history analysis and qualitative data, both from Cameroon, in an innovative analytical framework, I show how the employment gender inequality has changed and decompose the sources of observed changes vis-a-vis schooling, marriage, and fertility. Results suggest that the employment inequality has persisted within both the overall and formal economic sectors. While periods of economic growth favor women’s than men’s formal sector prospects, Cameroonian women have not reaped the anticipated economic benefits to their human capital. Discrimination and lower access to economic opportunities explain the deep-seated inequality, regardless of human capital, marital status, and family size.	Fatou	 Jah
2010	56	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility: International Perspectives	Religiousness and Reproduction in Muslim Countries	This study is aimed at determining the effects on fertility of variations in religiousness and in egalitarian attitudes in the Muslim world. Based on Muslim populations in 18 developing countries, the work is an extension of an earlier study by Westoff and Frejka of the connections of religiousness and reproductive behavior in Europe. We use data from the World Values Surveys to assess the ways in which religiousness is related to attitudes toward gender equality, and how they in turn impact the age at marriage and then reproductive behavior within marriage. We compare data for women (n=11,412) and men (n=12,233), and evaluate the role played by geographic regions, as a proxy for underlying cultural variability. These micro-level analyses will be accompanied by national comparisons using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys and international agencies.	Charles	 Westoff	John	R. Weeks
2010	56	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility: International Perspectives	Explanations for the Fertility Reversal after 2005 in Japan	The major goal of this paper is to explore the explanations for the total fertility rate upturn in Japan after 2005. Following the view on the retreat from lowest-low fertility in European countries, we focus on elimination of tempo effects, inflation by immigrant women, economic improvement, policy effects on reconciliation of work and family life, and the contextual effects reflecting familistic attitude and welfare. Using weighted least squares models or weighted spatial error models, we estimate the influence of covariates on prefecture (state)-level TFR change from 2005 to 2008. According to the predicted values for national level increase, most of the increase was explained by increase in late fertility by the late thirties or forties, and increase in foreign mothers and decline in unemployment rates also pushed TFR upward. We will discuss the possible future trends and the importance of removing the barriers to maternal labor force participation.	Miho	 Iwasawa	Kenji	 Kamata	Ryuichi	 Kaneko
2010	56	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility: International Perspectives	Fertile Debates: A Comparative Account of Low Fertility in the Greek and British National Press	This paper compares how the Greek and British mainstream national press approached low fertility between 2001 and 2009. It describes not only the frequency with which the issue was mentioned by each set of newspapers but also the causes and consequences that they associated with it. Included in the discussion, are the Greek and British print media’s suggestions (e.g. measures or policy solutions) about how to deal with below-replacement fertility. Throughout the paper, the causes, consequences and solutions offered by the press are compared to those from the relevant demographic literature as well as a deliberately small sample of Greek and British women's personal accounts of reproductive decision-making, which were gathered by the author during an extensive period of fieldwork in Athens and London between 2001 and 2005. The paper ends with a discussion of the media's role in constructing and distributing particular forms of knowledge about demographic phenomena.	Katerina	 Georgiadis
2010	56	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility: International Perspectives	Fertility Differentials by Education and Community HIV Prevalence	Both individual and community education can be expected to condition the impact of HIV prevalence on fertility. Existing literature seems to suggest that the epidemic will only solidify the negative relationships between socioeconomic status and fertility that we have all grown accustomed to. However, when HIV-related mortality reduces the returns to schooling by truncating the time horizons for such returns (and introducing uncertainty about them), educated individuals who would otherwise have educated their children are the most likely to experience changes in the costs and benefits of children. Fertility differentials at the individual level could therefore alter radically. Whether better-educated communities respond differentially to HIV prevalence also receives empirical investigation here.	Laurie	 DeRose
2010	57	Environmental Impacts on Population Dynamics and Health	Environmental Change, Risky Sexual Behavior, and the HIV/AIDS Pandemic: Exploring Linkages through Livelihoods in Rural Haiti	Natural resources are central to rural livelihoods across much of the lesser developed world and, as such, resource scarcity may drive households to diversify livelihood strategies. We examine the association between natural resource scarcity, change, and the potential for rural women to engage in risky sexual behaviors. We do so to contribute to recent scholarship examining transactional sex as a means of acquiring necessary goods (e.g., Bene and Merten 2009), and also to examine the potential for environmental scarcity and change to contribute to perpetuation of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We use DHS data from Haiti and vegetation measures from satellite imagery. In all, the research adds to an understanding of how environmental change may shape population dynamics through its: 1) focus on Haiti, a setting outside sub-Saharan Africa although also impacted by HIV/AIDS and 2) its focus on livelihood decline as a potential driver of HIV/AIDS vulnerability through risky sexual behaviors.	Lori	M. Hunter	John	P. Reid-Hresko	Tom	 Dickinson
2010	57	Environmental Impacts on Population Dynamics and Health	Environmental Influences on Migration in Rural Ecuador	The potential for large numbers of internal and international migrants to be displaced by environmental change, particularly climate change, has gained increasing attention, but as of yet few studies have used demographic methods to address this process. We use original survey data from 850 households in rural Ecuador to investigate the influence of several potentially relevant environmental factors on out-migration to local, internal and international destinations. Specifically, we build a person-year dataset containing migration histories from 2000-2008 and estimate a multinomial discrete-time event history model of out-migration to alterative destinations. Preliminary results indicate that some but not all potentially relevant environmental factors significantly influence out-migration, and the directions of these effects do not consistently support common assumptions about environmentally-induced migration.	Clark	L. Gray	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2010	57	Environmental Impacts on Population Dynamics and Health	Natural Hazards and Child Health	This paper examines how the occurrence of various natural disasters affects the health status of children using data from Guatemala. Despite a large literature on child health there is relatively little work on how shocks from natural hazards affect the health of children and with climate change it is likely that more and more households will experience changes and possible increases in the risk of natural disasters. Using three rounds of DHS data combined with a long time series on hazards the paper controls for both time and area specific effects, while pinpointing when and where a particular shock occurred. This is done for children from birth to 59 months at the time of the survey. Child health is proxied by height for age and weight for height and direct information on recent symptoms of illness. The effect of shocks from these hazards is generally negative and often very large.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2010	57	Environmental Impacts on Population Dynamics and Health	Cycles of Vulnerability and Migration: A Case Study of Migration and Climate Variability in the Niono District of Mali	In 2001-2002, we conducted a longitudinal survey of 382 households in 11 villages in 3 eco-production zones in Niono, Mali to assess how households in each zone incorporate migration into their coping strategies. Excess rain years were associated with higher production for families without irrigation but lower production for those with irrigation, and conversely for rain deficit years. 43% of the households had at least one migrant. 51% of households without migrants had access to irrigation, compared to 80% of households with in-migrants and 90% of households with circular migrants. Only 40% of households with out-migrants had access to irrigation. (F=8.8,p      	Sally	E. Findley	Seydou	 Doumbia
2010	58	Sexual Behaviors, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Adolescents and Young Adults	Skills, Schooling and Non-Marital Teenage Pregnancy in Ghana	This paper examines non-marital teen pregnancy in Ghana, focusing on the role and interplay of Ghanaian and English reading skills, educational attainment, and adult literacy course participation. Pursuing first an instrumental variables strategy, using year of birth-region of birth interactions as identifying instruments, indicates that skills and schooling may be treated as predetermined to whether an unmarried teenage girl has experienced a pregnancy. Continuing, therefore, with linear probability models yields three main results. First, I confirm the finding from previous studies that educational attainment is negatively associated with either non-marital or teenage pregnancy. Second, however, once Ghanaian and English reading skills are introduced, the association between educational attainment and non-marital teen pregnancy decreases or disappears altogether. Third, for the teenage girls who have not completed primary school, adult literacy course participation is associated with a much lower probability of experiencing a teenage pregnancy. Directions for future research are also presented.	Niels-Hugo	 Blunch
2010	58	Sexual Behaviors, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Adolescents and Young Adults	Young Adult Pregnancy and Pregnancy Outcomes in Southern Malawi	Despite the considerable attention demographers give to sexual behavior and fertility, pregnancy itself is an often-overlooked demographic state. Nonetheless, pregnancy experiences, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, are important for understanding a variety of health outcomes, such as maternal mortality, unsafe abortion, fertility timing, and susceptibility to HIV infection. In the current study, we focus on the prevalence and predictors of pregnancy, miscarriage and abortion among young Malawian women. Our data come from Tsogolo la Thanzi, a new longitudinal study of reproduction in a peri-urban community of southern Malawi. We use two waves of survey data from 1500 young women aged 15-24 that includes two direct measures of pregnancy (a detailed pregnancy history and a biomarker for current pregnancy) and one indirect measure (a report of best friends’ pregnancy or abortion). We examine the context and predictors of pregnancy and miscarriage/abortion, including fertility desires and partnership characteristics at the previous wave.	Sara	E. Yeatman	Jenny	 Trinitapoli	Hazel	 Namadingo
2010	58	Sexual Behaviors, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Adolescents and Young Adults	Subsequent Childbearing among Teenage Mothers in South Africa: A Longitudinal Analysis	Using Cape Town Panel Study on young adults, this research employs life-course analysis to understand the timing of second births among adolescents in South Africa. The work is motivated by a body of research that identified subsequent childbearing as a key mediator of life-course outcomes for young mothers and their children. In particular, I explore the heterogeneity in the life-course experiences of young mothers by highlighting schooling factors that are associated with having a closely subsequent birth. I argue that young mothers’ schooling characteristics i) before first birth, ii) at first birth, and iii) after first birth play an important role in their timing of second births. Preliminary results suggests that being in school does not affect the likelihood of having a teen birth. However, returning to school after first birth is an important factor in the timing of second births. Nonetheless, this is confounded by socio-economic and environmental factors.	Thandie	 Hlabana
2010	58	Sexual Behaviors, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Adolescents and Young Adults	In the Absence of Marriage: Relationship and Fertility Contexts of HIV and Pregnancy Risk among Young Adults in South Africa	Global reproductive health policy prioritizes a reduction in HIV prevalence among young women in southern Africa. This paper examines qualitatively the relationships between marriage, partnering, fertility and HIV risk in rural KwaZulu/Natal, South Africa, based on in-depth interviews with 47 young adults aged 18-24 (23 men; 24 women), with follow-up interviews (n=29;10 men, 19 women) two years later. Long term primary relationships were common for young men and women, with simultaneous casual partnerships that changed frequently. Dynamic preventive behaviors reflected partnership type and expectations. Condom use increased over time in some primary relationships, but reduced in others due to perceived trust and marital aspirations; condoms were nearly universal with casual partners. Although not desired, pregnancy was common, and accepted within primary relationships, although childbearing increased women’s social vulnerability. With pregnancy prevention an important goal for most young people, reproductive health programs should emphasize the relationship and fertility contexts of risk.	Abigail	 Harrison	Lucia	 O'Sullivan
2010	59	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Consequences of Parental Divorce on Development of Cognitive Skills and Non-Cognitive Traits in Childhood	In this proposal, I come up with a three-stage estimation model to recover impacts of parental divorce on development of children’s cognitive skills and non-cognitive traits. Only using a pre-, then-, and post-divorce framework, can we disentangle complex dimensions affecting children of divorce to a more detailed extent. The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort 1998-99, a multi-wave longitudinal data set provides an invaluable opportunity to assess the three-stage model. Abundant and more reliable measures of cognitive skills and non-cognitive traits in the data set open unchartered and underutilized opportunity to appraise several hypotheses involved in most hotly debated areas in the social sciences. In addition, rich sets of covariates also make it possible to adjust for selection factors widely known to bias parameters of interest. To evaluate parameters of interest more rigorously, a piece-wise growth curve model and propensity score matching method are outlined.	Hyun	Sik  Kim
2010	59	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	Family Instability and Adolescent Educational Success: The Cumulation and Timing of Family Transitions across Childhood	This study examines the impact of transitions between family types on math and science course taking, cumulative grade point average, and high school completion. I find evidence for the impact of family instability only in models predicting whether adolescents pass Algebra II and chemistry, and fit statistics confirm the contribution of instability measures relative to a baseline status model. However, no transition measures make a significant contribution to model fit when predicting cumulative GPA or high school completion. Moreover, I find little evidence that the impact of family instability depends on the number or timing of transitions. Overall, findings suggest that family transitions may have a greater impact on whether adolescents take college-preparatory courses that become more optional toward the end of the high school career, but may be less likely to derail cumulative processes like grade achievement or graduation that are shaped starting at the beginning of high school.	Holly	 Heard
2010	59	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	School Context, Family Instability, and the Academic Careers of Adolescents: The Role of Family Instability within Schools	The living arrangements of American children are increasingly complex. An emerging literature suggests that these complex family histories are linked with multiple domains of adolescent development. Much of this scholarship focuses on associations at the individual level. Here, we build on this work and consider whether aspects of the school context—the aggregate level of family instability within schools—moderate this link. Taking advantage of the school-based design and the retrospective reports of family structure in Add Health and the linked academic transcript data in AHHA, we explore whether being in schools with lower proportions of peers with histories of family instability is good for all students, especially those in unstable families, or if students in unstable families do worse than expected when they attend schools with a fewer peer with unstable family history. Models will be estimated in HLM.	Shannon	E. Cavanagh	Paula	 Fomby
2010	59	Family Structure and Child Well-Being	The Effects of Family Structure on Child Wellbeing:
An Assessment of Marriage Policy Assumptions	With increases in out-of-wedlock childbearing and growing instability in family structure, the consequences of family structure differences have become a more pressing issue. The federal government has funded programs designed to promote marriage and prevent divorce as a way of reducing poverty and improving children’s life chances. Assessments of these policy interventions require a different class of the causal effects of family structure, the average treatment effects for the controls (e.g., the effect of stable marriage for children of divorced mothers). Our study attempts to estimate these effects on child wellbeing by using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study and a propensity score weighting method, with close attention to selection bias and causal effect heterogeneity. Results suggest that marriage policy interventions would be more effective, should they be combined with other interventions aimed at improving disadvantaged families’ conditions and develop a clearer understanding of specific family structure contexts facing these families.	Dohoon	 Lee	Sara	 McLanahan
2010	60	Adult Mortality	U.S. Mortality in an International Context: Age Variations	Compared to other developed countries, the US ranks poorly in terms of life expectancy at age 50. We seek to shed light on the US’s low life expectancy ranking by comparing the age-specific death rates of 18 developed countries at older ages. A striking pattern emerges: between ages 40 and 75, US all-cause mortality rates are among the poorest in the set of comparison countries. The US position improves dramatically after age 75. We consider four possible explanations: (1) international differences in patterns of smoking; (2) selection processes; (3) health insurance; and (4) age patterns of health care system performance. We find that smoking and health insurance are not plausible sources of this age pattern. While we cannot rule out selection entirely, we present suggestive evidence that the US health care system's unusually vigorous deployment of life-saving technologies at very old ages contributes to the age-pattern of US mortality rankings.	Jessica	Y. Ho	Sam	 Preston
2010	60	Adult Mortality	Why Do Depressed People Die Younger? An Inquiry into the Relationship Between Depressive Symptoms and Mortality	Many studies have shown a positive association between depressive symptoms and mortality. In this study I extend prior research and test competing hypotheses about the functional form of the depression-death relationship. I use nationally representative longitudinal data from the American’s Changing Lives Survey and discrete time hazard models to estimate the association between depressive symptoms and mortality risk at follow-up, accounting for physical health conditions, health behaviors, personal and coping resources, social support, and life stress. Findings show that physical health conditions and health behaviors fully explain the association between depression and mortality, while stress process variables account for only a small portion of the relationship. Additional analyses modeling change over time suggest that physical health and health behaviors mediate the relationship between depression and death, but pre-existing health conditions do not render the depression-death relationship spurious. Implications and limitations of the study are discussed.	Jason	 Houle
2010	60	Adult Mortality	Mortality Determinants in Western Europe: What Do the SHARE Data Tell Us?	It is argued that country-specific factors (behavioral patterns, dietary habits, etc.) play a major role in magnifying the differences in mortality across the countries of Western Europe. Using the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) data, this study aims at exploring mortality determinants among people aged 50 years and above in ten European countries. In particular, it focuses on the role of health-related factors (limitations in activities, disease duration, etc.) and other risk factors such as smoking and drinking in influencing cross-country and gender variations in mortality levels. The Cox proportional hazards model is applied to estimate the relative risk of death between the first two waves of the survey. The results indicate that disease duration, hospitalization, smoking and drinking are the major factors explaining the cross-country variations in mortality. The gender differences are determined by the presence of limitations in activities, hospitalization, and smoking.	Olga	G. Grigorieva
2010	60	Adult Mortality	The Biological Force behind Excess Male External Cause Mortality: An Analysis of Unnatural Deaths among Catholic Order Members	It is still unclear if and how biological factors contribute to excess male mortality due to external causes (accidents, injuries, homicides, and suicides). Sex hormones and reproductive roles are supposed to drive sex differences in behaviors increasing the male external cause mortality risk. This study analyzes the external cause mortality of Catholic nuns and monks from three Bavarian cloisters whose similar environments allow one to isolate the impact of biological factors from a number of confounding causes. Using obituaries, entries in the profession books of religious orders and cemetery registers 2,533 deaths of nuns and monks could be linked to a specific cause of death for the years 1946-2005. Whereas nuns show statistically significantly lower external cause mortality than general population women, monks' external cause mortality parallels or even exceeds that of general population males. These findings contradict the reproductive role hypothesis and provide some evidence for the sex hormones hypothesis.	Marc	 Luy
2010	61	Gender, Development and Demographic Processes	Gender Equality, Development, and the Sex Gap in Mortality: A World View	While female life expectancy exceeds male life expectancy in almost every country throughout the world, the sex gap varies by level of development. This study examines the effect of gender equality on the sex gap in mortality in 124 highly and less developed countries. The findings show that greater gender equality is associated with divergence in the sex gap in adult mortality in less developed countries but convergence in highly developed countries. The divergence between male and female mortality in less developed countries is partly attributable to the stronger positive effect of gender equality on female than male mortality. Finally, convergence in the sex gap in mortality in highly developed countries is due to a more positive effect of gender equality on male mortality relative to female mortality.	Carla	 Medalia	Virginia	W. Chang
2010	61	Gender, Development and Demographic Processes	Gender Equity and MDG Progress: A Comparison between Africa and Asia-Pacific	Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) include more than 60 indicators on gender, development and demographic processes. The contrast between Africa and Asia-Pacific illustrates the relationship between women empowerment and outcomes in reproductive health as well as development. Countries with lower proportions of literate females, women in non agricultural wage employment or lower gender equity in primary and secondary education have higher fertility, lower contraceptive prevalence rates and lower coverage of health and education services which is directly related with higher infant and maternal mortality and altogether poorer health indicators. Some of these indicators are already well acknowledged to be related with development and they also appear to be related with dependency ratio or advancement in the demographic window. The relationship between MDG indicators and trends, and population and socio-economic variables for countries in Africa and Asia-Pacific (including Pacific Island countries) will be presented.	Jean	Louis  Rallu
2010	61	Gender, Development and Demographic Processes	Testing the Link between Fertility Declines and Women’s Empowerment in Developing Countries	Malhotra and colleagues (2009) contend that under the right contextual conditions, women’s access to the means of fertility control and related fertility declines may benefit them significantly, in terms of their welfare, empowerment, and fundamental transformations in gender relations. This study offers an important first empirical examination of this hypothesis using macro-level quantitative and contextual data from 12 developing countries, using data from the economic, socio-cultural, legal, and political spheres to identify broad trends and other clues about their relationships with fertility decline. Examining these dynamics in developing countries will add insight to the challenges facing increasing numbers of developing country women today, including shifting age structures, higher aspirations, increasing labor force participation, and rapid changes in the global economy. Moreover, it will help to identify policy and program interventions to maximize the benefits of fertility decline for women and identify potential solutions to the challenges women face.	Susan	M. Lee-Rife	Anju	 Malhotra	Sophie	 Namy
2010	61	Gender, Development and Demographic Processes	Family Systems, Political Systems and Asia’s Missing Girls: The Construction of Son Preference and Its Unraveling	Son preference is known to exist in patrilineal cultures. But why do China, South Korea, and Northwest India manifest such extreme preference compared with other patrilineal societies? We argue this is because their pre-modern political and administrative systems used patrilineages to organize and administer their citizens. The interplay of culture, state, and political processes generated uniquely rigid patriliny and son preference.    We also argue that the advent of the modern state has unraveled the underpinnings of rigid patrilineal rules, and unleashed forces that reduce son preference. The modern state has powerful tools for incorporating and managing its citizenry, rendering patrilineages a threat not an asset to the state. They have initiated political, social, and legal reforms that challenge traditional age and gender hierarchies. Industrialization and urbanization reduced the hold of lineages. States can accelerate this decline in son preference through media advocacy that daughters are now as valuable as sons.	Monica	 Das Gupta
2010	62	Demographic and Economic Outcomes of Immigration	Ethnic Disparities in Social and Economic Wellbeing among the Immigrant Aged	The paper examines ethnic disparities in the social and economic wellbeing of the immigrant aged in Australia and the factors affecting older immigrants’ wellbeing as measured by a range of indicators. The data analysis is guided by the concept of the ‘Third Age’ as the basis for a more positive approach to the discussion of ageing and as a life-cycle stage of independent living in old age, focusing on the pursuit of an active retirement and the absence of core activity restrictions. Data from the 2006 population census on living arrangements, household income, participation in paid work, volunteering and need for assistance with core activities are used to examine the social and economic wellbeing of the immigrant population aged 65 and over identified by their country/region of origin, length of residence in Australia and ethnicity, and in comparison with the Australian-born aged. Policy implications of the research findings are discussed.	Siew-Ean	 Khoo
2010	62	Demographic and Economic Outcomes of Immigration	Does Rising Income Yield Higher Life Expectancy? Findings from Eastern Germany after Unification	Since the social, economic and political transformation following the German unification, Eastern Germans have experienced large increases in life expectancy almost closing the gap to their Western compatriots. By making use of the natural- experiment setting, this elaboration seeks to shed some light on the role of rising income in lowering mortality after unification. The estimation draws upon process data taken from the German pension fund which covers 98% of recipients of public retirement benefits in Eastern Germany. In terms of life- expectancy, we expect firstly, that not only higher incomes in general entailed these gains but, secondly, that pensioners above 65 benefited most of higher retirement benefits.	Tobias	C. Vogt
2010	62	Demographic and Economic Outcomes of Immigration	Age at Migration and Mortality in the Older Mexican-Origin Population	This paper examines the fifteen-year mortality experience of the H-EPESE sample, a panel of 3,050 individuals of Mexican-origin who were 65 or older in 1993 and followed-up in 2008. The analysis assesses the impact of age at migration on social support and other risk factors for mortality. A series of survival analyses shows that migration after age fifty is associated with a mortality advantage over the compared with earlier arrivals and the native born or those who arrived early in life net of demographic and other social factors. Lack of family support, chronic illness, and depressive symptoms were associated with an elevated risk of death. The patterns of morbidity and mortality suggest that late-life migrants may be selected for longevity, but because of a lack of medical care earlier in life may suffer more non-fatal chronic and disabling conditions. These possibilities call for further research. 	Ronald	 Angel	Jacqueline	L. Angel	Carlos	 Diaz-Venegas	Claude	 Bonazzo
2010	63	Strengths and Weaknesses of Asian Demographic Data	The Use of Demographic Data in Vietnam	Over the past two decades, various demographic surveys were carried out. General Statistics Office of Vietnam under supports of international organizations has collected several nationally representative data. Other Government and non-Government institutions have also collected various data. While those demographic data provide a good resource for policy making and planning, question of their use remain. This paper aims to gather major demographic data in Vietnam over the last two decades, assess their use, and raise recommendations for more effective use of this valuable resource. The results show that those demographic data were under-used: the number of studies using those data sources is small and a large number of potential topics for analysis were ignored. Low awareness and accessibility to data, limited human capacity to exploit quantitative data, and lack of resources for in-depth analysis contributed to the low use of demographic data and they should be changed.	Liem	T. Nguyen	Bach	Duong  Le
2010	63	Strengths and Weaknesses of Asian Demographic Data	Indonesian Demographic Data: Challenges and Opportunities in Analyzing Adult Mortality	In Indonesia and in other Asian countries, demographic data collection has improved considerably over time. Nowadays, population censuses and national coverage demographic surveys have been conducted regularly. However, insufficient resources and priority have been given to analysis. An especially important issue is the lack of available data suitable for estimating the adult mortality indicators. This paper explores the development of Indonesian data collection on mortality. For empirical analysis, it focuses on adult mortality data derived from different data sources including the 2000 Census, the 2005 Inter-censal Survey (Supas), and the 1998 National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas). The study investigates how well these data collections capture the national and sub-regional Indonesian mortality experience. Life table and data adjustment methods have been applied. Results show that improvement in data quality and timeliness of adult mortality measurements should be possible by fully using existing datasets and applying standard analytical strategies.	Salahudin	S. Muhidin
2010	63	Strengths and Weaknesses of Asian Demographic Data	Critical Assessment of India's Demographic Data	India is the first country where Civil Registration System (CRS) started prior to the Census. Although CRS is older than Census it suffers from a completeness problem. An alternate, Sample Registration System (SRS) was initiated in 1969 to provide vital indicators annually but these statistics are not available for the district level. The National Family Health Survey also provides recent updates along with levels and trends in different health indicators but it also does not provide district level estimates. The District Level Household Survey provides district level vital statistics but it has problems related to sampling. Considering this, the Government of India started to strengthen the CRS. Due to this attempt the southern states of India have reached 100% completeness of vital registration, but the problem still persists in other states. The present study aims to critically assess the different sources of data while also suggesting some plausible solutions to enhance the quality of demographic data.	Prakash	 Mishra	Shrikant	 Singh
2010	63	Strengths and Weaknesses of Asian Demographic Data	Has There Been a Fertility Rebound in China?  Data Issues in Assessing China's Recent Fertility Change		Zhigang	 Guo
2010	64	Social Determinants of Health Risking Behaviors	Estimating the Effects of Friendship Networks on Health Behaviors of Adolescents	This paper estimates the effects of friend’s health behaviors on own health behaviors for adolescents by comparing similar individuals who have the same friendship opportunities because they attend the same school and make the same friendship choices, under the assumption that the friendship choice reveals information about an individual’s unobservables. We combine this identification strategy with a cross-cohort, within school design so that the model is identified based on across grade differences in the clustering of health behaviors within specific friendship options. This strategy allows us to separate the effect of friends behavior on own behavior from the effect of friends observables attributes on behavior, a key aspect of the reflection problem. Our results suggest that friendship network effects are important in determining adolescent tobacco and alcohol use but are over-estimated in specifications that do not fully take into account the endogeneity of friendship selection by 20-30%.	Jason	 Fletcher	Stephen	 Ross
2010	64	Social Determinants of Health Risking Behaviors	The Roles of Education and Religion in the Prevention of Smoking over the Transition to Adulthood	Educational disparities in smoking, which are primary precursors of differential rates of morbidity and mortality, are a major public health problem. Using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we investigate several aspects of schooling in order to disentangle the mechanisms that translate higher educational achievement into healthier smoking habits in adulthood. In addition to education, we investigate the role of another major social institution that influences adolescents – religion. We find that religious adolescents are less likely to have tried smoking by young adulthood and that this effect is especially strong among adolescents who go to college. Education plays the greatest role in preventing regular smoking (rather than preventing adolescents from trying smoking). We find that the more challenging curriculum an adolescent gets in high school, particularly if they do not go to college, the less likely they are to be regular smokers in young adulthood.	Anna	 Mueller	Janelle	 Guillory	Chandra	 Muller
2010	64	Social Determinants of Health Risking Behaviors	Income and Alcohol Consumption: Investigating the Links between Lifecourse Income Trajectories and Adult Drinking Patterns	Little research exists on the ways that lifecourse income trajectories, rather than static measures of income, influence alcohol consumption. We evaluated the relationship between household income trajectories in 1968-1996 and alcohol use in 1999-2003 in a sample of 7579 adults from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Latent class growth mixture models with a censored normal distribution were used to estimate lifetime income trajectory groups, while repeated measures cumulative logit models estimated the number of drinks consumed per day. The five-group trajectory model provided the best fit for the household income data. Lower lifetime income trajectories were associated with higher odds of reporting lower drinking levels. The association was independent of current income and wealth, education, employment, and marital history. This study indicates that health risk behaviors such as alcohol use may depend not only on the immediate social environment, but on the shape of lifetime patterns of socioeconomic conditions.	Magdalena	 Cerda	Vicki	 Johnson-Lawrence	Sandro	 Galea
2010	64	Social Determinants of Health Risking Behaviors	Does Alcohol Advertising Induce Underage Drinking?	Underage drinking and alcohol abuse are causes for significant and widespread public health concern. We study whether alcohol advertisements influence underage drinking decisions. We use rich nationally-representative and individual-level consumer data to generate measures of drinking behavior for both underage and overage survey respondents. These data include highly detailed measures of individual television viewing and magazine reading behavior. We combine these individual measures of media viewing with a comprehensive database of the placement of alcohol advertisements in magazines and market-level summaries of alcohol advertising on television to generate individual estimates of how alcohol advertising exposure affects drinking. Importantly, we observe the same characteristics marketers use to determine where to place advertisements. Consequently, we can control for the targeting of alcohol advertisements. We find a positive and significant relationship between alcohol consumption and advertising exposure in both underage and overage samples.	Eamon	 Molloy
2010	65	Global Climate Change and Health/Mortality Consequences	Climate Change and Rural Child Health: A Review of the Evidence	Children, representing a third of the world’s population, are amongst the most vulnerable to climate change (IPCC, 2007). There have been several published reviews on this topic but none have evaluated the scientific evidence in a systematic way. The evidence base for direct “climate” effects on population health is slowly expanding, particularly regarding the role of weather events and climate variability on key causes of child mortality: malaria, diarrhoea and undernutrition. However, due to the complexity of the pathways of effects between climate and child health there is a dearth of studies that provide a comprehensive framework to study this important development issue. This paper outlines the conceptual framework for analyzing how climate change likely affects child health considering both direct and indirect mechanisms and reviews the best available evidence from a range of disciplines (epidemiology, public health, integrated assessment, demography, climate science).	Angela	 Baschieri	Sari	 Kovats
2010	65	Global Climate Change and Health/Mortality Consequences	Climate Change, Humidity, and Mortality in the United States	This paper estimates the effects of temperature and humidity on mortality rates in the United States (c. 1968-2002) in order to provide insight into the potential health impacts of climate change. I find that humidity, like temperature, is an important determinant of mortality. Coupled with Hadley CM3 climate-change predictions, my estimates imply that mortality rates are likely to increase by about 1.3 percent by the end of the 21st century (c. 2070-2099). Although small on the aggregate, the bias from omitting humidity has significant implications for evaluating the distributional impacts of climate change on health.	Alan	 Barreca
2010	65	Global Climate Change and Health/Mortality Consequences	Global Climate Change Impacts on Human Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	The main aim of the study is to examine the relationship between climate variability and malaria transmission in Sub-Saharan Africa using Nigeria as a case study. For this study, climatic conditions considered suitable for its development and transmission through the mosquito stage of its life cycle are temperatures within the range 18°C to 32°C, but below 18°C parasite development decreases significantly. Above 32°C the survival of the mosquito is compromised. Relative humidity greater than 60% is also considered as a requirement for the mosquito to survive long enough for the parasite to develop sufficiently to be transmitted to its human host stage. The research findings show that seasonality of climate greatly influences the seasonality of malaria transmission.	Sina	 Ayanlade	N.O	 Adeoye	O.	 Babatimehin
2010	65	Global Climate Change and Health/Mortality Consequences	Heat Waves and Cold Spells and Their Effect on Mortality: An Analysis of Micro-Data for the Netherlands In the Nineteenth and Twentieth Century	To gain insight into the changing impact of cold and heat on mortality, we analyze Dutch individual death records in relation to daily temperature for the period 1855-1950 for three Dutch provinces. Using negative binomial regression models we studied whether the effect of extreme heat and cold varied by province, age, sex, and social class and analyze the changes in the vulnerability to temperature fluctuations. Our study showed that between 1855 and 1950 total mortality underwent an immediate increase when temperature increased above the optimal value. We observed increases in mortality related to increases in temperature 1-2 days before the day of death, and strong delayed effects for lag-days 7-14 and 15-30. The immediate and delayed effects of heat were strongest for infants and unskilled workers, but their vulnerability to heat declined after 1930. Short-term delayed effects of heat and longer-term delayed effects declined from 1900 or 1930 on.	Peter	 Ekamper	Frans	W.A. van Poppel	Coen	 van Duin	Kees	 Mandemakers
2010	66	Marriage Formation in Historical and Comparative Perspective	The Decline in Marriage: An Age-Period-Cohort Analysis, Israel 1961-1994	Three explanations –two economic and one ideational– dominate the current debate over the decline in marriage. Using Israeli Census data this paper tests the three major hypotheses explaining the decline in marriage in an age-period-cohort model. Increased earnings account for most of the decline among women, probably by diminishing women's economic reliance on men. Cohort replacement accounts for much of the rest of the decline among women, attitudinal change being the more likely mechanism through which cohort replacement affected marriage. Among men cohort replacement is the major explanation for the decline. Period influences creating economic insecurity –unemployment and inflation– account for much of the rest of the decline among men.	Jona	 Schellekens	Moshe	 Ophir	David	 Gliksberg
2010	66	Marriage Formation in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Trends of Marital Age Homogamy in China, 1960-2005: A Marriage Cohort Perspective	This paper, using a random sample of the nationally representative China 20051% Population Inter-census Survey, based on log-multiplicative layer effect models, investigates the trends of age homogamy in contemporary China with sharp focus on the reform-era. As expected, empirical results show an inverted U-shape trend of age homogamy in reform-era China, which may be due to the reversal to “necessity considerations” of women during mate-selections process in coping with increasingly severe market competition in the late post-reform era. This pattern of reversal is further supported by the ancillary analysis based on human capital model. It shows when age at first marriage is held at the level of 1985 marriage cohort, husbands' earning premium to wives may diverge downwardly from that based on the actual levels. This indicates the narrowed gender gap of education may be accompanied by the increased spousal age gap so as to maintain the convention of hypergamy.	Zheng	 Mu	Yu	 Xie
2010	66	Marriage Formation in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Educational Differentials in Rates and Probabilities of First Marriage for Taiwanese Women Born in 1879-1991	I apply the Kaplan-Meier estimator and the Cox proportional hazard models to document cohort trends of marriage rates and eventual probabilities of first marriage in Taiwan using data pooled from 15 waves of the Women’s Marriage, Fertility, and Employment Surveys conducted between 1979 and 2006. The results suggest that marriage rates and the proportions of women ever having been married have declined over successive birth cohorts of Taiwanese women born between 1879 and 1991. In all birth cohorts, highly educated women have had lower marriage rates and lower probabilities of ever having been married than their lower educated counterparts. The educational differentials in marriage rates and the probabilities of ever having been married have increased across birth cohorts.	Yi-chuan	 Chang
2010	66	Marriage Formation in Historical and Comparative Perspective	The Marital Behavior of Single Mothers in Comparative Perspective	This paper analyzes the marital transitions of nearly 20,000 unmarried mothers, whose gave birth between 1940 and 2004. With data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), I find that the majority of unmarried mothers marry, though the likelihood that mothers married within a few years of a child’s birth have decreased substantially. Blacks show particularly marked declines in marriage likelihood, as black women who gave birth after 1990 had marriage odds that were 60% lower than black women who gave birth before 1960. The median survival time until first marriage has also increased for all groups, and contemporary women with a non-marital birth were also much more likely to have a second non-marital birth than to marry. Findings underscore the temporal and theoretical separation that exists between births and marriages in the United States, and have important implications for the family formation experiences of children.	Christina	M. Gibson-Davis
2010	67	Policy and Family	I’m Not Supporting His Kids”: Noncustodial 
Fathers’ Contributions When Mothers Have Children with New Partners	We examine the level, trend, and type of nonresident fathers’ informal contributions to their children. Using unique data on Wisconsin welfare participants, the paper measures how fathers’ contributions change when their ex-partner has a child with a new man. Cross-tabulations, change, fixed-effect, and difference-in-difference models generally confirm that fathers are less likely to provide informal support to mothers who have had a child with a new partner in the previous five years. Our models also show that fathers whose ex-partners have new children change the types of support they provide, away from general support (money toward rent) and toward child-specific support (gifts, clothes). Somewhat surprisingly, fathers who are paying more formal child support do not decrease informal support. However, some estimates change when we use propensity-score matching models, highlighting the importance of accounting for differences between those with and without new-partner fertility.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2010	67	Policy and Family	Child Support Enforcement and the Incidence of Single Motherhood	This paper examines how child support enforcement (CSE) reform created by the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 affects the incidence of single motherhood in the United States. Results demonstrate that the effect of CSE reform differs for women by educational attainment. CSE reform causes a 17.6 and 12 percent increase in the probability of being a single mother for women with less than a high school degree and female high school graduates, respectively. Rises in single motherhood come from an increase in non-marital births by women with less than a high school degree and increases in both non-marital births and marital dissolutions among female high school graduates. These results suggest that CSE has an impact on who decides to have children and the circumstances in which certain children are raised.	Patricia	 Tong
2010	67	Policy and Family	A Sort of Homecoming: The Effects of Incarceration on Men’s Housing Stability	Residential stability has long been recognized as an input into the economic, physical, and emotional health of individuals and their communities, particularly among populations vulnerable in other aspects of their lives. However, individuals returning from incarceration face both administrative and de facto barriers to the attainment of housing, which have been posited to threaten prospects for re-entry and increase ex-offenders’ likelihood of recidivism. The proposed analysis uses a large longitudinal study of urban families to estimate the extent to which incarceration compromises men’s housing security. We identify a number of unstable circumstances in which respondents may live, and use a series of Rasch models to determine which represent the greatest insecurity. Controlling for pre-incarceration residence, we then estimate how this insecurity is affected by incarceration. We anticipate that incarceration indeed exacerbates housing instability, suggesting severe hardship for the hundreds of thousands of men released from jail and prison each year.	Amanda	B. Geller	Marah	A. Curtis
2010	67	Policy and Family	Multi-Partnered Fertility and the Criminal Justice System	Multi-partnered fertility is increasingly common in the US. Evidence that it deters marriage, and reduces relationship stability and child wellbeing, is accumulating. We examine the link between men’s involvement with the criminal justice system (as reflected in arrest and incarceration rates) and the likelihood that a woman has children by more than one man. Our analysis exploits variation over time and across localities. Household data are from SIPP, with pooled cross-sections yielding observations on approximately 60,000 mothers over two decades (1985-2004). Arrest and incarceration rates are from FBI Uniform Crime Reports and the Bureau of Justice Statistics, respectively. Control variables include a mother’s individual characteristics (e.g., age, education, and ethnicity) and local factors that vary at the MSA level (e.g., housing costs, and male and female wage and unemployment rates) or state level (e.g., welfare benefits, divorce rates, and the strictness of child support enforcement).	Eirik	 Evenhouse	Siobhan	 Reilly
2010	68	Mathematical and Computational Approaches to Demography	Scale Effects in Segregation Processes	A complex system is a social, physical, or biological system in which properties of the system emerge from interactions among lower level units. Scale effects showing the independent effect of population size on system dynamics have been well documented in sociology, economics, biology, and the physical sciences. Residential segregation is also a complex process, as neighborhoods emerge from the interdependent mobility decisions of individuals. However, we do not know what role absolute or relative group size plays in segregation dynamics. We use agent-based models to explore whether and how race/ethnic segregation processes are sensitive to city and neighborhood size, and also relative and absolute ethnic group size (e.g., critical mass) under alternative theoretical and empirical residential mobility behaviors. Preliminary evidence shows that the same level of tolerance may produce higher segregation in smaller cities. In the final paper we will provide a complete analysis of the relationship between group size, ethnic tolerance, and segregation dynamics.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch	Arjun	 Narayan
2010	68	Mathematical and Computational Approaches to Demography	Demography and Social Network Differentiation	Nearly all societies have completed or begun a demographic transition, but their experiences have varied in terms of timing, tempo and extent of mortality and fertility decline. I focus on understanding what implications such variation has for social interaction. Though prior literature has explored demographic contributions to opportunities for interaction between individuals of different ages, it has focused on social ties between very close kin (such as children and parents), particularly in the context of multi-generational co-residence. This paper extends this focus by considering broader kinship links in communities, which are important components of community integration. To do so, I use a simulation approach that combines the traditions of demographic micro-simulation and social network generation with techniques of agent-based modeling. Results are presented concerning how variations in demographic history manifest as differences in modern social networks. These are then validated against a set of specific cases from Nang Rong, Thailand.	Ashton	M. Verdery
2010	68	Mathematical and Computational Approaches to Demography	A Bayesian Model for Estimating Population Size and Demographic Parameters with Uncertainty	High quality estimates of vital rates and population counts are essential for successful policy development. These should include probabilistic statements about measurement uncertainty. In the developing world, where data collection is often infrequent and/or limited, this is particularly challenging. A Bayesian model is proposed which combines information on fertility and mortality rates of the past, and baseline population counts, with independently measured population counts to produce joint posterior estimates of age-sex-specific vital rates and counts. The model is tested on synthetic data for which the true underlying vital rates and counts are known as well as real data from Burkina Faso. Eighty percent posterior predictive intervals for all parameters capture most of true values in the simulation study while results from the real data suggest that the method could be used in practice.	Mark	C. Wheldon	Adrian	 Raftery	Patrick	 Gerland
2010	68	Mathematical and Computational Approaches to Demography	International Migration, Multicultural Reforms, and Ethnic Identity Shift in Guatemala and Nicaragua	For the past few decades, the volume of international migrants and their impact on sending societies has increased considerably in Guatemala and Nicaragua. One significant impact brought by international migration in these countries is ethnic identity shift. A surprisingly similar feature between multicultural reforms and international migration is that while both offer unprecedented opportunities to indigenous people, they also threaten indigenous groups. I propose a mathematical model that describes the difference in rates of ethnic identity shift in communities in Guatemala and Nicaragua. Agent-based computational simulation suggests that when the definition of being indigenous is broad and less clear, indigenous people are more likely to change their ethnic identity,. sSince international migration tends to broaden the meaning of being indigenous. Therefore, we should be concerned that the combination of multicultural reforms and international migration may reinforce more indigenous people to abandon their ethnic identity and obscures various ethnicity-related social problems	Hirotoshi	 Yoshioka
2010	69	Methodological and Substantive Issues in Studies of Unwanted Fertility	Comparing Prospective and Retrospective Measures of Unwanted Fertility	We use the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to compare levels and correlates of prospective and retrospective measurements of unwanted fertility. Specifically, we contrast traditional retrospective measures with a new strategy that uses prospective intention measures that were asked 17 times over a three decade period. For instance, if a respondent reports in two consecutive surveys that she intends no more children, then we code a birth prior to the next survey as “prospectively unwanted”. Our preliminary results show that this prospective measure of unwanted fertility identifies 14.7% of all births to this cohort as unwanted. Traditional retrospective reports identify only 9.7% of births as unwanted. Planned analyses will compare the correlates of unwanted births using these two approaches as well as correlates of factors that predict when a birth will be differentially coded using these two approaches.	S.	Philip  Morgan	Heather	M. Rackin
2010	69	Methodological and Substantive Issues in Studies of Unwanted Fertility	Understanding the Issue of Unwanted Pregnancy in India: An Insight from Calendar Data	In developing countries like India, the issue of unwanted pregnancy in the context of contraception use has not been explored to date. This study takes advantage of calendar data, which is for the first time available in the Indian National Family Health Survey (2005-06), to deal with the discontinuation of family planning methods and their relation to unwanted pregnancy. Analysis revealed forty percent of ever married women had discontinued using contraception because they become pregnant while using. Another key factor for the discontinuation was also the disapproval of the husband. It should be noted that twenty seven percent of responses were inconsistent with respect to unwanted pregnancy. Furthermore, among users of family planning, failure of periodic abstinence contributed to more than 25 percent whereas discontinuation of the  pill and condom contributed to 30 and 26 percent respectively in increasing the unwanted pregnancy. The main reasons for discontinuation due to husband disapproval are highest for condom followed by pill and then periodic abstinence.	Priyanka	 Dixit	Faujdar	 Ram
2010	69	Methodological and Substantive Issues in Studies of Unwanted Fertility	An Unexpected Bun in the Oven? An Exploratory Research of Unplanned Pregnancies	Even though there are plenty of means women can use to avoid an unwanted pregnancy, a large percentage of pregnancies today are unplanned. Since there was no data available on this subject for Belgium, a study was conducted. This study investigates the socio-economic, demographic and relational characteristics of women related to having unplanned pregnancies. The data collection is carried out in Hasselt, Belgium. A standardized questionnaire is used, in which pregnancy planning is measured using the London Measure of Unplanned Pregnancy, an internationally validated scale. 197 responses are collected from pregnant or recently pregnant women. The main conclusion of this research is that it is mostly women with a weak societal position who face an unplanned pregnancy. Since the consequences of unplanned pregnancies for these women are more serious than for women with a strong position in society, future research on the causes of this kind of pregnancy is recommended.	Sarah	 Dreesen
2010	69	Methodological and Substantive Issues in Studies of Unwanted Fertility	The Impact of Contraceptive Failure on Unintended Pregnancy and Abortion	This paper focuses on unintended pregnancies resulting from contraceptive failure, using recent data from 14 nationally representative Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) from 2002-2008 to estimate:    1)	The prevalence of contraceptive failure by contraceptive method.   2)	The proportion of unintended pregnancies that result from contraceptive failure.   3)	Levels of unintended pregnancy and abortion (non-live births) with and without contraceptive failure.     The percentage of unintended (mistimed or unwanted) pregnancies resulting from contraceptive failure varies widely across countries, from 6 percent in Malawi to 50 percent in the Ukraine. Similarly, non-live births resulting from failures, which include induced abortions as well as miscarriages and stillbirths, vary from 4 percent in Malawi to 48 percent in the Ukraine.  Preliminary results from this study indicate that eliminating contraceptive failure could lead to declines of between 2 and 13 percentage points in rates of unintended pregnancy and up to 14 percentage points in non-live births.	Sarah	E.K. Bradley	Trevor	N. Croft
2010	70	Resource Allocation in Families and Households	Market Income and Household Work: New Tests of Gender Performance Theory	I provide new evidence about whether men and women engage in gender performance through housework. The literature suggests that there may be a curvilinear relationship between income share and housework time that is indicative of efforts by men and women to neutralize gender deviance in earnings. However, the empirical evidence for this inference is scattered and contested. In this paper, I provide new tests of gender performance theory, the first tests to use high quality time diary data for a U.S. sample in the contemporary period. I draw on data on 11,856 married women and 10,756 married men in the American Time Use Survey (2003-2007). I find no evidence that married men “do gender” through housework. However, I find strong evidence of a curvilinear association between income share and women’s housework that accords with the predictions of gender performance theory. Further, these results are quite robust to alternative model specifications.	Daniel	 Schneider
2010	70	Resource Allocation in Families and Households	Gender-Specific Effects on Leisure of a Conditional Cash Transfer Program	Oportunidades, a targeted conditional cash transfer program in Mexico aimed at investing in health and education to combat poverty, has led to numerous positive outcomes. However, some argue that Oportunidades may have unintended, negative effects on women or may not do enough to empower them. This paper aims to estimate the effects of program participation on time use and investigates whether program effects are gender-specific using data from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS). We utilize various matching methods to analyze program effects. Results show that program participation has a negative effect on women’s leisure, while men’s leisure time is unaffected, and number of hours worked for both genders remains unchanged by program participation. Additionally, there is a negative effect on hours spent caring for children for both genders. Decreased leisure time is a cost borne solely by women, and this counteracts the program’s goal of increasing gender equity.	Tia	 Palermo	Charlie	 Braymen
2010	70	Resource Allocation in Families and Households	Out-Migration of Young Adults and Gender Division of Intergenerational Support in Rural China	Using data from the baseline and follow-up surveys of “Well-being of Elderly in Anhui Province, China” conducted in 2001, in 2003 and in 2006 respectively by the Institute for Population and Development Studies of Xi’an Jiaotong University, this paper employs random effect models to explore the gender division of intergenerational support in elderly rural families. Analyses from both parents’ and children’s perspectives suggests there are gender differences in intergenerational support because of gender roles and division in family. Our analysis shows that older mothers receive more returns which compensate for their support, while older fathers benefit more from the out-migration of adult children. While sons take more responsibility for family support, daughters reciprocate more to support from their elderly parents. Enhancement of the role and function of daughters in families has accompanied out-migration of young adults, which suggests that gender differences in intergenerational supports between sons and daughters are reduced.	Lu	 Song	Shuzhuo	 Li	Marcus	W. Feldman
2010	70	Resource Allocation in Families and Households	How Money Matters: College, Motherhood, Earnings and Wives’ Housework	Using new data from the American Time Use Survey, we consider how educational and parental status influence the relationship between wives’ relative earnings and the time they devote to housework in a climate of heightened gender egalitarianism and growing similarity between women’s and men’s time use. We study four groups of wives. Among wives with children at home and without a college degree, we find that relative earnings bear a curvilinear relationship to housework time, supporting predictions derived from relative resources and gender display theory. Among wives with children and a college degree, and among wives without children regardless of degree status, relative earnings are unrelated to housework. However, wives’ own earnings are inversely related to housework time across all four groups. Our analyses suggest that educational and parental contexts jointly shape the relationship between wives’ earnings and their housework and the relative importance of bargaining, gender display and autonomy.	Margaret	L. Usdansky	Wendy	 Parker
2010	71	Internal Migration across the Life Course	Retirement, Health, and Migration from Nonmetro Counties: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey	Using an Event History Analysis of six biennial waves of the Health and Retirement Survey (1994 - 2004), I examined the pre-migration characteristics of older adults living in nonmetro counties in 1994 to see who stayed, who migrated, where they went (a metro or nonmetro county), and why. Retirement within the past year was the most powerful predictor of migration from a nonmetro origin, but did not predict the destination (metro vs. nonmetro). Consistently with Litwak and Longino’s theory, nonmetro migrants who went to live nearer, or with, kin and friends were more likely to go to metro than nonmetro destinations. Contrary to the theory, prior changes in four measures of health could not distinguish nonmetro nonmigrants from nonmetro outmigrants nor discriminate their destinations (metro from nonmetro). Thus, the first observable migration by nonmetro-origin older adults may have been in expectation of future needs for assistance.	Nan	E. Johnson
2010	71	Internal Migration across the Life Course	Child Mobility, Maternal Status and Household Composition in Rural South Africa	Using data from a demographic surveillance system from the rural northeast of South Africa, we examine the determinants of migration of children aged 0-14 followed up from 1999-2008. Of particular interest is the survival/residence status of the mother and the presence of potential maternal substitutes in the household in influencing child out migration. Event history analysis is used to estimate the risk of a child moving controlling for a set of time constant and time varying characteristics. Preliminary results show that when the mother is alive and part of the child’s household, the presence of an elderly female in the household increases the risk of a child moving but the presence of prime age females decreases the risk of a move. When the mother is dead or not part of the household, the presence of both elderly as well as prime age females decreases the risk of a child moving.	Sangeetha	 Madhavan	Enid	 Schatz	Mark	 Collinson
2010	71	Internal Migration across the Life Course	Inter-County Variability of Net Migration at Older Ages as a Path-Dependent Process	We examine why some nonmetropolitan counties are more likely than others to attract older in-migration. We contend that when natural amenities are commodified as recreation and tourism, migration networks are established that ultimately produce sustained in-migration of older persons to selected destination communities. We use county data from a variety of sources and a spatial statistics methodology to examine inter-county variability in net migration rates at ages 60+. Our findings are consistent with a path dependent development framework. High amenity counties with developed tourism, a long history of population growth, and previous experience attracting older in-migrants are most likely to have high net in-migration rates at ages 60+. In contrast, agricultural heartland and high poverty rate counties are associated with lower rates of older in-migration. Older migrants can be “grey gold,” but they can also pose challenges, such as possibly increased demand for public services as they age in place.	David	L. Brown	Benjamin	C. Bolender	Laszlo	J. Kulcsar	Nina	 Glasgow	Scott	R. Sanders
2010	71	Internal Migration across the Life Course	The Unusual Suspects: Factors That Create Unconventional Retirement Migration Destinations	Conventional theories and research on retirement migration often focus on natural amenities and recreation opportunities as main drivers. However, there are other kinds of factors that can be shown to attract different kinds of older people. This project aims to describe and explore “unconventional retirement destinations” that do not fit into the usual theoretical and methodological mold looking specifically for the influence of economic, health, and socio-cultural factors. Using regression residual analysis, 108 counties were identified as having a high rate of net inmigration at older ages while not empirically conforming to established ideas of the causal processes usually involved. This project combines national county level spatial statistics analysis with localized primary data collection from eight URD case study sites to draw a picture of where, how, and why unconventional retirement destinations are formed. This knowledge will help inform future policy decisions on local development and expenditures on advertising.	Benjamin	C. Bolender
2010	72	Migrant Workers and Children's Wellbeing in Developing Countries	¿Educación o desintegración? The Ramifications of Parental Migration and Remittances on Children’s Education in Western Guatemala	A small but growing body of literature addresses the largely positive impacts—from a national quantitative perspective—of international migration and remittances on the educational attainment of children. This paper offers a more nuanced view of the situation from the household and community-level that addresses both the positive remittance-related benefits to children’s educational attainment with the negative repercussions of parental absences on children’s general attitudes toward schooling. This investigation reports on a range of positive and negative educational transformations. A mixed-methods approach was used for this study that included participant observation, document analysis, and field interviews of educators, parents, and community elders from five western Guatemalan communities. Results indicate that remittances improved basic living conditions which allowed many children to access a more comfortable and substantive education. However, a lack of parental role models and disciplinarians in the home contributed to the disruption of childhood education for many other children.	Jason	 Davis
2010	72	Migrant Workers and Children's Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Impact of International Migration and Remittances on Child Schooling and Child Work: The Case of Egypt	We examine the impact of international migration and remittances on children’s schooling and work in Egypt. Egypt is among the largest ten remittance-receiving countries in the world (Wahba 2007). As has been noted in the literature, the effect of migration and remittances on schooling is a priori ambiguous. The main estimation issue we face is the possible endogeneity of migration. We use the national-level Egypt Labor Market Panel Survey of 2006 (ELMPS 06). The main estimation problem to overcome is the endogeneity of migration. Since migration opportunities tend to be network-dependent, one possible instrument is the intensity of migration on the village level based on the Egyptian Census. Remittances have a substantial effect on school attendance for university-aged boys. As for child work, the remittance income effect is dominant for market work especially for young boys and the substitution effect is dominant for older boys especially for short-duration domestic work.	Asmaa	 Elbadawy	Ragui	 Assaad
2010	72	Migrant Workers and Children's Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Population Migration and Children’s School Enrollments in China, 1990-2005	While population migration has been surging in China since 1990, little attention is paid to the impact of migration on children’s educational wellbeing. This paper analyzes the micro-data of Chinese population censuses in 1990 and 2000 and mini-census in 2005. We match the school-age children (6-15) to their parents’ background information within the same households, and examine how parents’ socio-economic status and family living arrangement affect children’s school enrollment status. We also compare migrant children to their peers in both origin and destination counties/districts. Results show that cross-county and cross-province migrant children are less likely to be enrolled in school than local children, and that children of rural hukou are disadvantaged in school enrollment over the whole examined period. Migrant children do significantly worse than non-migrant children in both origins and destinations. As migrant children spend more time in destinations, their disadvantage in school attendance tend to diminish.	Xiaogang	 Wu	Zhuoni	 Zhang
2010	72	Migrant Workers and Children's Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Effects of Poverty Concentration: A Case of Migrant Workers’ Children in China	We examined the consequences of poverty concentration on the social well being of children in China. Because most studies are based on data from developed countries, where institutional arrangements are well established and the flow of resources is clearly set, it is almost impossible to delineate and isolate the spatial poverty concentration effect from the influence of established institutional arrangements. The examination of the poverty concentration effect on migrant workers’ children in China provides a unique opportunity to evaluate the effect of poverty concentration on children’s social well being, in our case their social ties, within a context of changing institutional structures and arrangements. For the last few decades, China has experienced institutional changes at all levels of society. At the same time, children of migrant workers with their families are segregated in poor areas. Our analysis is based on surveys of students in four schools in Shanghai and Beijing.	Bill	 Tsang	Eric	 Fong	Tony	 Tam
2010	73	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Africa	Reconstructing Fertility Trends in Sub-Saharan Africa by Combining Multiple Surveys Affected by Data Quality Problems	The recent fertility trends in sub-Saharan Africa have generated interesting debates. Since the early 2000s, situations of fertility stalls or reversals of fertility declines have been described and analyzed in several African countries, and have been linked to the slowing down of investments in family planning programs in several settings. Recent work suggests however that the standard approach used to measure fertility trends – namely comparing recent ly published fertility estimates (over the three years preceding the surveys) in several consecutive surveys – may be flawed. The objective of this paper is to estimate fertility trends in sub-Saharan Africa using full birth histories and restricted cubic splines, taking into account data quality problems. Pooling surveys together, fertility can be reconstructed over periods as long as 25 to 30 years in many African countries. The method is used for all the 23 sub-Saharan African countries with at least 2 available DHS surveys.	Bruno	D. Schoumaker
2010	73	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Africa	Stopping, Spacing and Postponing: Patterns of Fertility Decline in Africa	We have argued previously that dichotomizing motives for birth control  into stopping and spacing of childbearing distorts the nature of those  motivations. Postponing (i.e. delaying having another birth for reasons  other than the age of one’s youngest child or existing family size) is a  third, distinct, childbearing strategy. A novel pattern of  lengthening median birth intervals exists across sub-Saharan Africa  which, as originally hypothesised by the Caldwells, vary little by age or parity.   This paper investigates birth intervals by fitting regression models to  data from 66 Demographic and Health Surveys conducted in 25 Africa  countries during the last twenty years. In countries where birth intervals have lengthened greatly, this lengthening is accounted for almost entirely by increased use of modern contraceptive methods. Limited evidence exists for parity-specific family size limitation in any country. Age and parity are not significant determinants of birth interval length in the African fertility transition.	Tom	A. Moultrie	Ian	M. Timaeus
2010	73	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Africa	A Moveable Feast?: The Flexibility of Fertility Preferences in a Transitioning Malawian Community	This study asks about the role of uncertainty in shaping the fertility preferences of young adults in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). New data from Tsogolo la Thanzi, a study of 2500 young adults (15-24) in peri-urban Malawi, is used to assess the conditions under which respondents believe their preference will move, in which directions, and whether or not this move would be temporary (a tempo effect) or permanent (a quantum effect). We examine how concern about HIV predicts fertility desires as measured with the Coombs scale, a sensitive but rarely used tool. We draw upon a rich literature on uncertainty to theorize that heightened concern about HIV and the proximity of the threat of HIV translate into more malleable fertility preferences and a greater urgency to have children. Finally, we discuss what is - and what is not - unique about AIDS-related uncertainty in the Malawian context.	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2010	73	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Africa	Onset of Childbearing and Circular Migration in Rural South Africa	This paper uses event history analysis to examine the association between onset of childbearing and circular labor migration using longitudinal data from a Demographic Surveillance Site in rural South Africa. Most studies examining the relationship between rural-urban migration and fertility in the developing countries have taken a linear view of migration as a state in which individuals ‘transition into’. In reality, labor migration in several countries of Africa entails transitions in and out of migration over an individual’s life course. In South Africa, women’s migration has remained particularly tenuous, with indelible marks of the apartheid era restrictive policies that curtailed their freedom of movement and labor force participation. Our findings challenge the assumptions of demographic theories that labor migration is likely to have a suppressive or delaying effect on fertility and make a case for understanding the socio-historical and structural context of fertility underlying the observable demographic characteristics.	Gayatri	 Singh	Benjamin	D. Clark	Jill	 Williams
2010	74	The Emergence of Very Low Fertility in China and India	Below Replacement Fertility Preferences in Shanghai, China	China has joined the group of low-fertility countries. With a TFR somewhere in the range of 1.4 to 1.6, much speculation about China's future fertility depends on stated fertility intentions. Specifically, is there evidence that the gap between individual and state fertility preferences is narrowing, or that achieved fertility may not reach stated goals due to social and economic constraints? We use a probability sample of Shanghai residents. We examine fertility preferences that incorporate the perspectives of the individual and the state and that allow the measurement of the deflating effect of policy on current intentions. Our results show that intended families are very small in this urban setting and that relaxing policy constraints on fertility would likely raise them only modestly. These empirical findings help ground speculations on the future of fertility in the hypothetical absence of policy constraints.	Giovanna	 Merli
2010	74	The Emergence of Very Low Fertility in China and India	Shanghai’s Ultra-Low Fertility: The Future for Other Populations?	Shanghai has recently reported a TFR of 0.6. This is for a population of some 20 million equivalent to that of Sweden, Finland and Norway combined - countries whose experience has been very influential in shaping our thinking about fertility. Despite recent attempts to shore up fertility rates, outcomes are incredibly unsure given the normalization of the one-child family. This paper will present a combination of an attempt to better understand the conditions of this unprecedented low level of fertility in a major population using qualitative and quantitative methodologies. This analysis will be set within the context of an extensive interdisciplinary literature review on the question: How low could fertility possibly fall?	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Stuart	A. Basten
2010	74	The Emergence of Very Low Fertility in China and India	Population Policy, Economic Development and Low Fertility in Guangdong Province, China, 1975-2005	The effects of the one-child policy and economic reform on China’s fertility decline since 1979 have been debated for years. Guangdong province is of particular interest because its fertility decline lagged behind the national average for about two decades after 1979, despite faster economic growth than that of any other province. This paper sheds light on this puzzle by analyzing how both fertility policy and economic development have affected the trend in fertility in Guangdong during the period 1975–2005, based on data from China’s 1990 and 2000 censuses and 2005 mini-census. The analysis shows clearly the influence of fertility policy on fertility trend. It also shows that economic development has brought about large changes in population composition by residence, education, occupation, and migration status, which have also contributed substantially to Guangdong’s fertility decline, in large part through changes in proportions currently married.	Jiajian	 Chen	Robert	D. Retherford	Minja	K. Choe	Xiru	 Li	Hongyan	 Cui
2010	74	The Emergence of Very Low Fertility in China and India	Middle Class Dreams: India’s One Child Families	This paper discusses the emergence of a new demographic sub-group in India – the one child family. Propelled neither by China’s kind of population policy nor by the kind of societal changes that characterize the second demographic transition in the industrialized world, a significant and possibly rising proportion of urban educated families now stop childbearing after one child, regardless of the sex of that child. We seek to describe the socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of this population sub-group as well as to speculate on the reasons for its existence. In particular, we consider the possibility that it represents a logical response to a situation of rising material aspirations that are created by the recent swift economic growth in the country but are outstripping this economic growth, so that severe restraints on fertility are the only way to both afford more material goods as well as invest more heavily in children.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu	Sonalde	B. Desai
2010	75	The Demography and Biodemography of Aging, Disability, Health and Longevity	Disability Insurance and Health in Europe and the US	Rising fiscal pressure from disability insurance programs have increased pressure on governments to scale back benefits. At the same time, restricting enrollments based on stricter eligibility criteria have raised concerns about workers in poor health unable to qualify for disability insurance. We first use data from the Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to compare patterns of health and DI participation across countries, finding little or no evidence of tradeoffs between health severity for DI enrollees and overall enrollment rates. We then develop a model of disability insurance participation depending on health, market opportunities, and country-level eligibility criteria that is potentially consistent with the aggregate empirical evidence. The model is estimated using SHARE and HRS, with estimates suggesting a pervasive and adverse impact of U.S. strategies for containing costs, such as long waiting periods and strict medical limitations on eligibility.	Enrica	 Croda
2010	75	The Demography and Biodemography of Aging, Disability, Health and Longevity	Disability and Recovery	There is well documented evidence that later life disability has declined over the past two decades. In addition, there is evidence that some older adults recover functional abilities between waves of longitudinal surveys. The reasons for recovery, the extent of recovery, and the correlates of recovery are poorly understood. This research examines the factors associated with the recovery of functional abilities. Does recovery vary by ADL? Are some “easier” to recover than others? Are some ADL limitations more strongly related to mortality than others? Do the associated chronic conditions vary by ADL and by recovery? That is, are some diseases “easier” to recover from? Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, I look at the extent to which respondents report improvements in functioning overall, and by specific function and activity. Preliminary results indicate that the odds of recovery vary by both underlying health condition and type of limitation.	Christine	 Himes
2010	75	The Demography and Biodemography of Aging, Disability, Health and Longevity	A Bio-Demographic Analysis of General, Independent, Joint, GxG and GxE Interaction Effects of FOXO Genotypes on Longevity	We extend/apply the bio-demographic and statistical methods to genotypic/phenotypic data from 1,104 Han Chinese centenarians and 1,406 middle-age controls. Our estimates show that the genotypes of FOXO1A and FOXO3A have significantly negative and positive effects, respectively, on survival probability from middle-age to age 100+. The positive effects of FOXO3A and negative effects of FOXO1A largely compensate each other if one carries both, although FOXO3A has a stronger impact. The 10-year-follow-up cohort analysis show that, adjusted for various confounders, the positive effects of FOXO3A on survival remain statistically significant at ages 92+, but the negative effects of FOXO1A disappear; GxG interactions between FOXO1A-209 and FOXO3A-310 or FOXO3A-292 increase mortality risk by 32-36% (P      	Yi	 Zeng	Lingguo	 Cheng	Huashuai	 Chen	Huiqing	 Cao	Elizabeth	 Hauser	Liu	 Yuzhi	Zhenyu	 Xiao	Qihua	 Tan	Xiaoli	 Tian	James	W. Vaupel
2010	75	The Demography and Biodemography of Aging, Disability, Health and Longevity	Sex Differences in Age Trajectories of Physiological Dysregulation: Inflammation, Metabolic Syndrome, and Allostatic Load	Using nationally representative data on 38,000 individuals aged 17+ from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1988 – 2006), this study examined sex differences in the age trajectories of 14 markers of physiological functions that show marked sexual dimorphism and are essential to cardiovascular health and vitality including markers of inflammation, metabolic disorders, and allostatic load. We found significant sex by age interaction effects for all variables examined. The patterns of sex and age differences vary by biological functions. Differential exposures and vulnerabilities to social status and health behaviors, especially obesity and cigarette smoking, partially account for the sex differences in age patterns of various biological functions. This study provides population based evidence for the potential physiological pathways through which age changes in sex mortality gaps occur. We discuss sex-specific biological mechanisms especially reproductive physiology underlying these differences, the complexity of the measurement of phenotypic frailty, and avenues for future research.	Yang	 Yang	Michael	 Kozloski
2010	76	Gender, Sexuality and Power	Employment, Transactional Sex, and Bargaining within Premarital Relationships in Urban Kenya	This study applies the household bargaining model to sexual decision-making in premarital relationships in a context of high HIV/AIDS prevalence. Using life history calendar data collected from women ages 18-24 in Kisumu, Kenya, the study explores linkages between two important sources of women’s economic resources—employment and material transfers from male partners—and sexual behavior within premarital relationships (N=503 relationships). Consistent with a bargaining perspective, results show that employment and income increase the likelihood of safe sexual behavior, including delaying sex and using condoms consistently. Material transfers display the opposite effect, supporting the view the resources obtained from within the relationship decrease women’s negotiating power. Finally, bargaining dynamics appear to be similar at the beginning and later stages of relationships.	Nancy	 Luke	Rachel	E. Goldberg	Blessing	  Mberu
2010	76	Gender, Sexuality and Power	Partner Influences on Contraceptive Decision Making	Given the large proportion of unplanned pregnancies in the United States, despite widespread contraceptive use, contraceptive compliance is an important area of research. Reasons for contraceptive nonuse may include perception that pregnancy was unlikely; past problems with contraceptive method; fear of side effects; unexpected or unwanted sex; financial barriers; and partner’s preferences, including refusal to use contraception. The objectives of this study were to determine actual and preferred methods of contraception and contraceptive use patterns and to understand the ways in which partners may control women's ability to use contraception effectively. Women ages 18-44 in the United States were eligible for inclusion in this study (n=1261). Information on preferred contraceptive methods, contraceptive discontinuation, and partner interference with contraception will be presented. The associations between demographic characteristics, intimate partner violence and contraceptive behaviors, including not using the preferred method, will be measured using Pearson’s chi-square tests and multiple logistic regression.	Corrine	 Williams
2010	76	Gender, Sexuality and Power	Constructs of Power and Equity, and Their Association with Contraceptive Use among African Men and Women	This paper addresses the question: “how do perceptions of personal power and gender equity influence their reports of contraceptive use in Ethiopia and Kenya.” Data were collected from men and women aged 15-45 in rural areas of Ethiopia and Kenya. Regression models were fitted to outcomes measuring current use of a modern method of contraception. The key covariates of interest in each model were scales measuring power and equity. Perceived power in a relationship was associated with the reporting of contraceptive use for men in both Ethiopia and Kenya, but not for women in either country. For women, perceived equity proved to be associated with the reporting of contraceptive use in both countries, but was not significant for men in either country. The findings are important for program planners who are interested in honing the gender components of reproductive health programs that are aimed at addressing unmet need for family planning.	Rob	 Stephenson	Doris	 Bartel	Marcie	 Rubardt
2010	76	Gender, Sexuality and Power	Sexual Frequency, Women’s Decision-Making and Contraceptive Use in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Multi-Country Analysis	Since the 1994 Cairo ICPD conference, there has been increasing interest in women’s empowerment, particularly for sexual and reproductive health. Women’s ability to negotiate the timing of intercourse with a partner has not been studied extensively in Africa. We explore the relationships between women’s autonomy and time since most recent intercourse in Ghana, Malawi, Mali, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe using Demographic and Health Surveys. We also examine the association between modern contraceptive use and time since most recent intercourse. We find a strong relationship between greater women’s decision-making autonomy and less recent sexual activity in all settings. These associations warrant further investigation but could be evidence that greater women’s autonomy results in women’s improved ability to negotiate sex. Additionally, we find a consistent association between modern contraceptive use and timing of most recent intercourse suggesting another potential benefit of promoting contraceptive use for couples wanting to space or limit births.	Michelle	J. Hindin	Carie	J. Muntifering
2010	77	Child Health and Well-Being	Limited Spending on Child Care Subsidies and Strict Welfare Policies: A Risky Combination for School-Age Children?	This project examines whether states’ expenditures on child care subsidies interact with their welfare policies to impact school-age children and their families. We hypothesize that states with limited spending on child care subsidies and strict welfare policies may encourage maternal employment even if this increases children's exposure to self-care. To test this hypothesis, we estimate a series of models examining the effects of within-state changes in child care subsidy expenditures and welfare policies on maternal employment and school-age children’s exposure to self-care. Our analyses rely on the 1997 – 2002 rounds of the National Survey of America’s Families, a critical period in which states were simultaneously expanding funding for child care subsidies and tightening their welfare policies.	Kathryn	 Hynes	Kaylin	 Greene
2010	77	Child Health and Well-Being	The Intragenerational Dynamics of Health and Skill Development	Using data from the U.K. National Child Development Study, I propose to investigate how the relationship between child health and skill development evolves over the early life course. I examine whether and how changes in children's health are related to changes in cognitive and non-cognitive achievement. A key goal is to account for the reality that health is not static: studying movement in and out of compromised health during the schooling process, as well as the frequency and severity of health problems, affords a more thorough understanding of when and how health matters.	Margot	 Jackson
2010	77	Child Health and Well-Being	Relative Age and ADHD Diagnosis and Treatment	According to the National Institute of Mental Health, when evaluating whether a child has ADHD, health professionals should consider whether the behaviors “happen more often in this child compared with the child’s peers.” We exploit the discontinuity in age when children start kindergarten generated by state eligibility laws to examine whether relative age is a significant determinant of ADHD diagnosis and treatment. Using a regression discontinuity model, we find that children born just after the cutoff, who are relatively old-for-grade, have a significantly lower incidence of ADHD diagnosis and treatment compared with similar children born just before the cutoff date. Since ADHD is an underlying neurological problem where incidence rates should not change dramatically from one birth date to the next, these results suggest that relative age to peers in class, and the resulting relative behavior, leads some children who are comparatively immature to receive medically inappropriate stimulant prescription medication.	William	N. Evans	Melinda	Sandler  Morrill	Steve	 Parente
2010	77	Child Health and Well-Being	School-Based Health Services and Adolescents’ Educational Outcomes: What Nationally Representative Data Can Tell Us about Service Provision and Impacts	This paper examines the link between school-based health services and educational outcomes. Research on health and education indicates that unhealthy students are poorly positioned to learn. By providing health-related services on campus, student health needs may be addressed without having to decrease time in school, potentially enhancing students’ opportunities to learn and leading to improved academic performance. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I identify 15 different health services that schools may provide and descriptively compare schools that rank high and low on service provision along multiple school characteristics. I employ multilevel regression models to identify how the service provision aspect of school context relates to adolescents’ achievement. Further, I explore the existence of heterogeneous effects across subpopulations; I examine whether greater health service provision on school campus mitigates observed racial disparities in academic outcomes.	Jane	 Rochmes
2010	78	Late Life Work, Retirement and Income Security	Retirement Preferences and Policy Implications across Europe	Increasing life expectancy coupled with declining birth rates is prompting European countries to revise their current pension schemes. The policy reforms needed constitutes perhaps the biggest challenge facing European policy makers. The urgency of the policy reforms are reflected by the European Council Summits of Stockholm (2001) and Barcelona (2002), where policy makers agreed to both increase the labour force participation among older workers and to delay the retirement period. As the great majority of countries are way off the targets set for 2010, we investigate individuals’ preferences for work and retirement in 23 European countries. We find that on average individuals prefer to retire at a younger age that the current mean retirement age though there is huge variation both at the individual and country levels. We find rather robust evidence to suggest that individuals are willing to work longer as the average life expectancy is increasing.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Cristina	 Ruggeri	Zsolt	 Speder
2010	78	Late Life Work, Retirement and Income Security	The Effect of Social Security Reform on Retirement	We analyze panel data for 40 countries over the period 1970-2000 to examine the effect of social security reform on the labor supply of older men. The data show a trend towards earlier retirement which can partially be explained by rising income levels. We find the average retirement age rises significantly when either the normal, or early, social security eligibility age rises, or pension benefits for postponing retirement are increased. A shift from a defined benefit to a defined contribution system, holding other factors such as the expected replacement rate constant, leads to a large increase in the average retirement age.	Guenther	 Fink
2010	78	Late Life Work, Retirement and Income Security	Retirement, Pension Reform, and Lifecycle Pension Wealth: An International Comparison	This study considers the effect of the later retirement and an increase in pensionable age on old age support system by using a larger study of the economic life-cycle, the National Transfer Accounts (NTA). The NTA is a new system of accounts that is consistent with National Income and Product Accounts but provides much-needed age data. The results also make use of a similar simulation model to assess the implications of population change for wealth and income. Our results show that increasing pensionable age or delaying retirement has a substantial impact on labor income and pension wealth to elderly. An increase in pensionable age raises the asset to labor income ratio, but delaying retirement lowers it. The effects vary a lot depending on our study countries, but the combined effect generally raises the ratio. The effect will be greater if delaying retirement crowds out some of the familial transfers.	Sang-Hyop	 Lee
2010	78	Late Life Work, Retirement and Income Security	Rescaling the Life Cycle - The Effect of a Rising Life Expectancy on Retirement and Old-Age Provision	This paper analyzes the effect of a rising life expectancy on rescaling the life cycle and the related impact on macroeconomic saving and consumption patterns. By introducing the relative retirement span (RRS) as an indicator for life cycle arrangements we are able to analyze the development of the life cycle over time and to compare different country profiles. We also include characteristics of the social security system in order to identify a ‘behavioral effect’ shaping the life cycle. Additionally we estimate the effect of the relative retirement span on the gross domestic savings rate.   Based on a cross-sectional panel data set of OECD countries we discover an asymmetric change of the life course. We also find that life cycle arrangements are rather determined by the behavioral effect than by a rising life expectancy.   Moreover, we expect to find a macroeconomic response to an increased relative retirement span.	Francois	 Peglow
2010	79	Mortality Trends in More Developed Countries	The Russian Puzzle: Mortality and Ethnicity in a Changing Society, 1994-2004	Do populations from ethnic regions cope better with the transition from socialism and subsequent economic decline than populations from Slavic regions in post-communist Russia?  Using multivariate and random effects models for the 1994-2004 panel data, this paper examines the ethnic regional variability of post-Soviet mortality crisis in 88 (excluding Chechnya) regions of Russia adjusting for income, urbanization, and crime. The present study demonstrates that after adjusting for confounding effect of population age, populations from republics did not experience a health advantage compared to oblast populations during the post-Soviet transition.  The Muslim religious rather than the ethnic factor was a strong determinant of a mortality advantage. Among all populations from Muslim regions, those who lived in the Caucasus experienced better mortality outcomes. Among Muslims who lived in the Caucasus, women appeared to have the most advantageous position in mortality.	Saglar	 Bougdaeva
2010	79	Mortality Trends in More Developed Countries	Education and Age, Period, and Cohort Patterns of U.S. Adult Mortality: Heart Disease, Lung Cancer, and Respiratory Diseases	Adult mortality risk in the United States has decreased significantly over the past twenty years. While the continued decreases are to be celebrated, the forces behind these decreases are not entirely understood. Scant research has attempted to disentangle cohort effects from period effects, and most explanations of the mortality reductions simply allude to lifestyle changes, medical and science breakthroughs, and/or increased education. Further still, despite the overall reduction in mortality risk, educational differences in U.S. mortality have persisted, or even widened. The persistence and/or widening of these gaps suggest that the recent mortality decreases have varied considerably by educational attainment. In this paper, we use the 1986-2002 NHIS-LMF data to analyze the variations in the age, period, and cohort patterns across both sex and educational level over the past 20 years.	Ryan	K. Masters	Robert	A. Hummer	Thomas	W. Pullum
2010	79	Mortality Trends in More Developed Countries	Long-Term Mortality of War Cohorts: The Case of Finland	The system of full mobilisation and the modest effects of the World War II events on the civil population make Finland a highly useful case for exploring whether war veterans experience elevated long-term mortality risks. Using data from the Human Mortality Database and a detailed register-based sample containing main causes of death, we study mortality rates of the Finnish male cohorts who participated in the wars against the Soviet Union in 1939-1944. We find no indications of elevations in long-term mortality rates of people in the war cohorts. Recently after war-end, death rates in the war cohorts were substantially above the expected time trend, but they approached unity at the time antibiotics were introduced. The medical advances of later date have additionally helped in notably reducing mortality levels in the general population. This health beneficial development has evidently forced down any potential for a reduction of later-life survival in the war cohorts.	Jan	M. Saarela	Fjalar	 Finnäs
2010	79	Mortality Trends in More Developed Countries	Effects of Early-Life Conditions on Adult Mortality Decline in the Netherlands 1860-1969	How important are improvements in early-life conditions in adult mortality decline? Properly controlling for period effects in an age-period-cohort model this paper estimates the contribution of early-life conditions to mortality decline above age 40 in the Netherlands between the onset of decline until the medical innovations of the 1970s. Early-life conditions explain about a third of the adult mortality decline between 1860-74 and 1965-69. Increased height and infant mortality decline explain slightly less than half of the cohort influences (or more than fifteen percent of the decline). While infant mortality has a significant effect on adult mortality, improvements in health conditions in childhood, as measured by infant mortality decline, only make a marginal contribution to adult mortality decline.	Jona	 Schellekens
2010	80	Prenatal Care, Early-Life Health and Child Development: Evidence from Developing Countries	Health Outcomes for Children Born to Teen Mothers in Cape Town, South Africa	This paper analyzes the effect of being born to a teen mother on child health outcomes in South Africa using propensity score reweighting. Exploiting the longitudinal nature of the Cape Area Panel Study, we estimate the probability of being a teen mother conditional on pre-childbirth characteristics. We use this score to construct a weighted counterfactual group of children born to mothers over nineteen whose pre-childbirth characteristics are very similar to the teen mother sample except for their age at the birth of their first child. Our reweighted regressions indicate that being born to a teen mother has some significant adverse effects on child health, especially among coloured children. In particular, children born to teens are more likely to be underweight at birth and to be stunted with the negative effect being double the size for coloureds than Africans.	Nicola	 Branson	Cally	 Ardington
2010	80	Prenatal Care, Early-Life Health and Child Development: Evidence from Developing Countries	The Impact of Adequate Prenatal Care in a Developing Country: Testing the WHO Recommendations	Deficient birth outcomes entail greater mortality risks, and higher probabilities of poor future health. This study is the first statistical examination of the effect of the World Health Organization’s recommended number of prenatal care visits for developing countries on birth outcomes. This study accounts for the endogenous nature of prenatal care decisions by using an instrumental variables approach based on the accessibility of prenatal services. Using the CLHN Survey I construct a measure of prenatal care which involves both timing and intensity and that shows positive impacts for the combination of both. These results are highly robust to alternative methods to remove the systematic effect of gestation on birth weight but are only significant for urban areas. The lack of impact on rural areas could be due to the inferior quality of prenatal care services received there. This theory is corroborated when controlling directly for care quality.	Gissele	 Gajate Garrido
2010	80	Prenatal Care, Early-Life Health and Child Development: Evidence from Developing Countries	The Production Function of Cognitive Skills: Health,
Parental Inputs and Caste Test Gaps in India	This paper explores the determinants of children's cognitive outcomes using novel panel data from India. As in Todd  andWolpin's (2007) I do not find evidence supporting restrictive models that  assume test scores depend only on contemporaneous inputs. Alternatively,  the results show that lagged inputs matter in the production of current skills.  In models where past inputs are not observed or imperfectly measured, past  health and/or past test scores turn out to be a good proxy-indicator of this  variable. Using an IV approach I find that 1 SD increase in  HAZ at the age of 1 leads to cognitive test scores that are on average 24  per cent of 1 SD higher at age 5. I also study the behaviour of inputs and find that parents seem  to 'reinforce' rather than 'compensate' children on test scores, and they do  so more in lower caste families and particularly with boys.	Florencia	 Lopez Boo
2010	80	Prenatal Care, Early-Life Health and Child Development: Evidence from Developing Countries	An Evaluation of the Indian Child Nutrition and Development Program	The Indian Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) aims to improve nutrition of young children by providing nutritional supplements and pre- and post-natal services to targeted villages. However, previous evaluations find ICDS fails to reduce malnutrition and program placement does not uniformly target vulnerable areas. I use new data to reevaluate ICDS on several dimensions; in contrast to previous studies, I find significant treatment effects particularly for the most malnourished children. Unlike previous studies, I control for non-normality of ICDS coverage; however, like previous work, results suggest targeting is not uniform. While ICDS effectively targets poor areas, it fails to target areas with low levels of education or those with unbalanced sex ratios. Results also show that allocation of national-level ICDS funds depends on voting patterns rather than malnutrition rates. I conclude that although once placed ICDS significantly reduces child malnutrition, which village receives the treatment continues to be problematic.	Eeshani	 Kandpal
2010	81	Immigrant Integration	Does Age at Immigration Matter? A Comparison of Asian Immigrants in Canada and the United States	Conventional theories of immigrant integration predict that immigrants who arrive at younger ages are more integrated. However, there is much debate over how best to study age-at-immigration effects. We examine microdata from the 2000 U.S. census and the 2005 American Community Survey, and the 1991, 2001, and 2006 Canadian censuses to compare age-at-arrival effects on several measures of integration, including home language, education, and occupation, for the six largest Asian immigrant groups in both countries. Age at immigration is a key factor in Asian immigrants’ integration in both the U.S. and Canada, and a linear measure of age at immigration is superior to age break points (for example, at 5 or 12 years old) or immigrant generation (such as 1.5 generation) for revealing age-at-immigration effects. There are also substantial differences by gender, ethnic group, and outcome. We discuss implications for theories of, and future research on, immigrant integration.	Sharon	M. Lee
2010	81	Immigrant Integration	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation in the United Kingdom and United States	Immigrant incorporation is a critical social and policy issue confronting a growing number of countries. This study examines one aspect of integration in the United Kingdom and the United States: the residential patterns of immigrants and minority group members. Using data from the 2001 UK census and the 2000 US census, we compute dissimilarity, information theory, and isolation indexes for a set of comparably defined ethnic and foreign-born groups and geographic areas. We further examine the association between nativity and levels of segregation among the panethnic groups. In doing so we aim to arrive at a better understanding of the ethnic incorporation process in the UK and the US.	John	 Iceland	Pablo	 Mateos
2010	81	Immigrant Integration	Social Changes, Cohort Quality, and Labor Market Assimilation: Chinese Immigrants in Hong Kong, 1991-2006	This paper uses Hong Kong census and bi-census data between 1991 and 2006 to examine the assimilation of mainland immigrants in the labor market, focusing on employment, occupational and earnings attainment in comparison to natives. Particular attention is paid to the assimilation of the immigrants over time, and the effects of changes to the cohort quality, resulting primarily from the shift in immigration policy after Hong Kong’s return to China in 1997. Results show that newly arrived Chinese immigrants had a lower employment rate, and were trapped in elementary occupations even if they had jobs, and earned much less than the natives. As immigrants stayed longer, the gap tended to decrease. However, most immigrants were not able to reach parity to natives in terms of earnings throughout their working lives. The above pattern differs by gender. No evidence suggests significant changes in the quality of immigrant cohorts after Hong Kong’s return to China in 1997	Zhuoni	 Zhang
2010	81	Immigrant Integration	Language at Work: The Impact of Linguistic Enclaves on Immigrant Economic Integration	This study examines the relationship between language enclaves and the economic integration of immigrants, paying particular attention to the earnings of immigrants. Two core questions are asked: 1) What factors influence the likelihood of employment in linguistic enclaves; and 2) What are the impacts of working in linguistic enclaves on earnings? The analysis utilizes two relatively new census questions on languages used at work most often and regularly asked in the 2006 Canadian census. The investigation shows that levels of language proficiency are important factors determining the type of language enclave where individuals are employed. Further language at work mediates much of the observed impacts of language proficiency on earnings. Wage determination models also confirm that employment in linguistic enclaves conditions weekly earnings; immigrants who use non-official languages at work have lower wages than those who use only English at work.	Monica	 Boyd
2010	82	Assortative Mating	Racial and Ethnic Diversity, Immigration, and Changing Interracial Marriage, 1980-2008	Past research shows that interracial marriage has been increasing but the pace of increase slowed down in the 1990s, especially for Hispanics and Asian Americans. Most of the studies focus on married couples and neglect the role marriage market conditions may play in interracial marriage. First, we use data from 1980 to 2000 decennial censuses and the 2005-2008 American Community Survey to update the trends in interracial marriage. We show how changes in racial/ethnic composition, immigration, and educational expansion have contributed to changing patterns of interracial marriage in U.S. metropolitan areas. Second, we take advantage of newly released 2008 ACS data, which include age at first marriage, and can be compared with similar data from the 1980 census. Unlike recent studies of intact marriages, these data allow us to identify never married individuals “at risk” of marriage and to estimate changing probabilities of interracial marriage since 1980 across different population groups.	Zhenchao	 Qian	Daniel	T. Lichter
2010	82	Assortative Mating	Racially Mixed Conjugal Unions in Three Canadian Large Cities	This study investigates racial exogamy in Canada. Using the 2001 Census data, the article analyses the occurrence of White/non-White unions in Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver. Log-linear models indicate that the relative levels of interracial relationships vary across racial groups, immigration status, and place of residence. The highest odds of cohabiting or marrying a White person are found among Blacks, a finding that stands in stark contrast with the results of studies from the US but corroborates the situation observed in the UK. The highest levels of racial exogamy are found among couples comprising an immigrant and a non-immigrant, but this effect varies across racial groups. Finally, contrary to our expectation, we find that French Canadians are not more inclusive of their linguistic counterparts than Anglophones.	Dana	 Hamplova	Celine	 Le Bourdais
2010	82	Assortative Mating	Assortative Mating on Age: Trends in the Spousal Age Difference	This paper presents a multi-country analysis of trends in the spousal age difference from the 1970s to the present. Our focus is the non-Western societies of Latin America, Africa, and Asia (n = 25+ countries). For these regions, this will be the most comprehensive rigorous analysis of assortative mating on age that has been carried out in recent years. We will present a descriptive analysis of trends in the spousal age difference, and will use log-linear models to model assortative mating according to age. We will also take into account assortative mating on education -- a key theme of this research is the interplay of age and educational attainment as characteristics of prospective spouses. We posit that marriages have become more age homogamous; and that the amount of narrowing in the spousal age gap is directly related to the increase in women's educational attainment and to the increase in women's age at marriage.	John	B. Casterline	Zhenchao	 Qian	Jing	 Liu
2010	82	Assortative Mating	Changing Intergroup Boundaries in Brazilian Marriages: 1991-2000	Using data from the 1991 and 2000 Censuses of Brazil, this paper examines change in educational, racial and religious intermarriage. Different perspectives on social change make different predictions regarding shifts in the magnitude of marital homogamy within these three social characteristics. Racial homogamy is less pronounced in Brazil than in a variety of other contexts, educational homogamy is comparable to that reported in the United States, and religious homogamy is much more pronounced than either educational or racial homogamy. The most common pattern of social change is increased fluidity in mate selection. Homogamy parameters are becoming smaller for race, education and religion, but the pattern of change is not uniform. Boundaries appear to be increasing at the two tails of the education distribution and for some religious categories.	Tim	B. Heaton
2010	83	Schooling and the Transition to Adulthood	Non-Cognitive Skills and the Transition to Adulthood for Australian Youth	The determinants of successful transitions to adulthood are complex and not fully explained by cognitive skills. This study examines locus of control, a key non-cognitive skill, measuring the extent to which a person believes their actions affect their outcomes. We use longitudinal data from the Australian Youth in Focus survey to first investigate how family socio-economic status, welfare receipt, and volatility over the life course relate to level and change in locus of control. Second, we assess the extent to which locus of control predicts education and employment transitions and whether locus of control matters differently for advantaged versus disadvantaged youth. The results show that locus of control is shaped by parental influence, childhood experience and life events, but not family welfare receipt. There is some evidence that locus of control among young people has an influence on education and employment. However, this relationship occurs mainly for economically disadvantaged youth.	Ariel	 Kalil	Wilawan	 Kanjanapan	Anastasia	 Sartbayeva
2010	83	Schooling and the Transition to Adulthood	Dating and Secondary School Completion in Urban Kenya	Completing secondary school is increasingly viewed as a desirable life goal for young men and women living in urban Kenya. This goal sometimes complements and at other times competes with other important adolescent transitions such as initiating sexual activity, getting married, and having children. In this paper, we draw on a ten-year retrospective Relationship History Calendar, which gathered detailed monthly information on schooling and all romantic and sexual partnerships. We find that for both men and women it is not simply being sexually active, but rather how many sexual partners they have, that negatively impacts their chances of completing secondary school. Similarly, while pregnancy for women diminishes their chances of graduating from secondary school, it does not fully account for the effects of having sexual partners. Lastly, while finding a suitable marriage partner actually increases the likelihood  that men finish secondary school, it substantially reduces women’s completion rates.	Shelley	 Clark	Rohini	 Mathur
2010	83	Schooling and the Transition to Adulthood	Not Just Luck: Characteristics and Attitudes Related to Employment in Different Sectors in Rural Ethiopia	Ethiopia accounts for the largest youth population in Sub-Saharan Africa and the lack of employment opportunities for Ethiopian young people is among the critical developing challenges facing the country. Yet, there is a drought of research on specific factors affecting youth employment in Ethiopia. Only a limited number of studies have address how individual background characteristics and social context affect adolescents’ attitudes towards occupational attainment. This paper investigates this relationship by examining how background and contextual characteristics affect perceived importance of ascribed and achieved characteristics on becoming a farmer, kiosk owner, school teacher or office worker. In addition, we also consider adolescents’ perception of “luck” on occupational achievement. The results from this paper add to the current debate regarding those factors which influence educational attainment and occupational choice, shifting the debate away from traditional issues affecting occupational choice and attitudes, such as intergenerational transfers of education and occupational experience	Lisbeth	Trille G. Loft	Carrie	E. Spearin	Dennis	 Hogan
2010	83	Schooling and the Transition to Adulthood	The Effects of Birth Order on Educational Transitions in West Germany	This study analyzes the effect of birth order on educational transitions. After decades of varied degrees of enthusiasm and skepticism, recent research has increasingly reported effects of birth order on a host of psychological and socioeconomic outcomes. The objective of this study is to contribute to understanding when in the educational career birth order effects are most relevant by analyzing these effects on educational transitions made at different points of the schooling career, with particular interest on whether the effects vary in strength at different educational transition points. We analyze life history data that includes information on educational attainment of all siblings in West Germany, a country where pupils are tracked into different educational careers early in life. Preliminary findings stress the importance of birth order on educational attainment also in the West German context.	Juho	 Härkönen
2010	84	Housing and Location Choice	Housing Tenure Differences in Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation	Homeownership is one of the primary ways through which families accumulate wealth, particularly for blacks and Hispanics. But recent trends suggest that minority homeownership itself may not be as helpful to minorities in their accrual of wealth as it is for whites. Minority homeowners are likely to be highly segregated from their white counterparts. Surprisingly, however, little is known about how housing tenure shapes racial and ethnic residential segregation. The primary goal of this study is to document the segregation of minority and white homeowners and renters across metropolitan America using data from Census 2000. Preliminary results here suggest that housing tenure is an important dimension of socioeconomic status to examine as it relates to residential segregation and that race/ethnicity appears to interact with housing tenure in shaping racial and ethnic segregation. Blacks appear to be the minority group with the highest levels of segregation from white owners and renters.	Samantha	 Friedman	Nancy	A. Denton	Cheng	 Chen
2010	84	Housing and Location Choice	Metropolitan Structure and Neighborhood Attainment: Exploring Inter-Metropolitan Variation in Racial Residential Segregation	Using data from the 1981, 1991, and 2001 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, in conjunction with decennial census data for tracts and metropolitan areas, we examine how ecological and demographic characteristics of metropolitan areas are associated with black and white households’ neighborhood racial composition. Results from hierarchical linear models show that about 20-40% of the variation in the percentage of households’ tract population that is non-Hispanic white or non-Hispanic black exists across, rather than within, metropolitan areas. In large metropolitan areas and areas with greater concentrations of blacks, blacks and whites have fewer white neighbors and more black neighbors. In metropolitan areas with large foreign-born populations, blacks have fewer non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black neighbors. In metropolitan areas characterized by ample supplies of new housing and low levels of municipal fragmentation, whites have comparatively more minority neighbors.	Jeremy	 Pais	Scott	J. South
2010	84	Housing and Location Choice	Segregation through the Lens of Housing Unit Transition: What Roles Do the Prior Residents, the Local Micro-Neighborhood, and the Broader Neighborhood Play?	This study focuses on segregation as it plays out at the micro-level of housing unit transition. Employing a unique sample that places housing units into micro-neighborhoods and census tracts, this study tests whether the characteristics of the previous residents of the unit, the local micro-neighborhood, or the broader tract better explain the race/ethnicity of the new residents in a housing unit. The results show that the racial/ethnic composition of the local micro-neighborhood has even stronger effects on the race/ethnicity of the new residents than does the racial/ethnic composition of the broader census tract. The results also reveal that even when accounting for the racial/ethnic composition of these two contexts, the race/ethnicity of the prior residents has a very strong effect on the race/ethnicity of the new residents. We consider possible explanations for this household-level effect.	John	 Hipp
2010	84	Housing and Location Choice	Race and Class in Neighborhood Mobility: A Conditional Logit Model of Neighborhood Migration	A basic question in understanding the causes of racial residential segregation is the extent to which race drives residential relocation decisions in contrast to correlated but non-racial factors, like neighborhood income level and housing costs. Analysis of panel data on residential mobility among neighborhoods presents a promising approach to this issue, but existing data has been only incompletely used for this purpose because the statistical models used for mobility analyses can only characterize destination neighborhoods by a single characteristic (e.g. percentage black). We use a conditional logit model to analyze residential neighborhoods of destination, an approach that allows us to simultaneously assess the relative importance of multiple destination neighborhood characteristics on residential relocation. We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1986-1994. Preliminary results indicate powerful effects of racial composition on residential choice that are not significantly weakened after controlling for neighborhood economic level and housing prices.	Lincoln	 Quillian
2010	85	The Association Between Body Weight, Pubertal Timing and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Racial Differences in the Influence of Female Adolescents’ Body Size on Dating and Sex	This paper investigates the effect of body size, measured by a person’s Body Mass Index and obesity status, on dating and sexual experiences of white and African American female adolescents. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, we estimate the effects of BMI and obesity on the probability of having had sex, being in a romantic relationship, and other important dating and sexual experiences. We find that obese white female adolescents are less likely to be in a romantic relationship compared to their non-obese counterparts. In addition, conditional on having dating experience, obese white girls are less likely to have been intimate and to have had sex. We find no significant differences in relationship experiences and sexual behaviors between obese and non-obese black female adolescents. These findings are novel and contribute to the emerging literature on the consequences of obesity and the racial differences in beauty norms.	Mir	 Ali	Frank	 Heiland
2010	85	The Association Between Body Weight, Pubertal Timing and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Adolescent Girl’s Weight and High School Fertility: The Role of School Context	Previous research shows that obese adolescent girls have reduced odds of romantic and sexual partnership, but the relationship between obesity and their fertility has not been established. We propose that obesity generally decreases girls’ risk of a high school birth given her limited opportunities for partnership, but that certain aspects of school context moderate this association in ways that reduce the constraint of obesity on childbearing for some girls and increase this constraint for others. This premise is rooted in theory regarding risk regulators. Using data from Add Health female respondents (n=5,039), we test this premise, which is generally supported. Obesity reduces a girl’s odds of a high school birth, but this risk varies according to the proportion of obese students and aggregate levels of school attachment within her school. Findings show how an important population health problem differentially influences an off-time, demographic life course transitions within disparate social contexts.	Jennifer	 Buher Kane	Michelle	 Frisco
2010	85	The Association Between Body Weight, Pubertal Timing and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Early Pubertal Timing, Race, and Girls’ Orientation to Sex and Romance in Adolescence	Using the first two waves from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health), we examine early pubertal timing and girls’ orientation toward sex and romance. Pubertal timing, like other life course transitions, redefines roles and brings about new social obligations and expectations. It also marks the moment when the cultural meanings, expectations, and limitations of gender, sexuality, and romance become real for girls and when others perceive girls as sexual actors, laying the foundation for opposite-sex relationships in adolescence and beyond. Thus, we argue, the pubertal transition represents girls’ transition into the romantic market. We examine how early transitions shape parental communication about sex and pregnancy, motivations to engage in sex, and motivations to avoid pregnancy. Preliminary results suggest that early maturing girls receive greater parental communication, are more motivated to engage in sex, and are less motivated to avoid pregnancy. These associations are strongest for White girls.	Kimberly	A. Daniels	Shannon	E. Cavanagh
2010	85	The Association Between Body Weight, Pubertal Timing and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Sexual Activity	Recent research suggests that overweight females suffer penalties in the labor and marriage markets, while overweight males do not. This study explores whether gender differences in the effect of body weight exist in what Cawley et al. (2006) labeled “the adolescent sex market.” Drawing on data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we use individual fixed effects and instrumental variables (IV) identification strategies to estimate the relationship between body weight and sexual activity. We find evidence that increases in body weight lower the probability that female adolescents become sexually active. In contrast, there is little evidence of a causal relationship between body weight and sexual activity for male adolescents.	Daniel	I. Rees
2010	86	Determinants of Child Survival in Africa	Influence of Maternal Education on Child Health in Kenya	In 2003, the child mortality rate was 115/1000 children in Kenya compared to an average of  88/1000 for Sub-Saharan African countries. This study sought to determine the effect of maternal education on immunization (n=2,169) and nutritional status (n=5,949) of children. Cross-sectional data, the Kenya Demographic Health Survey (KDHS)-2003 were used for data analyses. 80% of children were stunted and 49% were immunized. After controlling for confounding variables, children born to mothers with primary education were 2.17 times more likely to be fully immunized compared to those whose mothers lacked any formal education. For nutrition, children born to mothers with primary education were at 94% lower odds of having stunted growth compared to mothers with no primary education, p      	Benta	A. Abuya	James	 Kimani	Elijah	 Onsomu
2010	86	Determinants of Child Survival in Africa	Evaluation of Mortality Impact of Mass Disease-Prevention Efforts: A Case of Nationwide Distribution of Insecticide-Treated Nets In Togo, West Africa	Evaluation of the mortality impact of a national-scale disease-prevention intervention is complicated by the endogeneity—those individuals who receive the intervention may be healthier than those who did not. This population-based study assesses the mortality impact of Togo’s 2004 nationwide child health campaign that distributed insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) to mothers of children ages 9–59 months. We first demonstrate that a one-time campaign that restricts programme eligibility to households with a surviving child inadvertently excludes some households with a high child-mortality risk, by comparing mortality rates before and after the campaign according to a household’s eligibility status. We then estimate a two-equation model for ITN receipt and mortality risk in order to address the potential endogeneity of ITN receipt. Results show that among households with a child eligible to receive an ITN, living in a household with ITNs significantly reduced mortality among children ages 20–59 months even after controlling for endogeneity.	Kanako	 Ishida	Paul	 Stupp	Howard	 Gordberg	Marcy	 Erskine	Kodjo	 Morgah
2010	86	Determinants of Child Survival in Africa	Here We Are: Polygamous Marriages, Social Standing of Women and Child Survival in Kassena-Nankana District of Ghana	The objective of this paper is to analyze the life narratives of women’s marital relationships within the context of social change, the sharing of household resources and participation in the local health economy. Previous research has shown that children of polygamous co-wives have differential health outcomes and well-being (Slonim-Nevo and Al-Krenawi 2006, Hinks 2008, Caldwell, Caldwell and Orubuloye 1992). However, other research has found that most of the difference in child health outcomes is due to other factors such as mother's education, religious practices, age gap between male and female spouses and other socio-economic indicators that are common to polygamous unions and not primarily due to marital composition itself (Hogan 1999, Gibson and Mace 2007, Peterson 1999). This paper incorporates demographic analysis and anthropological methods to further explore the changing social contexts of marriage, a woman's social standing and the child survival rate of her children.	Maya	Nicole  Vaughan-Smith	Philip	B. Adongo	J.	Koku  Awoonor-Williams	Cornelius	Y. Debpuur	Ayaga	A. Bawah
2010	86	Determinants of Child Survival in Africa	Is Birth Weight a Good Predictor of Child Mortality in Developing Countries? Results from Recent National Surveys in Sub-Saharan Africa	Less attention has been paid to the relationship between low birth weight (LBW) and the risk of dying before age 5. We exploit recent national survey data to explore whether LBW is associated with increased risk of child mortality in Africa. Specifically, we apply a multivariate piecewise constant hazard model with gamma-shared frailty to the latest Demographic and Health Survey data for Benin, Cameroon, Congo, Gabon, Lesotho, Namibia, Swaziland, and Zimbabwe. In all countries, life table estimates of the risk of dying before age 5 indicate that LBW is associated with a higher probability of dying not only in infancy but also during childhood. After controlling for potential confounding factors, LBW is a very strong predictor of mortality risk during the first five years of life. We find also strong evidence of the impact of LBW status on the risk of dying before age 5 based on exposure time.	Adébiyi	Germain  Boco
2010	87	Population and Environmental Impact in Africa	Awareness of Water Pollution as a Problem and the Decision to Treat Drinking Water among Rural African Households with Unclean Drinking Water: South Africa 2004-06	Factors related to (1) awareness of water pollution as a problem and (2) actions to treat drinking water are examined using data from 11,270 rural African households in South Africa which did not have clean drinking water. Data are from national representative surveys conducted 2004-2006. Literature has suggested that household social status is important to both awareness of water pollution and whether the household treats drinking water. Logistic regression analysis finds that the worse the quality of drinking water, the more likely the household is to perceive water pollution as a problem, but SES does not matter for this perception. In treating water, water quality and whether the household perceives water pollution as a problem were important, along with education and household expenditures. Thus households do not need to be well-educated to perceive water pollution as a problem, but education is important in deciding to treat polluted drinking water.	John	H. Romani	Marie	 Wentzel	Heston	 Phillips
2010	87	Population and Environmental Impact in Africa	Population and other Determinants of Food Crop Production in the Dry and Derived Savannah Zones of Ghana	After Malthus, theories accounting for food production have centred on two key conditions, viz., demographic pressure (Boserup) and market price incentives (Schultz). This paper examines determinants of food crop production in Ghana, placing these two theories and other mediating conditions (environmental, techno-managerial, political economic and institutional) at the heart of the discussions. Information from a household survey undertaken in 2001 among 1,568 farmers in 504 households in 24 rural localities in the dry and derived savannah zones is used. Results show that population is playing a significant role in determining food crop production in the derived and not the dry savannah. This is expected because most of the arable land is already being used for production and bushfires have also taken their toll on arable lands in the dry savannah. 	Samuel	N.A Codjoe
2010	87	Population and Environmental Impact in Africa	Analysis of Regional Disparities in the Impacts of Anthropogenic Factors on the Environment in Africa	The linkage between population and environment has remained a contentious one. With the increasing concerns raised by climate change, African countries are faced with the onerous task of achieving MDGs through sustainable development. This work analyses the magnitude of the impacts of anthropogenic factors on the environment of these countries using the STIRPAT model. Findings of the study reveal regional disparities in the magnitudes of environmental impacts. The disparities in the estimated environmental impacts of these countries are attributable to differences in the values of their anthropogenic driving factors. Based on the magnitude of environmental impacts estimated from the STIRPAT model, countries are broadly grouped into areas with low, medium and high environmental impacts. This work suggests the application of preventive and intervening measures to achieve sustainable development in the region.	Chukwuedozie	K. Ajaero	Chidi	T. Nzeadibe
2010	87	Population and Environmental Impact in Africa	Linking the Environment, Growth in the Economy and the Population - Forestry Sector Growth, Deforestation and Population Growth	Environmental sustainability will benefit future generations. Proper environment utilization is the priority of the Forestry Authority and yet this has proved a challenge to the population, who consume forest resources. This study used data from the 2006 Uganda National Household Survey, UNHS and economic data on the forest sector.  The forest sector has grown recently from 553 billion Uganda shillings in 2004/5 to 882 billion in 2007/8. The study found that the population of Uganda is increasing much more rapidly than available  environmental resources. This will lead to depletion of forests and hence an adverse effect on not only the people but the ecosystem as well. Clear environmental policies are needed to check population pressure on the environment and ensure sustainable income levels.	Stella	L. Nassolo
2010	88	Cause-of-Death Analyses	Exploring Shifting Mortality and Gender Differences in 
Variability of Age at Death in France: A Cause-of-Death Analysis	The recent wane in mortality compression indicated by stable trends in variability of age at death has been depicted as the dawning of new era of mortality change: the shifting mortality era. In this paper, I examine two issues regarding the transition to shifting mortality that have yet to be fully resolved. First, how can trends in variability of age at death remain stable even in the face of possible changes in cause-of-death composition? Secondly, why have trends in variability of age at death for different groups stabilized at different levels of variability rather than at a similar (possibly biological) level? Using a historical cause-of-death series from France and decomposition analysis, I pursue answers to these questions through examination of both sex-specific trends in variability of age at death and the evolution of the gap in variability of age at death between the sexes.	Sarah	 Zureick
2010	88	Cause-of-Death Analyses	Cause-of-Death Contributions to Black-White Differences in Life Expectancy 1980-2005: The Role of “Avoidable” Mortality	Despite unprecedented declines in mortality during the 20th century, black-white mortality disparities continue to be substantial in the United States. In this paper, we analyze the contribution of “avoidable mortality,” causes of death that should not occur in the presence of high-quality and timely medical treatment and causes that are influenced by behavior (e.g., smoking) and in part by public policy, to black-white differences in life expectancy. We also examine the contribution of causes classified as “non-avoidable” and their contribution to trends in white and black life expectancy between 1980 and 2005. These “non-avoidable” causes have made a substantial contribution to mortality declines in the U.S. and to reducing the black-white mortality gap. A disaggregation of the “non-avoidable” cause-of-death group will shed further light on factors that have played a role in US mortality trends in the latter half of the 20th and beginning of the 21st century.	Irma	T. Elo	James	 Macinko	Hiram	 Beltran-Sanchez
2010	88	Cause-of-Death Analyses	Advances In Cause-Specific Mortality of Highly Educated Married People in Finland, Norway and Sweden	The best practice (or vanguard) groups within populations are the first going towards the new frontiers of longevity that will eventually be reached by others. There are substantial time lags which refer to time intervals needed for the other population groups to catch up with vanguard group. It suggests an advantage of the vanguard group regarding health behaviors, use of medical care, quality of life and other factors influencing health.   In this study, the vanguard as a two-dimensional group of highly educated married people since education and marital status are the two principal health dimensions determining availability of human and social capital. We systematically analyze trends in cause-specific mortality in the vanguard groups and remaining populations in Finland, Norway, and Sweden from the early 1970s to the late 1990s. We examine to what extent the non-vanguard populations follow mortality trajectories of the vanguard group in respect to causes of death.	Vladimir	 Shkolnikov	Evgueni	 Andreev	Dmitri	A. Jdanov
2010	88	Cause-of-Death Analyses	Multiple Cause-of-Death Analysis: A Comparison between France and Italy	We use the multiple cause-of-death approach to compare the mortality profiles of Italy and France in 2003. Data base on the information reported by the certifying physicians on the death certificates. We first evaluate the overall impact of taking into account both the underlying and the contributory causes. We then compare the combination of causes in the two countries. The average number of causes per certificate is higher in Italy than in France. The multiple cause-of-death approach does not substantially alter the ranking of the causes of death but it reinforces the role played by conditions that are not among the top three leading causes of death, such as the diseases of the blood and the diseases of the skin. As to the combinations of causes, we were able to distinguish several patterns according to the underlying cause of the death. These patterns are common to both countries.	Aline	 Desesquelles	Antonio	 Salvatore	Marilena	 Pappagallo	Luisa	 Frova	Monica	 Pace	Viviana	 Egidi
2010	89	Parental Investments in Education: Social, Economic, and Policy Influences	Mother’s Perception of HIV and Investments in Children's Health and Education: The Case of Rural Malawi	Among Sub Saharan Countries, literature emphasizes the case of children living in HIV+ households, proven to be disadvantaged on schooling levels and health indicators. Even for children in households with no HIV+ members, proximity of HIV have been linked to lower education attainment. Among other explanations, it is suggested that mothers, when more likely to die, might just invest less in their children. This article explores this idea. Starting from a human capital model, panel data on children from rural Malawi is used to study the explanatory role of mother’s reported HIV likelihood on their children outcomes on education and health. The results show a non monotonic relation: mothers’ invest more (less) when facing shorter life expectancies, if their level of consumption is high (low). This relationship is robust for the education and health of boys of 8 to 18 years old. Among girls, no significant results are obtained.	Ruben	 Castro	Jere	 Behrman	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2010	89	Parental Investments in Education: Social, Economic, and Policy Influences	Education Returns in the Marriage Market: Does Female Education Investment Improve the Quality of Future Husbands in Egypt?	The hypothesis in this paper is that the expectation of better marriage prospects and the potential upward social mobility for an educated woman influences parental educational investment decisions. This paper examines how female education improves marriage prospects  in Egypt, including such husband characteristics as his education and his pre-marital wealth level. The relative contribution of spouses to marriage costs is also analyzed. Findings suggest that a high level of female education plays a strong role in her marrying a highly educated husband.  In addition,  female education is highly associated with living independently upon marriage, as opposed to living in an extended-family household, and negatively associated with being in a consanguineous marriage. Female education seems to play an insignificant role with respect to the share of marriage costs borne by a bride and her family.	Asmaa	 Elbadawy
2010	89	Parental Investments in Education: Social, Economic, and Policy Influences	How Does Legalizing Divorce Effect Resource Allocation within Households? The Case of Chile	In recent years, many economists have argued the unitary household model, which assumes households maximize a single utility function given an overall household budget constraint, does not accurately describe the economic behavior of households. Instead, they argue, models should acknowledge that household members' individual bargaining power influences the allocation of household resources. This study examines the effects of exogenous changes in family policy and administrative processes in Chile on the allocation of resources towards children’s education. Specifically, the legalization of divorce and family court wait times for divorce are analyzed. Using panel data and a difference-in-differences approach, I show that implementing a pro-female divorce law shifts the bargaining power within married couple households towards the wife, as does the speed with which family courts process divorce cases. By increasing women's bargaining power, both family policy and administrative processes have had an influence on household consumption decisions relating to children's education.	Misty	 Heggeness
2010	89	Parental Investments in Education: Social, Economic, and Policy Influences	The Role of U.S. Migration and Remittances on the Educational Attainment of Children in Mexico	Studies on the socioeconomic impact of U.S. migration in Mexico often focus on the investment of remittances in household assets and property. Little attention is given to its impact on the education of the children of migrants in Mexico. Human capital theory suggests migration may have a positive impact on education due to increased income; however, research suggests that migration also discourages education and creates an orientation towards U.S. labor markets. This paper analyzes the role of U.S. migration and remittances on the educational attainment of Mexican youth using the 10% sample of the 2000 Mexican Census. Results are consistent with the existence of two processes connecting migration and education. The first is family’s investment on human capital, defined by the use of economic resources from migration on the education of children. The second is the discouragement of schooling among children living in communities with higher migration prevalence.	Gabriela	 Sanchez-Soto
2010	90	Determinants of Immigration and Its Impact	Peer Migration in China	We examine the role of social networks in job-related migration. With over 130 million rural labors migrating to the city each year, China is experiencing the largest internal migration in the human history. Based on the 2006 China Agricultural Census, we show that individual migration decisions vary greatly across villages; but migrants from the same village tend to cluster in the same destination and occupation. After using China’s one-child policy as instruments for neighbor migration, we conclude that the clustered migration is most likely driven by same-origin villagers helping each other in moving cost and job search at the destination.	Yuyu	 Chen	Ginger	Zhe  Jin	Yang	 Yue
2010	90	Determinants of Immigration and Its Impact	Selectivity and Immigrant Employment	Jointly modeling location and employment decisions turns out to have important implications for immigrant selectivity. Existing microeconomic models of immigrant self-selection ignore employment decisions, and these models demonstrate that immigrants need not be favorably selected in terms of their wages or labor market skills. By contrast, we show that immigrants are likely to be favorably selected in terms of employment rates. Moreover, the interaction between decisions regarding work and migration serves to limit the extent to which immigrants can be negatively selected in terms of skills. Empirical analysis of microdata from the 2000 U.S. Census confirms the main implication of the theoretical model. In particular, at low skill levels foreign-born men are more likely to work than U.S.-born men, whereas at high skill levels the employment rates of immigrants and natives are similar.	Brian	 Duncan	Stephen	 Trejo
2010	90	Determinants of Immigration and Its Impact	Comparing the Domestic Labor Market Impacts of a South-North and South-South Migration: The Cases of Costa Rica and the United States	In this paper, we calibrate a structural model of the native wage distribution to the economies of two countries: Costa Rica and the United States. We then use these empirical models to simulate the likely effects of labor market competition with immigrants on native wages. For Costa Rica we find very little evidence of imperfect substitutability between immigrants and natives of similar observable human capital levels. In contrast, there is fairly strong evidence of imperfect substitutability between immigrants and natives in the U.S. A plausible interpretation of this finding is that the ability to speak the receiving nation’s language is an important determinant of the degree of substitutability between otherwise similar immigrants and natives. The wage simulation results yield little evidence of an impact of immigration on native wages in Costa Rica, and suggest modest effects on the least skilled natives in the U.S	Federico	 Castillo	J.	Keith  Gilless	Steven	 Raphael
2010	90	Determinants of Immigration and Its Impact	Cohort Analysis of Changes in Education of Mexican Migrants to the U.S.	Previous studies on the educational composition of Mexican migrants to the U.S. have mostly used either U.S. data sources or data from Mexico community-based samples. Recent results instead using nationally-representative Mexican data from households reporting on the emigration of household members contradict the findings of positive educational selectivity of previous studies. The present study builds on this work by using nationally-representative migrant-flow and Mexican-resident data sources collected in Mexico to investigate cohort trends in the age and education composition of migrants to the U.S. since the mid-1990s. We find a much larger change in the educational composition of migrants when viewed across cohorts than across periods, suggesting a large role for exogenous (supply) changes in the educational attainment of successive cohorts in Mexico. We discuss this “supply” source of change versus changes in the demand for educated workers in the U.S. and changes in Mexican emigrants' educational selectivity.	Michael	 Rendall	Susan	 Parker
2010	91	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility	Fiscal Externalities of Becoming a Parent	It has often been observed that there are economic externalities to childbearing; however, there are numerous public expenditure programs aimed at the well-being of children, while some taxes treat differently those with and without children. Thus, the net fiscal externality from raising children may be positive or negative. We calculate the net present value of being a parent from the perspective of the combined Federal, State and local public budgets. We compute age profiles of contributions to the public budget—i.e. taxes paid—and age profiles of claims on the public budget—i.e., benefits received—separately for parents and “nonparents.” We employ an expansive definition of “parent,” counting all those who bear private childrearing costs in the form of time, money, or co-residential space. Using a previously-developed intertemporal accounting model, we find that the net present value of the fiscal streams associated with parenting is about $150,000.	Douglas	A. Wolf	Ronald	 Lee	Timothy	 Miller	Gretchen	 Donehower	Alexandre	 Genest
2010	91	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility	Happiness and Fertility Globally and Across Countries: Does the Context Matter?	The literature on fertility and subjective well-being has neglected comparative analysis. This paper investigates whether the relationship between fertility and happiness is consistent across countries using data from the World Values Surveys from 42 countries. Preliminary findings indicate that globally, those with children are less happy than those without children, but cross-national analyses revealed large country differences. We find that having children is associated with lower happiness in African and South American countries which are experiencing rapid fertility declines and East Asian countries with strict family planning policies. In three Eastern European countries, having children is associated with higher happiness, but in Western Europe, Australia and Japan we find no differences in happiness between those with children and the childless. These findings indicate that the relationship between childrearing and well-being is sensitive to the context, and highlight the importance of fertility trends and the country’s stage in the fertility transition.	Rachel	 Margolis
2010	91	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility	Relationship Characteristics Predicting Unintended Pregnancies Reported in An Online Weekly Survey: Preliminary Results	This paper uses longitudinal data from a weekly mixed-mode (online or phone) survey spanning 2.5 years, or 130 weeks. We use these data to examine the types of relationships that produce unintended pregnancies among 1000 18-21 year old women. We draw from the literature predicting that serious relationships, as well as unstable relationships, lead to pregnancy. We examine dynamic, time-varying measures of seriousness and instability. Our results are preliminary at this time, but our analyses suggest that both seriousness and instability are important. We plan to conduct detailed analyses using a wide variety of measures of these concepts before the PAA conference.	Jennifer	S. Barber	Heather	H. Gatny	Jennifer	 Yarger
2010	91	Social Demographic Aspects of Fertility	The Quality of Male Fertility Data in Major U.S. Surveys	Researchers continue to question fathers’ willingness to report their biological children in surveys, and the ability of surveys to adequately represent them. To address these concerns, this study evaluates the quality of men’s fertility data in the 1979 and 1997 Cohorts of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79 and NLSY97), and in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). Comparing fertility rates in each survey to population rates based on the data from the National Center for Health Statistics and the U.S. Census Bureau, we document how the undercount of births to men in different surveys varies according to several of their characteristics, including their age, race/ethnicity, marital status, and birth cohort. In addition, we use Monte Carlo simulations based on the NSFG data to demonstrate how birth undercounting biases associations between early parenthood and its antecedents.	Kara	 Joyner	Elizabeth	 Peters	Asia	 Sikora	Kathryn	 Hynes	Jamie	C. Rubenstein
2010	92	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Asia	Cohort Effects or Period Effects?: Fertility Decline in South Korea in the 20th Century	This paper examines recent trends in fertility decline in South Korea. I attempt to answer two long-standing demographic questions using a unique Korean experience: 1) is fertility change driven by long-term cohort change or fluctuating period change? and 2) how is the level of completed fertility related to the timing of fertility? By using a classic age-period-cohort model, a moment decomposition method and a new summary fertility measure, ‘cross-sectional average fertility (CAF)’, I show that fertility change is primarily driven by period change and that delayed childbearing has important consequences for the onset of fertility decline. These findings are consistent with sociological accounts of fertility changes in Western countries: 1) temporal variations that cut across cohorts (e.g., economic cycles) are more important than shared socializing experiences within cohorts and 2) the onset of the fertility transition is driven by delays in childbearing.	Bongoh	 Kye
2010	92	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Asia	A Dynamic Structural Model of Contraceptive Use and Employment Sector Choice for Women in Indonesia	The average number of children for a woman in Indonesia dropped more than 50 percent between 1960s and the mid 1990s. A large part of this reduction in the total fertility rate has been attributed to the extensive family planning program that was initiated in the late 1960s. This research, within a discrete choice dynamic structural framework, investigates the impact of the Indonesian Family Planning Program on the joint labor force participation decisions and contraceptive choices of women. The choices made by a woman depend on the compatibility between raising children and the sector of employment. The primary source of data for this study is the first wave of the Indonesia Family Life Survey. I use the geographic expansion and the changing nature of the family planning program as sources of exogenous variation to provide identification. The structural nature of my model allows me to conduct interesting policy experiments.	Uma	 Radhakrishnan
2010	92	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Asia	Intra-Urban Differentials in Utilization of Reproductive and Child Health Care Services in India, 1992-05	This paper examines intra-urban differentials in selected reproductive and child health care indicators in India and selected states, using data from three rounds of National Family Health Survey. The composite wealth index is computed based on economic proxies, separately for the urban sample and classified the population into poor and non-poor. Results indicate that estimates of poor and non-poor are quite reliable. It is found that antenatal care, safe delivery and immunization coverage has increased over the periods, among poor and non-poor in India and states with stark poor and non-poor differences. Interestingly, coverage of immunization was higher in rural areas than urban poor cutting across the states. Along with other factors, the poverty status of households is a significant determinant of utilization of reproductive and child health care services. Decomposition analysis reports that over 15 percent of the improvements in utilization of such services are attributable to the reduction of poverty across the states.	Abhishek	 Kumar	S.K	 Mohanty
2010	92	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility in Asia	Maternal Health, What Matters: A Study of Individual and Contextual Factors Related to Maternal Health Care Utilization	Maternal death and disability are the leading cause of healthy years of life lost for women of reproductive age in developing countries. Underlying the immediate medical causes of maternal mortality are a complex network of determinants including socio-cultural factors and access to and use of health services . This study examined the individual and contextual correlates of care seeking in intrapartum and postpartum periods among a nationally representative sample of 5,724 Pakistani women. Data from the 2006-07 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey were analyzed using hierarchical logistic regression. Antenatal care and financial and logistic preparation for the birth were associated with significantly increased odds of health care use. Among contextual factors, community infrastructure, concentration of poverty and contraceptive use in the community were associated with use of health services. These findings have implications for targeted health interventions including providing family planning and antepartum care to women in the poorest communities	Sadaf	 Khan	Donna	 Strobino
2010	93	Race, Gender and Health Outcomes	Ethnic Variations in Immigrant Health: A Gendered Analysis of Six Immigrant Groups	Leading explanations for immigrant health derive mainly from studies of Mexican Americans. Recent case studies suggest that these explanations may be less generalizable than previously believed, but few have examined this question systematically. Using new data from the 2000 through 2007 National Health Interview Surveys, we examine how well conventional theories of immigrant health apply to six immigrant groups, focusing on differences by region of birth and gender. The results reveal tremendous diversity across immigrant groups. Immigrants from Africa and India have much more advantaged health profiles than Mexican immigrants, and the gender gap in health for these groups is quite small. In contrast, European and Middle Eastern immigrants have health profiles more in line with Mexican immigrants and exhibit much greater disparities between men and women. We test explanations for such variability and suggest avenues of future research to better understand the diverse health profiles of newer immigrant groups.	Jen'nan	G. Read	Megan	 Reynolds
2010	93	Race, Gender and Health Outcomes	Race and Preterm Births: A Protective Effect of the Military?	The continuing black-white preterm birth gap reflects pervasive race inequality that is still present in 21st-century American life. This paper identifies a unique control group, Non-Hispanic blacks serving in the U.S. military, to re-examine the role of racial inequality in preterm birth outcomes. We look at the military as a rare environment where racial marginalization is considerably lessened to understand how social environment can mitigate something as critical as infant well being. Using the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS) data, we examine how the structural conditions of military service impact births among non-Hispanic whites and non-Hispanic blacks compared to their civilian counterparts. We find that the probability of an early preterm birth (before 32 weeks) is cut in half for black women associated with the U.S. military, when compared to civilian black women. There appears to be no such lessened protective effect of the military service for white women.	Jennifer	H. Lundquist	Irma	T. Elo	Wanda	 Barfield	Zhun	 Xu
2010	93	Race, Gender and Health Outcomes	Understanding How Race/Ethnicity and Gender Define Age-Trajectories of Disability: An Intersectionality Approach	Prior studies have demonstrated health disparities among racial/ethnic groups or between men and women; few have considered how race/ethnicity and gender combine to affect older adults’ health. Here, we take an intersectionality approach, grounded in life course theory, conceptualizing and modeling trajectories of disability as jointly defined by race/ethnicity and gender. We use the 1994-2004 Health and Retirement Study to examine intra-individual change in functional limitations among white, black and Mexican American men and women, and the extent to which differences in life course capital account for group disparities. Results support an intersectionality approach: white men had the lowest levels of disability at baseline, white women and minority men intermediate levels, and black and Hispanic women the highest levels. These disparities that remained stable with age. Dissimilar early life origins, adult SES, marital status, and health behaviors fully explained the racial/ethnic disparities among men but only partially so among women.	David	F. Warner	Tyson	H. Brown
2010	93	Race, Gender and Health Outcomes	Masculinity and Health: A Multiple Method Examination of a Sample of African-American Men	We research links between masculinity and physical and mental health using qualitative and quantitative data of a sample of 192 African American men. We examine the ways in which these men construct their masculine identities and analyze the associations between these identities, a standardized measure of sex roles (BSRI), and physical and mental health. Many men define masculinity with reference to social institutions such as the family and work. Some definitions refer explicitly to mental and physical health, whereas others may have indirect health consequences. In quantitative analysis, we do not find significant associations between an index constructed from the masculinity items of the BSRI. However, we find that the number of masculinity accounts mentioned by the men in open-ended questions predicts better mental health but worse physical and self-rated health. This suggests that narrow conceptions of masculinity get rewarded in American culture, although they might compromise health.	Waverly	 Duck	Juho	 Härkönen
2010	94	Health and Migration among Mexican Origin Population in Mexico and the U.S.	Migrant Networks and Pathways to Child Obesity in Mexico		Mathew	J. Creighton	Noreen	 Goldman	Graciela	M. Teruel	Luis	 Rubalcava
2010	94	Health and Migration among Mexican Origin Population in Mexico and the U.S.	Suboptimal Sleep among the Families of Mexican Migrants		Estela	 Rivero Fuentes	Lauren	 Hale
2010	94	Health and Migration among Mexican Origin Population in Mexico and the U.S.	Childbirth Transitions Across Contexts: Comparing Risk of First Birth among Immigrant and Non-migrant Mexican Women	Population statistics frequently draw attention to the fact that immigrant women have higher fertility relative to women of the majority population at destination, which researchers attribute to immigrants’ sociodemographic characteristics, cultural patterns of childbearing, and adaptation to the destination context. However these assessments often rely on fertility measures that may misrepresent immigrant fertility, as well as exclude non-migrants at origin as a frame of reference. This study seeks to address these limitations by examining the transition to first birth among Mexican non-migrants, Mexican immigrants to United States (US) and non-Hispanic white women in the US. Specifically, using Mexican and US data sources and an event history approach, I assess the association between immigrant generation, duration of residence, education, marital status, and contraceptive use on women’s transition to first birth. The influence of origin and destination contexts on the association between sociodemographic factors and first birth risk will be discussed.	Kari	 White
2010	94	Health and Migration among Mexican Origin Population in Mexico and the U.S.	Does the Hispanic Epidemiological Paradox in Mortality Extend to Disability? Comparisons of Migration Groups Across the Mexico-U.S. Border		Mark	D. Hayward	Rebeca	 Wong	Chi-Tsun	 Chiu	Cesar	 Gonzalez
2010	95	Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Relationship Profiles and Contraceptive Use within Young Adult Dating Relationships	This study examines the association between characteristics of young adult dating relationships and couples’ contraceptive use. Using a sample of young adults from the NLSY97, we first employ latent class analysis to establish relationship profiles based on attributes including relationship duration, intimacy and emotional support, relationship commitment, and lack of conflict. We then model the associations between these relationship profiles and the contraceptive method used the last time the couple had sex, comparing condom, hormonal or a combination “dual method,” to no method. We will test these associations with and without controlling for individual and background characteristics of the respondent and his or her partner. Results will contribute to 1) our understanding of characteristics of young adult dating relationships and 2) how the grouping of relationship attributes influences contraceptive use.	Jennifer	 Manlove	Kate	 Perper	Megan	 Barry
2010	95	Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Concordance of Sexual and Contraceptive Behavior among Sex Partners and Predictors of Discordant Reports	We examine concordance/discordance in self-reported sexual behavior and contraceptive use of married, cohabiting and dating couples, and factors associated with discordance. Unlike much prior work, our results are based on a large sample representative of people in four metropolitan areas. We find only fair to moderate congruence in partners’ reports compared to higher levels of agreement reported in studies using small convenience samples. We also find relatively few factors that predict discordance, and the ones that do (women’s education, race, and sex role ideology) differ from previously published results. Importantly, despite significant discordance in reports, means of reported behaviors show little gender difference, suggesting that average reported behavior by either gender provides a fairly accurate description of a couple’s behavior. Moreover, the lack of significant predictors of discordance suggests that valid models for identifying predictors of specific sexual or contraceptive behaviors can be obtained from the reports of either partner.	Daniel	H. Klepinger	John	O.G. Billy	William	R. Grady
2010	95	Romantic and Sexual Relationships	The Casual Sex Trajectories of Adolescents and Young Adults: A Growth Curve Analysis	Extensive research has examined adolescent and young adult sexual experience with growing attention to casual sexual activity. However, prior studies have relied on college-based samples, ignoring the experiences of sixty percent of young adults. We contribute to prior work by using longitudinal data from a broad sample of teens and young adults (N=845). Using growth curve analysis we determine male and female casual sex trajectories. We find that by age 23, three-quarters of young adults have had a casual sex partner and on average they have had two casual sex partners. At age 15, males and females are equally likely to have had casual sex; however, males increase their number of casual sex partners at a significantly faster rate than females. We find alcohol use, peer influence, and liberal sex attitudes are significantly related to casual sex activity for both males and females and the influence of these covariates increases with age.	Heidi	 Lyons	Wendy	D. Manning	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2010	95	Romantic and Sexual Relationships	Men Bring Condoms, Women Take Pills: Men's and Women's Role in Contraceptive Decision-Making	From both a legal perspective and an academic and theoretical perspective, American men’s role in the fertility and contraceptive decision-making process is unclear. Many academics and lay people both assume that men are uninterested in and uninformed about contraception, but this assumption has largely remained untested. This paper explores what men perceive their role in the contraceptive decision-making process to be and what women perceive and want men's role to be. Interviews were conducted with 30 American male-female young adult couples in long-term relationships. Results find that many men are informed, involved, and committed contraceptors. They are more likely to discuss contraception with their long-term partners than with short-term partners, but they are often still insecure about asking women to use hormonal birth control in long-term relationships. Consequently, women often perceive men as unconcerned. Technology and accompanying socialization has created unequal contraceptive access for men and women.	Julie	 Fennell
2010	96	Comparative Health and Mortality in High-Income Countries	Incarceration and Population Health in Wealthy Democracies	This article considers the relationship between incarceration and population health using panel data from 21 wealthy democracies (1981-2005). Results support three conclusions. First, when the United States is included in the analysis, the incarceration rate is negatively associated with life expectancy (but not the infant mortality rate). Based on point estimates from these models, American life expectancy would have been 1.5 years longer in 2005 had the incarceration rate remained at the 1981 level, suggesting that mass incarceration may have substantial effects on population health. Second, when the United States is excluded, increases in the incarceration rate are associated with decreases in the infant mortality rate, suggesting that incarceration may promote population health outside of the United States. Finally, results from models predicting age-specific effects suggest that increases in the incarceration rate may diminish the mortality risks of young men.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2010	96	Comparative Health and Mortality in High-Income Countries	Health across the  Life Span in the United States and England	Despite higher per capita spending on health care in the United States than in England, older Americans suffer worse health status than the English. There is little evidence on whether health differences also exist at younger ages. This study compares the health of residents of the United States and England from childhood through old age using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) and the Health Survey for England (HSE), focusing on a number of biological and self-reported health measures. We find that Americans experience worse health than the English throughout the life span and that differences at young ages are as large as those at older ages for most health outcomes.	Melissa	L. Martinson	Julien	O. Teitler	Nancy	E. Reichman
2010	96	Comparative Health and Mortality in High-Income Countries	Health Inequalities at Older Ages in the European Union: Findings from the Survey of Health and Retirement in Europe (SHARE)	Inequalities in life expectancy (LE) amongst European countries have been evident for some time, the major gaps being between the established EU countries (EU15) and the more recent members from Eastern European countries. The new EU structural indicator on health, Healthy Life Years (HLY) reveals even greater inequalities across Europe, though this is only one global measure of disability. This paper uses the Survey of Health and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) wave 2 to evaluate inequalities in a range of health expectancies that span the disablement process, at older ages in 13 European countries (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. We specifically investigate whether countries with the highest LE spend the extra years in better health and use hierarchical cluster analysis to explore similarities in the full range of health and life expectancies between the countries.	Carol	 Jagger	Claire	 Weston	Gabriele	 Doblhammer	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Herman	 Van Oyen	Wilma	 Nusselder	Jitka	 Rychtarikova	Jean-Marie	 Robine
2010	96	Comparative Health and Mortality in High-Income Countries	Breast, Prostate, and Colorectal Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates in the U.S. and 10 European Countries	Substantial proportions of cancer cases and deaths are attributable to breast, prostate and colorectal cancer in the U.S. and Europe; however, national screening guidelines and practices are incongruent. Recent analysis of the risks and benefits of screening have questioned the mortality benefit of aggressive screening practices in the U.S. Our study uses national survey data and population-based cancer data from Cancer Incidence in Five Continents I-IX and the WHO Mortality Database to compare age-specific cancer screening, incidence, and mortality rates between the U.S. and nine European countries. Joinpoint regression is used to examine if age-specific breast, prostate and colorectal cancer mortality rates declined at a faster rate in the U.S. than in Europe from 1980-2005. We address the question of whether differences in mortality rates can be attributed to differences in screening rates and the widespread use of screening tests for early detection and treatment.	Krista	E. Garcia
2010	97	Families and Health	Can’t We Just Live Together? New Evidence on the Effect of Relationship Status on Health	An extensive literature suggests that marriage confers health benefits to men and women. We address several problems with extant studies. First, measures of morbidity vary across studies making comparisons difficult, and the categorical measure of self-assessed health raises difficult interpretation and econometric issues. Second, existing research has not confirmed whether these benefits accrue to couples who cohabit. Third, the extant research relies almost exclusively on fixed-effects models to control for selection into marriage without addressing the strong persistence in health. We use a multiple correspondence analysis to identify instruments for a continuous multi-dimensional health index. We control for selection by estimating the individual heterogeneity affecting both selection into marriage and health. Our preliminary analysis of nearly 2,430 individuals over 17 waves of the British Household Panel Survey finds that cohabitation has a greater positive effect on health than marriage after controlling for both selection and health dynamics.	Susan	L. Averett	Jennifer	 Kohn
2010	97	Families and Health	Union Transitions and Change in BMI in Mexico	This study utilizes nationally-representative, longitudinal data to examine whether union transitions are associated with changes in body mass index (BMI) among Mexican adults; and, whether these associations differ by initial BMI status. The results indicate larger gains in BMI for those entering a union compared with those exiting a union or remaining in stable union categories. Individuals with normal BMI at baseline gained more when entering a union compared to those already overweight at baseline. Normal-BMI individuals who exited a union gained rather than lost BMI, suggesting that associations between union dissolution and declines in BMI found in U.S. research may be driven by overweight individuals aiming to lose weight. These findings indicate that the transition into a union may be an important determinant of BMI gains among Mexican adults, and that baseline weight status may be a key moderator of the effects of union transitions on changes in BMI.	Kammi	 Schmeer	Rhiannon	A. D'Souza
2010	97	Families and Health	To Love and Look After: Exploring the Mechanisms Linking the Quality of Family Relationships to Maternal and Child Health in India	Love and other positive dimensions of family relationship quality and their connections to health are neglected in less developed contexts. This study, thus, uses qualitative data from a rural, low income setting in India to explore the mechanisms linking the quality of family relationships to maternal and child health. The exploration suggests that the quality of family relationships may benefit maternal and child health in a variety of ways. These mechanisms include improving women’s subjective well-being, increasing nutritional intake, facilitating communication about health matters, and encouraging the use of health care and attention inside and outside the home. In some circumstances, however, loving family relationships can also act as a barrier to hospital delivery. Most of these mechanisms are also moderated by beliefs about what constitutes beneficial health behavior. Strong and loving relationships motivate family members to do their best for women, but their best is not always beneficial.	Keera	 Allendorf
2010	97	Families and Health	Dyadic and Dynamic Relationships: An Extension of the SES-Health Framework	In order to fully explicate the relationship between individual socioeconomic status (SES) and health, the dyadic association between parent-child SES and health should be examined to account for how child health may affect parental SES and health. Prior research finds that poor child health may present an additional risk for maternal health, mental health, and SES. Using nationally representative longitudinal data of mother-child dyads from the NLSY 1979 cohort, this analysis expands upon prior research by using regression analyses to explore the extent to which child health modifies the effect of maternal SES on maternal health. This analysis also expands upon prior research by dynamically defining child health by using growth mixture modeling to explore how child health trajectories interact with maternal SES to affect maternal health, demonstrating whether child health has a cumulative exposure relationship to subsequent maternal outcomes.	Dana	 Garbarski
2010	98	Determinants, Associations and Consequences of Abortion	Changes in Abortion Legislation in Eight States of Mexico: A Mexico City Backlash?	In April 2007 the Mexico City Assembly made elective abortion legal up to 12 weeks gestation. Following this reform, 15 states, out of a total of 32, either approved legislation to pose barriers to abortion under previously legal clauses, or passed amendments to limit women’s access to abortion. In March 2008 we carried out 8 public opinion surveys in four states where laws had been changed and four with pending legislation. Each included a random rural/urban sample of 800 men and women, aged 18-95. Surveys included knowledge of existing abortion law, opinion regarding changes or initiatives to change the existing abortion legislation, etc. We conducted bivariate and multivariate analysis. Results from 6,397 participants indicate they support abortion within a 12 week gestation period especially in cases of risk to a woman’s health or life and fetal abnormalities. Participant’s knowledge of state abortion legislation in Mexico is low.	Jorge	Armando  Valencia-Rodriguez	Sandra	 García	Katherine	 Wilson	Claudia	 Díaz-Olavarrieta	Maria	Luisa  Sanchez Fuentes
2010	98	Determinants, Associations and Consequences of Abortion	The Role of Men in Abortion Decision-Making and Postabortion Care in Uganda	Abortion is illegal in Uganda except to save the life of a woman. Nevertheless, about 300,000 induced abortions occur annually and 85,000 women are treated for postabortion complications. In this culture where men control most of the financial resources, men play a critical part in determining whether women receive a safe abortion or appropriate treatment if they experience abortion complications. This study draws on in-depth interviews (IDIs) carried out in Uganda in 2003 with 61 women and 21 men. Most men believe that if a woman is having an abortion, it must be because she is pregnant with another man’s child. If the woman does experience postabortion complications, men said that they cannot support her in such a situation because if it had been his child, she would not have had a clandestine abortion. Since money alone guarantees care, women’s inability to involve men in abortion decision-making endangers women’s lives.	Ann	M. Moore
2010	98	Determinants, Associations and Consequences of Abortion	Induced Abortion and Women’s Reproductive Health in India	Despite the intensive national campaign for safe motherhood and legalization of induced abortion, morbidity from abortion has remained a serious problem for Indian women. The present paper tries to examine the consequences of induced abortion on women’s reproductive health by exploring the data of 90,303 ever-married women age 15-49 years, included in India’s NFHS-2, 1998-99. Binary logistic regression methods were used to examine the consequences of induced abortion on women’s reproductive health. Independent of other factors, the likelihood of experiencing any reproductive health problems was 1.5 times higher among women who had one induced abortion and 1.9 times higher among women who had two or more induced abortions compared to women with no history of induced abortion. The study suggests that induced abortions may have negative consequences for women’s reproductive health. Programs should focus more on availability and accessibility of contraceptives among women to elude the reproductive health consequences of induced abortion.	Sutapa	 Agrawal
2010	98	Determinants, Associations and Consequences of Abortion	Abortion and Fertility in Ukraine: How Are the Two Interrelated?	In this paper we analyze the changing relationship between abortion and childbearing in Ukraine, which has had one of the world’s highest abortion rates and lowest fertility rates. Using the 2007 Ukrainian Demographic and Health Survey, we examine changes in abortion before and after the dramatic fertility decline. We estimate event history models for first abortions as well as competing risk hazards by pregnancy outcome. Preliminary results suggest that although abortion rates rapidly declined in the 1990s, abortions have impacted fertility by lowering second birth rates. On the other hand, abortions have been used less frequently for postponing first births, as is more common in developed countries. We also describe how this relationship has been maintained through the slow adoption of modern contraception. Thus, Ukraine represents a country with an unusual relationship between fertility, abortion, and contraception, and where low fertility has been achieved with low reliance on modern methods.	Nataliia	 Levchuk	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris
2010	99	Neighborhoods, Poverty, and Inequality	Income Inequality and Income Segregation	Both neighborhood poverty and income inequality increased substantially in the United States between 1970 and 1990. Income inequality continued to increase through 2000, while neighborhood declined somewhat in the 1990s. Some researchers argue that increasing income inequality caused the increase in neighborhood poverty in the 1990s. However, these studies rely purely on descriptive information regarding levels of income segregation and levels of income inequality; none of them analytically explore the relationship between income inequality and the concentration of poverty for a given pattern of residential mobility. In this paper, we use a simple agent-based model to explore the relationship between increases in income inequality and income segregation. We first extend Schelling's classic racial segregation model to understand economic segregation, and then explore how actual changes in income distributions between 1980-2000 for a set of U.S. metro areas could have affected segregation dynamics, assuming behavior remained constant over this period.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch	Eric	 Provins
2010	99	Neighborhoods, Poverty, and Inequality	Mobility of Affluent Neighborhoods in U.S. Cities	Residents of metropolitan areas are geographically sorted by key dimensions, including economic characteristics. Interest in economic segregation has centered on poor neighborhoods, with special attention to those chronically poor. In order to paint a clearer picture of social inequality, however, we must understand the life-course of neighborhoods across the full economic spectrum, from poor to affluent. Some researchers suggest disparities between the poor and affluent are more strongly driven by the concentrated advantage of the affluent rather than the concentrated disadvantage of the poor. In this project, I investigate the rates and patterns of mobility for affluent, middle income, and poor neighborhoods in U.S. cities using census data from 1970 to 2000. This paper will enhance our understanding about the economic mobility of affluent neighborhoods compared to other neighborhood types and identify trends in the pattern of neighborhood mobility, thereby offering insight on a relatively understudied dimension of social stratification.	Claudia	 Solari
2010	99	Neighborhoods, Poverty, and Inequality	The Renaissance Comes to the Projects:
Public Housing, Urban Redevelopment, and Racial Inequality in Baltimore	The federal Housing Opportunities for People Everywhere (HOPE VI) program, which tears down public housing projects and rebuilds mixed income communities in their place, may represent a reversal of the historic pattern of denying investment in black neighborhoods and placing housing for the poor within them. Yet implementing the program required the displacement of hundreds of families, many whom were unable to return. Critics charge that HOPE VI may reshuffle poor minority populations to new ghettos and increase urban inequalities. This paper uses mortgage investment data to understand how neighborhoods have improved as a result of HOPE VI,and also to explore neighborhood outcomes for displaced families. It focuses on Baltimore, which is the first city in the country to use HOPE VI funds to demolish all of its high rise housing projects.	Peter	 Rosenblatt
2010	99	Neighborhoods, Poverty, and Inequality	Tracking Community-Level Dynamics Associated with Imprisonment and Enlistment	Two major U.S. institutions are disproportionately responsible for state intrusion into the lives of young adult men from working class and disadvantaged backgrounds: the military and the criminal justice system. However, the two are rarely researched together, and little empirical work investigates their effects on “sending” communities. In this paper, we will track the community dynamics associated with institutionally-linked population removal. We will use the home addresses of new prisoners and military personnel to link individuals to their home communities, and track changes in those communities over a span of two decades (1990 – 2009). Our focus is on the identifying the social, demographic, and economic characteristics of neighborhoods that serve as population reservoirs for each of these institutions. We also plan to identify systematic variance between the trajectories of these communities and other neighborhoods with similar points of origin.	Amy	K. Bailey	Devah	 Pager
2010	100	Housing in International Context	Spatial Assimilation of Ethnic Immigrants in European Societies	Most contemporary European cities are populated by distinct-segregated ethnic neighborhoods. Whereas patterns of segregation and spatial assimilation have been studied extensively in American society, research on immigrants' segregation and spatial assimilation in Europe is new. The present research utilizes data from the European Social Survey to examine patterns of spatial segregation and assimilation among immigrants across 13 European countries and the extent to which they are influenced by immigrants' tenure in the host country, socio-economic characteristics, preferences for residential location, and ethnic and cultural origin. The analysis reveals that rates of spatial segregation vary considerably across ethnic and cultural groups with spatial assimilation being lower among immigrants from Asia or Africa and among Muslims. The findings are discussed in light of theories of acculturation and segmented assimilation and the role played by differential preferences for residential location.	Anya	 Glikman	Moshe	 Semyonov
2010	100	Housing in International Context	Immigrants’ Legal Status and Homeownership Rates	This study will examine homeownership by recent immigrants in Spain using a recent survey of 15,465 Spanish immigrants – the Encuesta Nacional de Inmigrantes. We add to the literature in a couple of ways. First, we focus on the role of legal status on homeownership rates, as well as on the impact of legal status adjustments on improvements in housing. Second, we focus on Spain –a country that constitutes an interesting case study given the impressive growth of its immigrant population during the past 15 years. Preliminary evidence suggests that undocumented migrants are significantly less likely to own their home than their legal counterparts. Additionally, improvements in legal status are also related to homeownership improvements in the host country. The econometric analysis corroborates our preliminary findings. By underscoring the value of becoming legal on immigrants’ homeownership, our findings emphasize the value of past regularization processes and their consequences for the housing market.	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Kusum	 Mundra
2010	100	Housing in International Context	A Tale of Three Cities: Housing and Immigrants in Canada	Immigrants in many countries concentrate in large cities, raising important questions about the role of location in understanding immigrants and housing. We address two questions. First, are immigrant households more likely to experience critical housing needs? Second, what is the role of location in immigrants’ housing needs? We analyze data from the 2001 Canadian Census. Descriptive results show that immigrants in Canada are concentrated in its three largest cities, Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver, and more immigrant households experience critical housing needs. Multivariate analysis of housing affordability shows that much of the initial difference between immigrant and non-immigrant households is eliminated, and is explained by factors included in the logistic model, particularly location factors. The study suggests that for immigrants in Canada, critical housing is a distinctly urban issue, raising important questions for the role of location in housing policies in Canada and other countries with large urban concentrations of immigrants.	Barry	 Edmonston	Sharon	M. Lee	Zheng	 Wu
2010	100	Housing in International Context	The Residential Crowding of Immigrants in Canada, 1971-2001	Although rates of residential crowding in Canada declined between 1971 and 2001, the drop for immigrants was not nearly as pronounced as it was for the Canadian-born. The purpose of this paper is to determine the extent to which the differential trends in residential crowding can be attributed to changes in educational attainment, household composition, economic characteristics (including housing values), Census Metropolitan Area (CMA) of residence, and skin colour (visible minority status ). Additionally, the prospect of changing effects over time for several factors is also assessed. The main findings of the paper are that basic household characteristics explain a significant portion of the 30-year immigrant/Canadian-born divergence, and that including time interactions reveals that differences in propensities across CMAs emerged post-1971. Interestingly, time interactions also reveal that there have been nearly no significant changes in the propensity to crowd among visible minority groups since 1971.	Michael	 Haan
2010	101	The Demographic Dividend: Empirical Evidence	Adult Mortality, Institutions, and Cross-Country Income Differences	Recent research has called into question the emergent view from the late 1990s of health improvements as an important contributor to labor productivity and thus income per capita. While improved health can raise the quality of labor, development accounting finds it has a relatively small effect on growth, and studies have associated increases in life expectancy with increases in population size and thus capital shallowing. In this paper I examine a new dataset on the average and variance of adult length of life around the world to provide a new perspective on the role of the mortality transition in promoting economic growth. I find that longer adult life is associated with higher levels of capital accumulation, as life-cycle theory suggests, and of technology, even when controlling for the effects of institutions. But the latter appear to be most important for determining human capital accumulation.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2010	101	The Demographic Dividend: Empirical Evidence	The Household Demographic Dividend	Using data from the India Human Development Survey, we will examine changes in household wealth and income between 1994 and 2005. While more advantaged households in 1994 (e.g., higher education, high caste, salaried occupations, wealthy states) enjoyed the biggest gains over the next decade, demographic composition also played a role. Households that had more men and boys in 1994 were slightly better off in 2005. However, much of a “household demographic dividend” was offset by a higher likelihood of those households dividing into two or more separate households by 2005. But if the 1994 household did stay together as an extended household, it was much better off a decade later if there had been more boys and men in 1994.	Reeve	 Vanneman	James	 Noon
2010	101	The Demographic Dividend: Empirical Evidence	The Demographic Transition and Teenagers’ Education in Mexico	Competition for the educational resources at the family and the population levels may change as the demographic transition advances. Given that the reduction in the size of the cohorts that compete for educational resources has recently occurred in Mexico, it is essential to investigate how the changes in population age structure interact with the family situation of Mexican adolescents. This study assesses if the school enrollment of 12-18 year olds is associated with their number of siblings, as well as their relative cohort size and the child dependency ratio of the municipality of residence. Teenagers with 3 or more siblings show lower odds of enrollment than those from smaller families. This disadvantage seems to be greater in the municipalities where the demographic transition is more advanced, once family, socioeconomic and demographic factors are taken into account.	Eunice	D. Vargas Valle
2010	101	The Demographic Dividend: Empirical Evidence	Fertility, the Demographic Dividend, and Economic Growth	We exploit differential timing of abortion legalization across countries between 1960 and 2005 to estimate the effect of changes in fertility on income, finding that reducing fertility by one child per women increases income per capita by about 20%. We estimate that most of the income gain is due to an increase in the number of workers per capita, because of a lower youth dependency ratio, and higher female labor force participation. We also find that reductions in fertility lead to increased investment in education and slower population growth, but little evidence of higher physical capital intensity or worker productivity.	David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning	Jocelyn	E. Finlay
2010	102	Cohabitation and Marriage	Legal Arrangements in Marriage and Cohabitation in the Netherlands: Trends and Determinants	Most studies on cohabitation and marriage have ignored legal variations within these relationship types. This study distinguishes between: (1) marriage in joint property, (2) marriage with prenuptial agreements, (3) cohabitation with a contract/registered partnership, and (4) non-legal cohabitation. These legal arrangements have important implications for gender inequality and children’s life chances, and are indicative of individualization and institutionalization of relationships. Using Dutch survey-data from 1995 and 2002-4, cohabitation contracts and prenuptial agreements are found to have become more common in this period. Marriage in joint property continues to be most popular. An examination of the determinants shows that insecurity about the relationship and the need to arrange the rights and obligations toward third parties (i.e., prior children and creditors) are most important. Remarkably, the need to protect women against the risks of specialization and children are less important determinants. Furthermore, the determinants are gendered: his characteristics matter more than hers.	Anne-Rigt	 Poortman
2010	102	Cohabitation and Marriage	A Comparative Study of Commitment and Relationship Quality in Marital and Cohabiting Unions in Europe	Most studies find that cohabitors are less committed to and satisfied with their partnerships than those married. In this study, we utilize data from the first wave of the Generations and Gender Surveys to investigate commitment and union quality in marital and cohabiting unions across eight European countries (Bulgaria, France, Germany, Hungary, Norway, Romania and Russia). For the Netherlands we use the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study. We expect there to be less differences between cohabitation and marriage in counties where cohabitation is widespread and institutionalized. Preliminary analyses show that in all countries cohabitors more often have breakup plans and are significantly less satisfied (except Hungary and the Netherlands) than those married. Controlling for a range of relevant characteristics of respondents and their partners (e.g., common children, union duration, education) we find that this “cohabitation gap” is largest in Russia, Romania and Bulgaria and least pronounced in the Netherlands and Norway.	Kenneth	Aarskaug  Wiik	Trude	 Lappegård
2010	102	Cohabitation and Marriage	Marriage, Divorce, and Personality	This paper uses data from the German Socio-economic Panel Study to examine the relationship between psychological traits, in particular personality, and the formation and dissolution of marital and cohabiting partnerships. Changing patterns of selection into and out of relationships indicate that the determinants of marital surplus have altered between older cohorts born in the years after World War II and younger cohorts born in the 1960s. For younger cohorts, relationships between personality traits and the probability of marriage are identical for men and women, which is consistent with marital benefits based on joint consumption. Tastes for marital public goods are negatively related to openness to experience and positively related to conscientiousness for both men and women. Selection into marriage is associated with distinctly different personality profiles for older men and older women, suggesting that gender-specialized contributions to household public goods were an important source of marital surplus for these cohorts.	Shelly	J. Lundberg
2010	102	Cohabitation and Marriage	Work Family Preferences, Behavior, and Marital Satisfaction in an Age of Egalitarianism	In this paper I argue that although trends point to increasing egalitarianism in marriage, dual-earner spouses are heterogeneous in their family role preferences. Dual-earners who prefer traditional family roles may experience a marital satisfaction penalty because their ideals are incongruent with their family reality. I use data from the 1997 and 2002 waves of National Study of the Changing Workforce to test this hypothesis. Because the survey contains a variety of family and workplace measures, I am able to test competing explanations for the marital satisfaction penalty experienced by traditionally-minded dual-earners. I find that after accounting for time spent with one’s spouse, economic dependency, and the interaction between workplace characteristics and traditionalism, the penalty for holding traditional family preferences on marital satisfaction remains. I conclude that in an era where preferences increasingly determine one’s lifestyle, the mismatch between traditional family preferences and a dual-earner reality may lower marital wellbeing.	Brian	J. Serafini
2010	103	Measures and Methods for Fertility and Mortality Analysis	The Own Children Fertility Estimation Procedure: A Reappraisal	We estimate Total Fertility Rates (TFR’s) using the Own-Child and Full Birth History methods for 56 countries using DHS data. Although the Household Questionnaire (HQ) and Individual Questionnaire (IQ) include exactly the same set of women, we find that the Full Birth History method yields significantly higher estimates of TFR than does the Own-Child method. We find two systematic sources of differences in these explanations. First, we find systematic inconsistencies in age coding across the two questionnaires. Second, we find evidence of systematic sampling bias in the IQ file; women who appear in the HQ file but not in the IQ file tend to have relatively fewer children. Each of these differences yields an estimated increase of 2% in TFR for the Full Birth History method relative to the Own-Child TFR. These findings suggest that the Own-Child method is probably at least as accurate as the Full Birth History method.	Christopher	 Avery	Travis	 St Clair	Michael	 Levin	Kenneth	 Hill
2010	103	Measures and Methods for Fertility and Mortality Analysis	A Unifying Framework for Assessing Changes in Life Expectancy Associated with Changes in Mortality: The Case of Violent Deaths	Policymakers often require an assessment of possible gains in life expectancy that could results from large-scale public health campaigns aimed at reducing mortality for specific ages and causes of death. Equally important is assessing the contribution of observed decline in a particular cause of death on observed gains in life expectancy. For forty years, demographers have worked intensively to develop methods that address these important issues. As yet, there has been no framework unifying these important works. In this paper, we provide a unifying framework for assessing the change in life expectancy given any conceivable change in age and cause-specific mortality. We consider both conceptualizations of mortality change counterfactual assessment of a hypothetical change and a retrospective assessment of an observed change. We apply our methodology to violent deaths, the leading cause of death  among young adults, and show that realistic targeted reductions could have important impacts on life expectancy.	Hiram	 Beltran-Sanchez	Samir	 Soneji
2010	103	Measures and Methods for Fertility and Mortality Analysis	The Increase in Female Survival at Reproductive Ages: An Appraisal of the Contribution of Maternal Mortality	The maternal mortality disparity in the world is greater than in any other health indicator. We study the abridged life expectancy between ages 15 and 50: Its historical time trends for developed and some developing countries, and quantify the contribution of maternal mortality. Five years of gain in this abridged life expectancy were gained mainly during the twentieth century in the developed and some developing countries. Of this gain in the abridged life expectancy between ten to thirty percent is due to maternal mortality, varying from country to country, and in Sub-Saharan countries the possible gains might be even bigger. The assessment of the timing and contribution of maternal mortality in the survivorship of reproductive aged women along with the changes in other causes of death could further our understanding of the particular circumstances that propitiated the increase in survival through the decline in maternal mortality.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	Li	 Liu	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2010	103	Measures and Methods for Fertility and Mortality Analysis	Maternal Cohort Measures of Child Mortality	Demographers have long noted that fertility patterns look different from period and cohort perspectives. However, despite the fact that child mortality is often considered to play an important role in determining fertility, little work has been done to distinguish maternal cohort from period patterns in childhood mortality. In this paper I contrast time patterns of child mortality generated from a more traditional child cohort perspective (similar to period rates) with those generated from a maternal cohort perspective for a wide variety of developing countries. Using data from 139 Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), I document a wide variety of contrasting patterns across countries.	Adam	 Storeygard
2010	104	Neighborhood Processes and Effects	Do Neighborhood Effects Depend on the Definition of the Neighborhood?	Definitions used in studies of neighborhood effects tend to be data driven and although more theoretically-driven definitions have been proposed, little empirical work uses alternative conceptualizations of neighborhood boundaries. This paper examines the effects of neighborhood sociodemographic composition and signs of disorder on residents’ reports of fear using different neighborhood definitions. We compare more commonly used definitions, those based on census boundaries, with distance-based definitions and vary the size of the boundary.   We find stronger effects of sociodemographic composition when neighborhoods include larger areas, suggesting that residents’ fear is more strongly influenced by sociodemographic characteristics of the macroenvironment. In contrast, we find weaker effects of disorder with increasing neighborhood size, indicating that localized disorder is more consequential for fear. Although the relationships between neighborhood characteristics and fear are essentially unchanged across neighborhood definitions, the strength of the relationship varies with neighborhood size and the direction depends on the neighborhood process.	Jennifer	A. Ailshire	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	Robert	 Melendez
2010	104	Neighborhood Processes and Effects	Neighborhood-Level Physical Disorder and Its Relationship to Poverty, Affluence, Residential Stability, and Ethnicity in Los Angeles	Previous research suggests that physical disorder (e.g., dilapidated buildings, trash, broken sidewalks, etc.) is more common in socially disadvantaged neighborhoods than in other urban neighborhoods and that it may increase stress levels and crime experienced by neighborhood residents. In this paper, we examine the association between physical disorder and neighborhood disadvantage in a large stratified probability sample of census tracts in a major US urban center. First, we use data collected by trained observers to explore issues of inter-rater reliability, interviewer effects, and the effects of time of observation in the measurement of physical disorder. Next, we examine the relationship between neighborhood social disadvantage and physical disorder using multivariate statistical models. Our results show that physical disorder is significantly related to neighborhood poverty, affluence, residential stability and race/ethnic diversity, but not with tract level immigrant concentration.	Malia	 Jones	Anne	 Pebley
2010	104	Neighborhood Processes and Effects	Neighborhood Social Context and Smoking Cession: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy and Social Norms	Cigarette smoking has been identified as one of the most important sources of preventable morbidity and premature mortality worldwide. Additional research is needed to identify factors that support or impede individual smoking cessation, and to design interventions accordingly. This study examines neighborhood level social norms and collective efficacy, a measure of social control and social cohesion, in association with individual smoking cessation. We model the hazard of quitting over a 5 year period among 4000 participants in the 2005 New York Social Environment Study (NYSES). Multivariable analysis using Cox-Proportional Hazard models showed that neighborhood level prohibitive smoking norms were significantly associated with individual smoking cessation (HR= 1.85 [95% CI=1.08, 3.17]). The analysis did not find a significant association for the neighborhood collective efficacy measure nor significant evidence of the joint effects of collective efficacy and smoking norms on cessation. Cessation Interventions should consider avenues for neighborhood normative change.	Deborah	 Karasek	Jennifer	 Ahern
2010	105	Global Patterns of Internal Migration	Gender, Family and Migration between Urban and Rural Areas in Coastal Ghana: An Event History Analysis	This paper uses life history calendar data from Ghana and event history methods to examine migration for men and women, focusing on four specific migration types: rural-urban, rural-rural, urban-urban, and urban-rural. We examine how key determinants of migration—including education, employment, marital status, and childbearing—differ by sex. We find that, as expected, women are less mobile than men overall, but that educated women are more likely to move (particularly to urban areas) than their male counterparts. Moreover, employment in the prior year is less of a deterrent to migration among women. While childbearing has a negative effect on migration, this impact is surprisingly stronger for men than for women, perhaps because women’s search for childcare promotes migration. These results demonstrate the benefits of a Life History Calendar and suggest that migration research should further examine men’s and women’s mobility as it relates to both human capital and household and family dynamics.	Holly	E. Reed	Catherine	S. Andrzejewski
2010	105	Global Patterns of Internal Migration	Female Migration to Mega Cities of India	The present paper tries to understand the pattern and trend of female migration to six mega cities of India: namely Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bangalore, which each have populations of more than five million. The study uses the census data at two periods of time, namely 1991 and 2001. It is found that most of the migrants to these six cities originate from relatively backward states of India. Marriage is still the most important factor of female migration in India but its importance as a cause of female migration declines over the periods. On the other hand, it is quite encouraging to find that the proportion of females migrating for work, employment and education is increasing over the period of time. The volume of female migration to all the six mega cities has also increased over the period of time.	Kailash	Chandra  Das	Arunanand	 Murmu
2010	105	Global Patterns of Internal Migration	Migration and Remittances in Rural China	China’s monumental migration volume has drawn world-wide attention. In this paper, we focus on remittances in a poor province of rural China. We draw on data collected in Guizhou province in southwestern China from the 2003 China Rural Household Survey. We estimated multilevel models of amount of remittances among migrants from Guizhou province and take into account characteristics at the individuals, household, as well as village level. As we expected, migrants with high earnings and long migration durations tend to remit larger amounts compared to migrants with lower earnings and shorter durations. Contrary to our prediction, migrants’ remittance behavior is not responsive to a household’s relative economic standing (as measured by household income) in the village. Most importantly, we find strong evidence of a “culture of remittances” impact in these villages. Namely, migrants who are from villages with high average remittance norms are likely to remit a larger amount than otherwise.	Zai	 Liang	Jiejin	 Li	Zhongdong	 Ma
2010	105	Global Patterns of Internal Migration	Internal Migration in Chile: An Empirical Analysis of the Indigenous Population	Chile, like other countries in Latin America, has seen an increase in internal migration. However migration research in Chile tends to focus on and compare aggregated populations across regions. This aggregation masks significant socio-demographic differences within the population, differences that may influence the likelihood of migration. To date, there is little quantitative evidence verifying the socio-demographic correlates of internal migration in Chile. Using nationally representative data from a household survey in Chile the author uses descriptive and multivariate analyses to shed light on the social, demographic, and spatial factors associated with the likelihood of migrating. Using two measures of migration and logistic regression models, the author finds significant differences in the likelihood of migrating between the indigenous and the non-indigenous population. The results also indicate a need for further refinement in the definition of internal migration.	David	 Ader
2010	106	Tied Mobility	Impact of Male Out-Migration on Lives of Left Behind Women in Rural India: Evidence from NFHS-3	Two divergent views confront each other from the perspective of the management of family affairs by left behind women due to male out-migration. Some opine that left behind women take on active roles in the management of family affairs whereas others believe that many are confronted for the first time with major responsibilities and are ill-prepared to handle those responsibilities on their own. Hence, an attempt has been made in this paper to do a comparative study of women from rural India whose husbands have out-migrated (left behind women) and those who stay with their husbands (stay-put) especially focusing on decision making power with the help of NFHS-3 (2005-2006) data. It has been found that decision making power is higher among left behind women compared to women who are staying with their husbands. However, this finding is subjected to certain contextual factors.	Sujata	 Ganguly
2010	106	Tied Mobility	Collocation or Tied Migration? Choice of Destination Location among Dual-Earner Families	In this paper I add to the family migration literature by addressing two primary research questions. First, do dual-earner families move to labor markets that seem advantageous for the careers of both partners, i.e., do they collocate, or do they move to locations that appear to maximize career opportunity for one partner, i.e., is tied migration the norm? Second, what individual- or family-level characteristics are associated with collocation? For this analysis I use individual- and family-level data from the 1981 through 2003 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), location-specific characteristics measured with data from multiple sources, and a conditional logit model to analyze the correlates of location choice among dual-earner married couples.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2010	106	Tied Mobility	“I Will Go with You”: Partners of Graduate Students as “Tied-Movers”	The Graduate Student Partners Project (GSPP) presents results from interviews with men and women who are the tied-movers of graduate students in a Northeastern private university. Our main interest is to understand the dynamics of tied migration, specifically the process of decision making. According to our findings, the partners of graduate students have to deal with a variety of issues as they negotiate their joint move along with their educational and career trajectories. Studying graduate student partners provides the opportunity to observe an interesting but understudied group of individuals. This project also contributes to the study of tied migration and work trajectories in a way that is not widely covered in the literature. Moreover, this study contributes to the understanding of couples’ interactions and their individual and collective coordination in the context of migration for professional and personal advancement.	Orly	 Clerge	Gabriela	 Sanchez-Soto	Jing	 Song
2010	107	Social Determinants of Perinatal and Child Health	Does Economic Status of Women Affect Obstetric Morbidity?	The study highlights the net effects of selected socio-economic and demographic factors on the obstetric morbidity among different economic classes in India on the basis of self-reported obstetric health problems elicited from 38745 currently married women in the National Family Health Survey, 2005-06 (NFHS-3). The study found that obstetric morbidity is relatively high - among women who are rural, illiterate, non working, Muslim, with no mass media exposure, and at high parities. Higher percentages of educated women reported obstetric morbidity.	Vandana	 Gautam
2010	107	Social Determinants of Perinatal and Child Health	Economic Contraction and Birth Outcomes: A Review	Economic contraction may affect gestation via psychosocial stress or resource loss. This review assesses the quantity, validity, and consistency of empirical evidence examining economic contraction and birth outcomes. Articles examining economic change at either the aggregate or individual level and birth weight, length of gestation, neonatal mortality, and the secondary sex ratio were identified, organized by level of analysis and birth outcome, and evaluated for internal and external validity. One individual-level study reported a strong association between shift to inadequate employment and decreased birth weight. Of seven aggregate-level studies on birth weight, five exhibited moderate to strong validity but reported inconsistent findings. Findings from five studies examining rates of neonatal mortality reported inconsistent findings. Three of four studies reported a reduced secondary sex ratio following economic contraction. Associations between economic contraction and birth outcomes remain speculative. Future research should develop a consensus on methodology and examine individual-level birth outcome data.	Claire	 Margerison Zilko
2010	107	Social Determinants of Perinatal and Child Health	Perinatal and Socioeconomic Risk Factors for Variable and Persistent Cognitive Delay at 24 and 48 Months of Age in a National Sample	This paper analyzes perinatal and sociodemographic risks for cognitive delay at 24 and 48 months using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) (n=7,220). Of 976 children delayed at 24 months, 236 (24.2%) remained delayed by 48 months; 493 (7.9%) of 6,244 children not delayed at 24 months exhibited delay at 48 months. Low birthweight increased delay risk at 24, but not 48 months. Low maternal education had a strongly increasing effect (OR=2.3 at 24 months, 13.7 at 48 months), as did low income (OR=1.4 at 24 months, 7.0 at 48 months). Among children delayed at 24 months, low maternal education predicted delay even more strongly at 48 months (OR=30.5). Although gestational factors including low birthweight increase cognitive delay risk at 24 months, low maternal education and family income are more prevalent and are much stronger predictors of persistent and emerging delay between 24 and 48 months.	Marianne	M. Hillemeier	Paul	 Morgan	George	 Farkas	Steven	 Maczuga
2010	107	Social Determinants of Perinatal and Child Health	The Unraveling of the Urban Health Advantage: The Case of South Africa	This paper examines the resilience of the ‘urban advantage’ in health in a developing country facing rapid urbanization. It uses anthropometric measurements and economic and social data collected on 31,170 individuals in 7305 households during the first wave of the South African National Income Dynamics Study. The paper uses a cross sectional analysis to investigate the comparative health advantage of urban children compared to rural children across six indicators of chronic and acute malnutrition, recent illness, disease, and obesity. It finds no evidence of an urban health advantage and, in fact, finds that, controlling for demographics and household socioeconomic status, children living in urban households are associated with higher risks for obesity and serious illness or disability.	Elizabeth	A. Gummerson
2010	108	Household Structure and Intergenerational Relationships in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Parent-Child Dynamics and Family Solidarity: A Comparative Study of East Asian Societies	Family solidarity refers to adult child-parent relations and can be examined from structural, social-psychological, and transactional perspectives. In East Asia, family organization has undergone substantial changes along with socioeconomic and demographic transitions in the past decades, and consequently family solidarity may have been affected. Using the 2006 East Asian Social Survey, we compare patterns of adult child-parent relations among Mainland China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan. Analytical results suggest that far from eroding, the family organization in East Asia remains strong in co-residence, emotional exchanges, and financial support between child- and parental generations, despite the differences in relative strengths in these dimensions of family solidarity across the four societies. Overall, families in Korea seem to maintain the strongest cohesion, followed by those in Taiwan and Mainland China, and Japanese families are the least cohesive. These results suggest a cultural force that holds the family to a solidified system during rising modernization in economy and society.	Juhua	 Yang
2010	108	Household Structure and Intergenerational Relationships in Historical and Comparative Perspective	The Living Arrangements of Children: Long-Term Changes and Social Variation in the Netherlands	The demographic and social processes of the past 150 years radically changed the number of parents children grew up with. In this paper, we use two unique datasets to illustrate long-term changes in the living arrangements of children born between 1850 and 1985 in the Netherlands. We describe in detail changes in terms of whether fathers, mothers and stepparents lived with these children at birth and at age 15. We also examine whether siblings - and if so how many - lived with the child, and we discuss variations in the living arrangements of children according to social class and level of education. We observe a massive shift in the living arrangements of the 1850-79 cohort compared with the 1880-99 cohort of children and only a slight return to nineteenth-century conditions in the most recent birth cohort.	Niels	 Schenk	Frans	W.A. van Poppel
2010	108	Household Structure and Intergenerational Relationships in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Spatial Variation in Household Structure in 19th and Early 20th Century Germany	In the center of continental Europe, ranging from East to West and North to South, Germany includes many of the cultural, economic, and religious variations found across Europe. In this study, we take   advantage of the great internal heterogeneity of 19th century Germany to gain a better understanding of the patterns and causes of household structure variation. Using aggregate data at scales ranging from the province to the Kreis, we document the contours, gradients, and variability of family structure using measures of household complexity and entry into marriage. We plan to focus on four interrelated questions: (1) Are family structure and marriage patterns consistent with the hypothesized East-West distinction put forth by Hajnal? (2) Is the pattern of land-ownership and agricultural organization an important organizing principle of household and family structure? (3) Are patterns consistent with the agricultural development hypothesis? (4) Are patterns consistent with inheritance patterns?	Mikolaj	 Szoltysek	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Sigfried	 Grueber	Sebastian	 Kluesener
2010	108	Household Structure and Intergenerational Relationships in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Frequency of Maternal Visits and Other Contacts, 1986-2001: A Cross-National Analysis	There has long been speculation that demographic developments, such as fertility declines, could undermine intergenerational support and contact. Using 1986 and 2001 International Social Survey Program data for seven countries, this paper asks whether 1) adults’ visits with mother declined, 2) other maternal contacts (e.g., phone calls) declined, and 3) the association of individual factors with the frequency of maternal contact changed. Although other contacts generally increased across countries, trends in the frequency of maternal visits are mixed. Controlling for individual characteristics, however, there were significantly more visits in 2001 than in 1986 in all seven nations. Several variables underpinning kin contact (e.g., travel time to mother) moved in unfavorable directions, but other, unmeasured forces apparently worked to offset these factors. Although there was no significant change in the association of individual-level factors and maternal visits, education ceased to be a significant predictor of other contract between the two years.	Judith	 Treas	Zoya	 Gubernskaya
2010	109	Infant and Child Mortality	Maternal Schooling and Child Mortality in Nigeria: The Importance of the Actual Curriculum	This paper examines what mediates the relationship between maternal schooling and child mortality in Nigeria. The sample consists of 5,742 children derived from the nationally representative 2003 Nigerian Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS). A series of seven equations are modeled to estimate specific individual-level pathways from maternal schooling to child mortality. More specifically, female autonomy, empowerment, attendance from medical professionals, use of a modern health facility, and literacy are evaluated as mediators. To evaluate the robustness of the individual-level findings, conditional fixed-effects logistic regression is employed to control for community-level factors and isolate the individual-level effect of mothers’ education on the odds of child mortality. The results suggest that the evaluated components of a ‘hidden curriculum’ are not the primary mechanisms but that literacy significantly mediates the relationship between maternal schooling and child mortality.	Emily	Grace Smith
2010	109	Infant and Child Mortality	On the Effects of Water and Sanitation on Child Mortality: Global Evidence from Demographic and Health Surveys	We combine all available DHS data sets with complete household information as well as birth and mortality records to estimate the effect of water and sanitation on child mortality. The estimates from our global data set comprising close to 800,000 observations across 68 countries and 174 surveys confirm the generally observed negative correlation between access to safe water and sanitation and infant mortality. However, the magnitude of the estimated effects is significantly smaller than the estimates typically found in the literature: we find that both improved sanitation and access to safe water decrease child mortality by about 5 to ten percent, less than half the magnitude typically reported. We discuss publication bias, model mis-specification and measurement error as possible explanations of these diverging results, and investigate the stability of the results across time and regions.	Isabel	 Gunther	Guenther	 Fink
2010	109	Infant and Child Mortality	Is Childhood Mortality Affected by Wantedness in Cambodia?	Previous works have already shown that social and cultural practices play an important role in fertility and mortality levels, particularly in areas where there is a strong sex preference. This paper seeks to explore if being wanted affects childhood mortality in the context of Cambodia using the 2005 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey. A logistic regression is applied and the result is discussed in the context of behavioral practices and interventions.	Savet	 Hong
2010	109	Infant and Child Mortality	Infant and Child Mortality within Social Networks and Perceptions of Mortality Change in Niakhar, Senegal	Using an innovative social network design, this research models the association between individuals’ network members’ experiences of child mortality, their own, and their perceptions of change in the rate of such mortality in Niakhar, Senegal. The impact of social interaction on demographic phenomena has been the subject of intense research in the last decade. Previous research however has been hampered by inadequate measures of individuals’ personal networks. We employ survey data that remedies theses issues, capturing more extensive personal networks and higher quality data on network members than has been possible before. We examine the association between beliefs concerning levels of child mortality and the mortality experience of network members across 4 commonly identified domains of association defined by affective, exchange and role-relational ties as well as frequency of interaction.	John	 Sandberg	Steven	 Rytina
2010	110	HIV/AIDS in Contemporary Africa	Determinants of HIV Risk Perception among Adolescents in Four Sub-Saharan African Countries	Whether well founded or not, the perceptions of one’s own HIV/AIDS risk have been shown by health behavior models to be an important factor for individuals’ sexual behaviors. However, due to some limitations, the literature on the determinants of HIV risk perception remains scarce. There has been particularly limited research on the determinants of adolescents’ HIV risk perception. Using data from nationally-representative surveys of adolescents, we assess the factors associated with adolescents’ HIV risk perception in four African countries at different stages of the AIDS epidemic (Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi, Uganda). Ordered logistic regression results show a range of individual and environmental factors which interact to influence adolescents’ perception. Virgin adolescents’ social networks have a significant effect on their HIV risk perception. For females in Burkina Faso and Uganda, and both males and females in Ghana, having had a conversation with friends about AIDS increases the level of HIV perceived risk.	Guiella	 Georges	Simona	 Bignami
2010	110	HIV/AIDS in Contemporary Africa	Does Availability of HIV-Related Health Services Affect Individual Fertility Preferences and Contraceptive Use in Sub-Saharan Africa?	Recent uptake in HIV related services, drug treatment for HIV positive pregnant women to lower the risk of HIV transmission to newborns and anti-retroviral therapy for HIV positive people to improve quality of health and lengthen life expectancy, introduces new questions about what this means for individuals’ fertility preferences and contraceptive behavior. Using recent Demographic and Health Surveys data with HIV biomaker and HIV related service availability in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia we examine how these services influence the effects of HIV status on fertility preferences and contraceptive use. Preliminary results show that individuals living in areas where there is greater access to HIV related services, such as ART, are less likely to want to delay or stop childbearing than those in areas with lower access to these services. We hypothesize that availability of these services will also have impact on the associations between HIV status and reproductive behavior.	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Ann	E. Biddlecom	Isaac	 Adewole
2010	110	HIV/AIDS in Contemporary Africa	Community HIV Prevalence and Parity Progression	The emergent literature on how HIV prevalence in the community affects fertility includes a wide array of mixed results, but is starting to favor the null hypothesis of no general effect on fertility. However, an overall zero effect can conceal radically different effects for women of different parities. More specifically, high HIV prevalence could delay first births by delaying the initiation of condomless sex, but it could speed the transition from the first birth to desired family size. Women who have already been exposed to risk of acquiring HIV sexually might be motivated to complete childbearing quickly future reproductive capacity is most uncertain. I estimate effects of community HIV prevalence on parity progression in 20 sub-Saharan African countries in random effects models and 15 countries in fixed effects models.	Laurie	 DeRose
2010	110	HIV/AIDS in Contemporary Africa	From Intentions to Behavior: How Does HIV Awareness Influence Fertility?	At the population level, high prevalence of HIV/AIDS is associated with reduced fertility, largely because of biological proximate determinants. Previous studies have assessed the impact of perceived HIV risk on preferences for childbearing. However, little research has examined how fertility preferences are translated into behavior, and how this process is shaped by concerns about HIV/AIDS. In this paper, we use two waves of survey data, collected three years apart, to assess how fertility intentions and perceived HIV risk interact to influence subsequent fertility behavior. Data come from Mozambique, a country with high HIV prevalence levels, a dynamic social context, and rapidly increasing availability of testing and treatment. Initial results show that worry about HIV is not related to fertility intentions in 2006. Analyses using data collected three years later will assess how intentions are translated into fertility outcomes for women with different levels of concern about HIV.	Sarah	R. Hayford	Victor	 Agadjanian
2010	112	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Hispanics in the U.S. and Latin America	Contraceptive Practices in Honduras and Nicaragua: Age, Period and Cohort Differences over the Past 15 Years	This analysis examines age, period and cohort effects in contraceptive practices in Honduras and Nicaragua. We pooled data from four rounds of nationally-representative cross-sectional reproductive health surveys conducted in Honduras and Nicaragua from 1991 through 2006 and constructed synthetic birth-cohorts of reproductive-aged women(Honduras: n=27,214; Nicaragua: n=30,125). We adopted a hierarchical multi-level approach and specified separate logit cross-classified random-effects models for practice of any contraceptive method, modern methods and female sterilization adjusting for women’s residence, education and household wealth. Cohort effects have independently contributed to the increase in the use of all contraceptive methods, and disproportionally so to the increase in female sterilization practice in both countries (p      	Andreea	A. Creanga	Paul	 Stupp	Daniel	 Williams	Carrie	 Shapiro-Mendoza
2010	112	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Hispanics in the U.S. and Latin America	The Effects of International Migration on the Risk of Low Birth Weight in Mexico	The purpose of this paper is to provide new empirical evidence linking migration in Mexican households to the U.S. with infant health outcomes. By using new data for Mexico, the ENADID 2006, this research focuses on the effects of migration with low birth weight (LBW). Multivariate logistic regression methods are used to model low birth weight as a function of a set of proximate, intermediate and socioeconomic determinants. In analyzing the channels through which migration affects birth outcomes, the findings provide no conclusive evidence for remittances as the only mechanism associated with lowering the odds of low birth weight. Further studies are recommended in understanding the relationship between migration to the U.S. and health outcomes in Mexico.	Thankam	S. Sunil	Miguel	 Flores
2010	112	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Hispanics in the U.S. and Latin America	Unmet Demand for Sterilization among Latinas	In a prospective study of Latina oral contraceptive users in El Paso, Texas, we find a large proportion of parous pill users want no more children (64%), a large majority of whom (72%) would like to be sterilized. Eight in ten of those who wanted a tubal ligation wanted the procedure at the time of their last delivery. Only one of 363 women wanting a sterilization at baseline was sterilized over the course of nine months of follow up. Logistic regression results for wanting a sterilization show that parity is positively associated with wanting it while a post-secondary education is negatively associated with that outcome. In the model predicting having asked for a sterilization, we find that age is negatively associated with asking while receiving some form of government assistance and wanting to be sterilized at the last delivery are positively associated with asking for a sterilization.	Joseph	E. Potter	Kristine	 Hopkins	Kari	 White	Sarah	 McKinnon	Daniel	 Grossman	Michele	G. Shedlin	Jon	 Amastae
2010	112	Family Planning, Reproductive Health and Fertility among Hispanics in the U.S. and Latin America	How High is Hispanic/Mexican Fertility in the U.S.? Immigration and Tempo Considerations	This paper re-examines the issue of high Hispanic/Mexican fertility. We argue that two main processes distort period estimates. The first is the unknown size of the undercount in population projections and estimates. The second, and potentially more important issue, is that migration affects the timing of fertility. We show that the tendency of women to have a birth soon after migration dramatically distorts period estimates. The first part of the analysis documents anomalies in fertility estimates obtained from vital statistics. We then use data from the 2002 NSFG to show that these anomalies are also present in survey estimates. Connecting information on the timing of migration and fertility we document the acceleration in childbearing in the years immediately after arrival to the U.S. Finally, we use cohort fertility measures to provide alternative fertility estimates for Hispanic/Mexican women. Overall we show that standard period fertility measures significantly overstate the level of Hispanic/Mexican fertility.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Jorge	Armando  Valencia-Rodriguez
2010	113	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Big Bad Racists, Subtle Prejudice and Minority Victims: An Agent-Based Analysis of the Dynamics of Racial Inequality	How many racists does it take to maintain racial inequality? Historical evidence suggests one needs a large number of racist advocates. Recent research, however, cites a decline in racist beliefs that has not been paralleled by declines in inequality. Hence, the strong hypothesized connection between racist attitudes and inequality was erroneous. Researchers have responded by asserting that racial inequality does not require an abundance of racists, but only a system of biased (i.e., racialized) institutions—patterns of interaction—which can maintain racial inequality with a few/no racists. This paper answers the question how many racists—or biased institutional actors—it takes to create and maintain racial inequality using an agent based model. The results reveal that one needs an enormous amount of discrimination to create/maintain racial inequality. However, when non-racist agents are able to use race of competitors in decision making via social learning, the need for discriminatory agents to maintain inequality is reduced to nil.	Quincy	 Stewart
2010	113	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	The Demography of Wealth Inequality: Marriage, Fertility, and Black-White Differences in Wealth	Differences in wealth holdings between white and black Americans are staggering. Research has shown that many factors influence wealth accumulation but the existing literature has not considered a comprehensive set of demographic mechanisms or adopted a life course perspective in examining black/white differences in wealth. We describe how differences in marriage timing, marriage duration, fertility timing and levels, and the sequencing of fertility and marriage predict wealth accumulation differentially for white and black Americans. We also show how these relationships have changed across birth cohorts. Finally, we use transition matrices to predict the likelihood of moving to a higher or lower quintile in the wealth distribution from early adulthood to prime age conditional on income and background factors. We then control for the timing and sequence of marriage and fertility to see how much these demographic factors explain wealth transitions over the life course for black and white Americans.	Vida	 Maralani	Berkay	 Ozcan
2010	113	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	The Degree of Disadvantage: Incarceration and Racial Inequality in Education	More than fifty years after Brown v. Board of education blacks still lag behind whites in high school graduation rates, and the exact size of the racial gap in high school completion has become a source of much scholarly and political debate (Heckman and LaFontaine 2007; Greene & Winters 2005). While data from the Current Population Survey suggest steady increases in the proportion of African Americans with high school diplomas over the past 3 decades, Common Core Data indicate substantially higher high school dropout, especially among African Americans (Warren and Halpern-Manners forthcoming; Heckman and LaFontaine 2007). In this paper, we examine how the rise in incarceration—and its disproportionate concentration among low-skill, young, African American men—influences the estimation of racial inequality in educational attainment. We find that conventional data sources that exclude the incarcerated population underestimate the dropout rate among black men by as much as 40%.	Stephanie	 Ewert	Becky	 Pettit	Bryan	L. Sykes
2010	113	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Discrimination Goes to School? Racial Differences in Performance Assessments by Teachers	Recent literature suggests that observed racial differentials in labor market outcomes are a result of lower investment in the accumulation of skills or of pre-market factors by individuals of African descent. If parents and children update investment decisions after extracting from school reports signals regarding scholastic abilities, differential errors in perceived aptitude could either generate or reinforce racial gaps in the accumulation of human capital. Evidence drawn from a unique data set from Brazilian elementary, middle and high-schools suggest that teachers’ assessments (when compared with blindly scored tests of proficiency) suffer from cardinal and ordinal biases associated with a child’s race.	Marcos	A. Rangel	Fernando	B. Botelho	Ricardo	 Madeira
2010	114	Intergenerational Transfers and Social Mobility	Economic Deprivation in Early Childhood And Adult Outcomes: Comparative Evidence from Norwegian Registry Data and the U.S. PSID	We describe child low-income dynamics in the United States and Norway and estimate associations between low childhood income and adult attainments, measured as late as age 37. Outcomes include years of completed schooling, adult earnings, and percent of adult years with any unemployment. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and Norwegian Registries we describe cross-country distributional differences and estimate the relationship between our adult outcomes and family economic conditions in early childhood, middle childhood and adolescence. Correlations between childhood income and adult outcomes were generally weaker in the Norwegian data. In both data sets, but larger in the PSID, we find statistically significant unfavorable associations between early childhood poverty and adult earnings. We discuss whether these results could be related to Scandinavian egalitarian welfare model’s ability to mitigate effects of family background and potentially correlated credit constraints imposed by low income in the family of origin.	Greg	J. Duncan	Kjetil	 Telle	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest	Ariel	 Kalil
2010	114	Intergenerational Transfers and Social Mobility	Are Extended Families Efficient?	This paper utilizes the structure of the data from the PSID to estimate the role of the extended family in the decision process of a household. The paper examines how the resources of specific members of the extended family outside of the household affect the spending patterns of the household. Next, the paper tests for Pareto efficiency of the extended family in the way that resources are shared between households of the same family. Lastly, the paper analyzes how the role of the extended family changes depending on one's place in the life cycle. We find that, even when accounting for fixed effects across the family, the resources of the family play a significant role in housing and education expenditures. The results show rejections of Pareto efficiency that suggests that there is an element of strategy in the decision process of the household outside the realm of the static model.	Patrick	 Coate	Michael	 Dalton
2010	114	Intergenerational Transfers and Social Mobility	Cohort Change and Racial Differences in Intergenerational Education and Income Mobility	This study examines trends in intergenerational education and income mobility across two recent cohorts in the U.S. Income inequality rose substantially between the early 1980s and the mid 1990s, in part due to rising returns to schooling, and yet few studies have examined changes in the mobility of young adults across these two periods. Perhaps more significantly, African Americans reaching maturity in these two periods faced very different opportunity structures while growing up. This paper studies whether changes in the social and economic organization of American society differentially affected the mobility of black and white men. Using nationally representative data from  two cohorts of children and their parents from the National Longitudinal Surveys, this paper finds a significant liberalization of educational mobility for African Americans, while both white and black men's incomes became somewhat more dependent on their parents' incomes.	Bruce	 Western	Deirdre	 Bloome
2010	114	Intergenerational Transfers and Social Mobility	Intergenerational Racial Stratification and the Black-White Achievement Gap	This paper combines theories of racial stratification with insights from developmental psychology to test hypotheses about how family and out-of-home inequality (neighborhood, school, and peers) contributes to the black-white achievement gap among children at varying developmental stages. Prior research has found that family socioeconomic status and home environment account for racial educational achievement differences among very young children. However, the same set of covariates cannot explain the achievement differences among children in junior and senior high schools. We investigate the large unexplained racial achievement gap among older children by focusing on: (1) grandparents’ characteristics, (2) neighborhoods, (3) schools, and (4) peers. We draw data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the U.S. Census, the Common Core Data on schools, and the Private School Survey. Results show that these characteristics, when combined with home environment, can statistically explain the differences in the black-white achievement gaps among older children.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung	Caroline	 Persell	Michael	 Reilly
2010	115	Marriage and Union Formation in Developing Countries	Marriage and Non-Marriage in Vietnam: Recent Patterns and Future Expectations	Set in a context in which marriage postponement has made headlines in both academic and popular press outlets, this research was designed to assess current correlates of marriage and non-marriage in Vietnam, along with attitudes about the value of marriage and marriage alternatives. The data come from two sources: the three percent microdata sample of the 1999 Vietnam Census of Population and Housing, and 16 focus group interviews, eight of which were conducted in Hanoi and eight of which took place in rural communities in surrounding districts. This research examines the relevance of a literature that stresses increasing economic independence among women, and growing individualistic attitudes in general, as possible reasons for shifting marriage patterns. The census data allow us to examine non-marriage patterns according to indicators such as education, occupation, and location of residence, while the focus group design incorporates comparisons by gender, age, and rural versus urban residence.	Lindy	 Williams	Florio	O. Arguillas
2010	115	Marriage and Union Formation in Developing Countries	Money and Marriage: The Practice of Dowry and Brideprice in Rural India	In many societies, marriages involve financial transactions between the two parties. In India, dowry, the net transaction from a bride’s to groom’s family, is commonly practiced. Using Rural Economic and Demographic Survey 1999, a nationally representative dataset of rural India, this paper investigates the practice by decomposing it into dowry and brideprice. Due to the dependent nature of the two, Zellner’s Seemingly Unrelated Regression model is utilized. Results suggest that dowry and brideprice are not independent of each other. Despite the increasing prevalence of dowries over time (1975-1999), the size of dowries in real terms declined. Interestingly, parents of educated brides pay higher dowries irrespective of family financial backgrounds. My explanation, supported by contextual evidence, is that parents who educate their daughters are more likely to pay higher dowries for altruistic reasons – as a bequest to their daughters. However, for grooms, both education and landholdings provide higher bargaining power and attract greater dowries.	Afra	R. Chowdhury
2010	115	Marriage and Union Formation in Developing Countries	Stability in Mexican
Nuptial Regimes or Change Over Time?: Cohort Differences in Timing to First Marriage among Women in Mexico and the Role of Education	Using data from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), we examine changes in age at first marriage across cohorts. Life table analysis indicates increased variability in age at first marriage across cohorts, and illustrates a greater proportion of never-married women in more recent compared to earlier cohorts at every point in the life course. This pattern is confirmed by the discrete time survival analysis which illustrates that women in more recent cohorts have a lower likelihood of marriage compared to those in earlier cohorts. This lower likelihood is largely mediated by educational attainment. Additionally, interaction models demonstrate the relationship between education and timing to marriage has changed across cohorts. Specifically, having a higher education decreases the likelihood of marriage only among women in more recent cohorts. These results suggest that education has gained value among women over time, challenging views that traditional family values and norms have remained dominant across cohorts of women in Mexico.	Rhiannon	A. D'Souza	Reanne	 Frank	Kammi	 Schmeer
2010	115	Marriage and Union Formation in Developing Countries	Health and Early Marriage in Rural Malawi	Recognition of the role that health plays in selection into marriage is not new, but it has been largely neglected in research in resource poor countries. The role that health may play in the transition to first marriage is particularly of interest in Malawi, where recent stagnation in the age at first marriage may reflect the pressures that the HIV epidemic is exerting on young adults. In this paper, we examine whether health serves as a selection factor into early marriage. If men choose younger women as their wives because of their assumed lower likelihood of HIV infection, we hypothesize that observable signals of health should be associated with the transition to first marriage. We examine this relationship using three indicators of health—self-reported health status, an index of recent symptoms, and Body Mass Index (BMI). Preliminary analysis suggests a significant positive association between BMI and the transition to marriage.	Monica	J. Grant	Erica	 Soler-Hampejsek	Barbara	S. Mensch
2010	116	Policies that Influence Smoking and Alcohol Use: Consequences for Child Well-being	Maternal Smoking, Misclassification, and Infant Health	Identifying the causal effect of prenatal maternal smoking on infant health is complicated by unobservable maternal characteristics and behaviors which are plausibly related to both birth outcomes and a mother’s propensity to smoke. Previous studies have addressed the omitted variables problem using instrumental variables (IV) techniques. However, with self-reported data on maternal smoking, misreporting can induce more severe biases in IV estimates than in OLS. This paper proposes an approach based on parametric methods for misclassified binary dependent variables that simultaneously addresses the endogeneity and measurement error problems. The relationship between infant health and maternal smoking is then re-examined using Birth Records. I find that roughly 30% of smoking mothers are misclassified as non-smokers. As a result, conventional IV estimates deliver implausibly large birth weight losses (upwards of 1,000 grams among African Americans). Accounting for misclassification yields estimates that are considerably smaller in magnitude and more consistent with experimental evidence.	Tanguy	 Brachet
2010	116	Policies that Influence Smoking and Alcohol Use: Consequences for Child Well-being	New Evidence on Whether Cigarette Taxes Reduce Youth Smoking	We present new evidence on the extent to which cigarette prices and taxes affect a youth’s decision to start smoking. We use longitudinal data from the Tobacco-Use Supplements to the CPS, PSID, and NLSY97 to show that prices and taxes matter. We also resolve a puzzle in the empirical literature. Most studies that use longitudinal data find that the probability of initiation is uncorrelated with changes in taxes. This result contradicts standard economic theory that demand falls when prices increase and it stands in contrast with cross-sectional evidence showing lower smoking prevalence among youth when taxes are higher. We resolve this puzzle by showing that taxes reduce smoking uptake, affects casual smoking much less than regular smoking, and that some of the empirical contradictions stem from basic specification errors flowing from the particular longitudinal data used. The findings have important implications for domestic and international tobacco control and public health policy.	Andrew	 Sfekas
2010	116	Policies that Influence Smoking and Alcohol Use: Consequences for Child Well-being	All in the Family British Style: Does Family Smoking Cause British Youth to Smoke?	Smoking is the leading preventable cause of death in every developed economy. Recent policy debates tend to focus on how to prevent youth from starting. Embedded in these debates is a stylized (but unestablished) assumption - that parental smoking causes youth to be more likely to take up smoking. We use data from the British Household Panel Study to estimate whether parental smoking causes children to be more likely to take up smoking. We estimate models with rich controls for family smoking behavior. We also estimate IV models that control for the choice of mothers, fathers, and older siblings to smoke. The results reject the naive assumption. We find that not only are children of smokers not induced to smoke if their parents smoked but that they are much *less* likely to smoke if they grew up with a smoking parent. We present evidence of why this effect is found.	Laura	 Fumagalli
2010	117	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions: Establishing Cause and Effect	Education and Family Formation: Lessons from an Expansion of Upper Secondary Schooling	This paper investigates the effect of education on fertility and marital outcomes. We study a major educational reform in Sweden where vocational tracks in upper secondary school were prolonged from two to three years and the curricula were made more academic. This made students graduating from vocational tracks eligible to apply to university. Our identification strategy takes advantage of cross-regional and cross-time variation in the implementation of a pilot scheme preceding the reform where several municipalities evaluated the policy. The empirical analysis draws on rich population micro data. We find that women who enrolled in the program were significantly less likely to give birth early in life and that this effect is driven by women with higher opportunity costs of childrearing. There is no effect on men’s fertility. The results also suggest that the reform made more able women delay their marriages; although there is no effect on men’s timing.	Hans	 Gronqvist	Caroline	 Hall
2010	117	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions: Establishing Cause and Effect	Postponement and Recuperation of Fertility in Italy: The Role of Education	Using data from the Italian Multiscopo we investigate the effect of higher education on fertility timing in Italy. While it is widely demonstrated that women with higher education tend to postpone the birth of the first child, it is still unclear whether they then recuperate on second and higher order births. Using a simultaneous equation approach, we jointly estimate an ordered probit for reached level of education and hazard functions for first, second and higher order births, controlling for women’s unobserved characteristics. Final results show a negative effect of higher education on all birth orders. We then developed a framework for a simulation in order to perform sensitivity analysis of the parameter estimates. This simulation analysis allows us to change the characteristics of the original sample and therefore to assess whether these changes lead to further postponement and recuperation and how they affect the overall fertility.	Elena	C. Meroni
2010	117	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions: Establishing Cause and Effect	Does Spacing Matter? The Effect of Child Spacing on the Cumulative Labor Force Outcomes of Mothers	The role of first-birth timing for mothers’ economic outcomes has interested researchers for some time, yet research that considers the implications of the spacing of children, in addition to the timing, is sparse. Longer birth intervals may disadvantage women by prolonging the child-rearing period and extending time out of full-time employment, or, alternatively, may advantage women by diminishing the intensity of the child-rearing period, facilitating ongoing labor force attachment. We use longitudinal data from NLSY79 and employ a matching strategy to estimate the long-term effect of long birth intervals on mothers' labor force outcomes. By doing so, we contribute to the literature on the intersection between women’s fertility and their labor force outcomes, filling a gap in the literature that has disproportionately ignored the implications of decisions about higher-parity births.	Margaret	 Gough	Alexandra	 Killewald
2010	117	Timing of Childbearing and Fertility Transitions: Establishing Cause and Effect	Do Children Affect Life Expectancy? A Joint Study of Early Life Conditions, Fertility and Mortality	Early life conditions are by now established determinants of adult mortality. Recent studies also find a strong statistical association between female fertility and mortality. This paper analyzes the relationship between these two determinants of adult mortality. To do so we first study the impact of economic conditions at different stages of childhood on individual fertility rates. Then we examine the effect of fertility on mortality. Given the potential endogeneity of fertility, female fertility and mortality is simultaneously studied using business-cycle conditions during childhood as exogenous determinants of both these events. Results indicate that favorable economic conditions in the years closer to puberty lower average fertility rates. Furthermore while women's health suffers during the reproductive period, fertility has a large, protective causal effect on female mortality thereafter. This effect is sensitive to the definition of fertility used and varies by age and parity of the woman.	Sumedha	 Gupta	Gerard	G.J. van den Berg	France	 Portrait
2010	118	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	Age Dynamics of Physiological Indices as Determinants of Healthy Life: Evidence from Longitudinal Data	Longitudinal data provide possibilities to analyze how dynamics of physiological indices impact morbidity/mortality risks. We analyzed the relationship between “healthy lifespan” (defined as free of cancer, cardiovascular and diabetes lifespan) and longitudinal observations of six physiological indices: body mass index, diastolic blood pressure, hematocrit, pulse pressure, pulse rate, and serum cholesterol, in the Framingham Heart Study using the stochastic process model of aging. We evaluated that: 1) “optimal” trajectories of the physiological indices (minimizing the risk of “unhealthy life”) are age-dependent; 2) these trajectories deviate from those resulting from the processes of allostatic adaptation of an organism; 3) ranges of “tolerable” deviations of indices from the “norm” reduce with age, i.e., U-shapes of the risk narrow with age. The model estimates that individuals might enjoy up to several additional years of healthy life if their indices followed the “optimal” age trajectories. The mechanisms contributing to observed results are discussed.	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Alexander	 Kulminski	Liubov	 Arbeeva	Lucy	 Akushevich	Irina	V. Culminskaya
2010	118	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	The World-Wide Physiological Revolution: Dysregulation in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Functioning	In examining physical change with industrialization, Fogel described the technophysio evolution of health capital that accompanied the industrial revolution. An increase in human capital was evidenced by an increase in height linked to improvements in nutrition. This paper examines the physiological revolution that has accompanied reductions in infection, increases in calorie consumption, and decreases in manual labor, characteristic of most populations. While virtually all populations have experienced increases in weight, hypertension, and dyslipidemia, dysregulations in physiological functioning indicators are related to socioeconomic, medical and cultural circumstances as well as differences in early life circumstances. We use recent biomarker data (NHANES, HRS, ELSA, CHARLS, SEBAS, IFLS, and MxFLS) to examine these differences. Weight is highest in the U.S., Mexico, and England and considerably lower in Asian countries; however, several Asian countries have some of the highest levels of hypertension while it is relatively low in the U.S. because of medication use.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Sarinnapha	 Vasunilashorn	Jung	Ki  Kim
2010	118	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	Does Higher Body Mass Index Lower Cognitive Functioning at Old-Age?	Cognitive performance declines with age, and impaired cognition is a major health problem with substantial economic costs. Old-age obesity is prevalent and increasing. While the physical health effects of obesity have been well-documented and consistently found to be adverse, the consequences of obesity on cognitive health at old-age are less well understood with widely varied results and conflicting evidence. Some studies show obesity is harmful to cognition; some report obesity is protective, while others find no relationship. The inconclusiveness of the literature may result from differences in study samples, measures of cognitive domains, and methodology. We contribute to the literature by using the Health and Retirement Study and measures of multiple cognitive domains, and importantly, an econometric analysis that models unobserved individual permanent heterogeneity, and the potential endogeneity of obesity. We demonstrate the importance of these econometric issues and how the difference in estimation methods yields different (opposite direction) results.	Bo	 Macinnis
2010	118	Biodemographic Influences on Health and Mortality	Predicting Mortality with Biomarkers among Elderly Costa Ricans	Biomarkers have increasingly been added to population surveys in recent years, but few studies document how well they relate to mortality outcomes. We considered 22 baseline biomarkers as three-year prospective death predictors in a nationally representative longitudinal sample from the Costa Rican Longevity and Healthy Aging Study (CRELES). The sample includes about 2,500 Costa Ricans born before 1945, of whom about 400 died. The strongest mortality predictors are markers of body functioning (hands, legs, lungs, and kidneys). C-reactive protein and HbA1c are also strong predictors. Low levels of DHEAS predict increased mortality only among men. Strikingly, traditional indicators of cardiovascular risk, such as high blood pressure and total cholesterol, unexpectedly predict lower mortality. Obesity increases the risk of dying but only among younger individuals. Results suggest the need for deeper understanding of the meaning of such biomarkers, particularly outside of the developed country settings where they have been primarily studied.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Melissa	 Rodriguez	William	H. Dow
2010	119	Immigration, Ethnicity and Child Development	Aspirations, Class & Identity: A Study of the Children of Haitian Immigrants in Queens, New York	This paper examines the acculturation process of second-generation Haitian immigrants in a multi-ethnic black suburban area in Queens, New York. This research focuses on the process of inter-generational mobility experienced by the children of Haitian immigrants and the ways in which it relates to their ethnic identity, racial background and youth developmental experiences. This research project tests the selective acculturation hypothesis, and purports that the second generation immigrants in this sample are on a pathway of selective acculturation. This study draws upon a qualitative methodology consisting of semi-structured interviews, a focus group, key informant interviews, and participant observations. The data suggests that Haitian youth, despite experiences with racial and ethnic discrimination in schools and community, have high educational and personal aspirations; questioning segmented assimilation's assumptions about population experiences with neighborhood affects of inter-generational mobility.	Orly	 Clerge
2010	119	Immigration, Ethnicity and Child Development	The Hispanic-White Achievement Gaps in Early School Years: Evidence from the ECLS-K	This paper investigates the ethnic academic achievement gaps and associated growth patterns from kindergarten to fifth grade between immigrant children of Mexican origin and native White, using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten data. We find that the Hispanic-white achievement gaps have been narrowed, which contrasts with the widening black-white achievement gaps. In particular, the 2nd generation Mexican children are able to catch up in reading and math, mostly due to their faster growth during first grade. Our analysis shows that the persisting achievement gaps in the fifth grade between immigrant children of Mexican origin may be largely due to the initial lags at kindergarten. Our findings highlight the pivotal importance of early intervention to boost immigrant children’s assimilation process.	Hongyun	 Han	Alberto	 Palloni
2010	119	Immigration, Ethnicity and Child Development	Depression and Anxiety among First-Generation Immigrant Latino Youth: Key Correlates and Implications for Future Research	We examined how the migration and acculturation experiences of first-generation Latino youth contributed to their psychological well-being. Data came from the Latino Adolescent Migration, Health, and Adaptation (LAMHA) study, which surveyed 281 first-generation Latino immigrant youth, ages 12-19. Using logistic regression, we evaluated how migration stressors (i.e. traumatic events, choice of migration, discrimination, and documentation status) and migration supports (i.e. family and teacher support, acculturation, and personal-motivation) were associated with depressive symptoms and anxiety. We found that migration stressors increased the risk of both depressive symptoms and anxiety. Time in the U.S. and support from family and teachers reduced the risk of depressive symptoms and anxiety. Compared to documented adolescents, undocumented adolescents were at greater risk of anxiety, and children in mixed-status families were at greater risk of anxiety and marginally greater risk of depressive symptoms.	Stephanie	 Potochnick	Krista	 Perreira
2010	119	Immigration, Ethnicity and Child Development	Inequalities in the Social Integration of Immigrant Youth	Extant research has documented an advantage of immigrant compared to native-born youths in terms of educational outcomes and health. Another important indicator of wellbeing in adolescence is social integration. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we focus on two important social integration indicators: friendship formation and strength. From adolescents' own reports and those of their schoolmates, we examine social ties with peers comparing foreign-born and native-born adolescents. Foreign-born adolescents report fewer friends, are more likely to be friendless, and are less likely to be named as friends by schoolmates. They are also less likely to have their friendships reciprocated. Some of these differences are explained by other disadvantages foreign-born individuals face, including lower socioeconomic status and attendance of less endowed schools. Their better health offers some protection in terms of social integration, but lower acceptance persists.	Elizabeth	 Vaquera	Solveig	 Argeseanu Cunningham
2010	120	Growth and Decline of Urban Populations	Are Demographic Forces Generating an Urban Revival?: American Cities, 1950-2006	The share of metropolitan residents living in the central city has declined continuously since 1950. We show that, if not for a series of demographic factors – notably renewed immigration, a falling share of households with children and a reduction in the number of veterans, many of whom have access to housing benefits – cities would have contracted even further. We provide causal estimates of the relationship between the presence of children or veteran status and living in the central city, relying variously on the occurrence of twins or comparisons between birth cohorts coming of age during and after the mass mobilization for World War II. We conclude that demographic trends were only strong enough to staunch the flow of population from cities, not to generate an urban revival.	Leah	P. Boustan	Allison	 Shertzer
2010	120	Growth and Decline of Urban Populations	Population Replacement and Migration in Historical Perspective: Depopulation in Castile & Leon and Concentration in Madrid in the 20th Century	This paper analyses the population reproduction in Castile&Leon and Madrid from 1900 to 2005. In historical perspective, there are two main problems for this analysis: first, the lacking of data, particularly migration data; second, the lacking of accurate measures of reproduction that takes into account the three components of population dynamics. In order to analyse this process, first, we have taken Calot’s interpretation (1984) of TFR to estimate a net migration constant of female population in reproductive ages; second, we have used the Birth Replacement Ratios, an indicator that incorporates the effects of all three demographic components in the evolution of births. This indicator has two advantages with respect to other methods: it is a retrospective indicator that does not assume hypothetical scenarios about the impact of migration in the dynamic of the population; and it is possible to decompose the effect of each component in the generational replacement process.	Luis	Alberto  Del Rey Poveda	Maria	del Mar  Cebrian
2010	120	Growth and Decline of Urban Populations	Trajectories of Neighborhood Racial and Ethnic Composition Change in Chicago Metropolitan Neighborhoods from 1970 to 2000	Although the process of racial transition or “white flight” was clearly articulated in the work of sociologists following World War II, emerging types of neighborhood change driven by gentrification and immigration challenge the idea that there is a single trajectory of racial and ethnic composition that neighborhoods follow. This paper uses growth mixture models and a dataset of tracts in the greater Chicago metropolitan area that were normalized to their 2000 census tract boundaries to empirically identify patterns of change in neighborhood racial and ethnic composition from 1970 to 2000. The model identifies nine types— or trajectories – of neighborhood racial and ethnic change. These trajectories indicate that racial succession from white to black neighborhoods still occurs, albeit much more slowly in later decades compared to earlier ones, and that Latino growth follows a number of trajectories, including displacement from gentrifying neighborhoods.	Michael	D.M. Bader
2010	121	Ethnicity, Health and Mortality in Russia and Former Soviet Republics	Health Status of Russian Minorities in Former Sovjet Republics	Ethnic Russians still constitute sizable minorities in some former Soviet Republics. After the dismantling of the USSR, by the end of 1991, their sociopolitical position has significantly weakened. Some argue that this has resulted in ethnic Russians occupying a lower socio-economic status, leading to lower health status and higher mortality rates. Others point to the importance of ethnic group-specific health risk behavior and illness control. We used nationally representative World Health Survey data to examine the role of both types of contributing factors when comparing the health status of Russian minority and native majority populations in the Newly Independent States of Estonia, Latvia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Russian Federation. The main finding is that health status differences do exist but that effects of wealth, education, health risk behavior and illness control vary with the socio-political position. Effects are most pronounced in countries where the sociopolitical position of the Russian minority is weakest.	George	 Groenewold	Jeroen	 van Ginneken
2010	121	Ethnicity, Health and Mortality in Russia and Former Soviet Republics	Ethnic Differentials of Mortality in Russia and the Role of Socio-Economic Conditions	Ethnic Russians in Russia traditionally have higher mortality at working ages compared to other ethnic groups. We analyzed mortality in 78 Russian territories according to percentage of ethnic Russians reported by the last 2002 census. The proportion of ethnic Russians in the total population is negatively correlated with life expectancy in a particular region and positively correlated with the level of mortality increase during the last 15 years. However this tendency varied depending on the socio-economic development of a particular territory. When living standards are low then lifestyle, religion or other national traditions result in higher ethnic inequalities in adult mortality.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Victoria	G. Semyonova	Alla	E. Ivanova	Leonid	A. Gavrilov
2010	121	Ethnicity, Health and Mortality in Russia and Former Soviet Republics	Does Nativity Matter? Correlates of Health by Immigrant Generation in the Russian Federation	Nativity is an important correlate of health in many migrant-receiving countries, but the migration-health link has not been studied in Russia. Our paper asks whether the foreign-born experience better health than the native-born, and whether any health advantage extends to the second generation. We find evidence of better health among first generation migrants from outside the former USSR, and among first and second generation migrants from the Caucasus and Central Asia. First generation migrants from Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova experience worse health than the native-born. When we control for sociodemograhpic characteristics, the health status of migrants is similar to that of the native population. In the Russian context, the fact that we found no relationship between migration and health in multivariate analyses is notable, because it challenges prevalent beliefs that migrants, particularly those from the Caucasus and Central Asia, are less healthy than the native population.	Cynthia	 Buckley	Erin	T. Hofmann	Yuka	 Minagawa
2010	121	Ethnicity, Health and Mortality in Russia and Former Soviet Republics	Ethnic Mortality Differentials in Lithuania:
Conflicting Evidence from Longitudinal Census-Linked and Unlinked Data	This study uses a unique data set from Lithuania containing aggregated mortality data based on the individual linkage of deaths in 2001-2004 to the population census of 2001. The data include information about ethnicity of the same deceased, obtained from two sources: 1) self-reported information from the census and 2) information reported by proxy informants from death records. The study systematically examines disagreements between the census and the death registry information in reporting the ethnicity of the deceased. Using Poisson regression, we identify relationships between misreporting of ethnicity in death records and selected socio-demographic variables. We produce group-specific estimates of life expectancy and mortality rate ratios and compare those derived from the census-linked data with those based on the census-unlinked data. Finally, using higher quality census-linked data, we examine age- and cause-specific patterns of ethnic mortality differentials in Lithuania.	Domantas	 Jasilionis	Dmitri	A. Jdanov	Vladimir	 Shkolnikov
2010	122	Labor Market Networks	Who Gets the Job Referral? Evidence from a Networks Experiment	Despite a wealth of knowledge that job networks are important, we know little about how exactly they work. Network theory suggests that individuals face two competing incentives in selecting a referral: the incentive to refer a high quality match, and the incentive to refer a close friend or family member. We simulate a day-labor environment using a novel experiment in Kolkata, India to learn who gets selected as a referral. Original participants perform a task and are asked to refer network members to the experiment, with randomized incentives to refer someone who is skilled at the task, while shared social bonds are measured through behavioral games. Preliminary results suggest that highly-skilled original participants do refer high quality network members, but only if they are directly incentivized. Future work will focus on the interaction between social capital, incentives, and the performance of referrals.	Lori	 Beaman	Jeremy	 Magruder
2010	122	Labor Market Networks	The Transition from School to Work Amongst Black Youth in Cape Town	The paper investigates the nature of the school to work transition amongst youth in Cape Town using the Cape Area Panel Survey. One focus of the paper is on the typical search behaviour in the months immediately following school leaving. Through the use of a monthly calendar we are able to determine precisely whether individuals searched or not from month to month as well as the month in which a job was obtained for those that found employment. We initially paint a descriptive picture, teasing out nuanced differences in the post schooling labour market behaviour of African and Coloured youth (two race groups with similar socio-economic profiles but different labour market outcomes owing to Cape Town specific labour dynamics that were shaped by the region’s history). The other focus of the paper is survival analysis modelling in order to gain insight on duration of unemployment.	David	 Lam	Murray	 Leibbrandt	Cecil	 Mlatsheni	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2010	122	Labor Market Networks	Smooth(er) Landing? The Role of Networks in the Location and Occupational Choice of Immigrants	How does the presence of networks influence location and occupation decisions of immigrants over time? This paper tries to answer this using the location and occupation choices of immigrants implicit in the gross and net immigration flows by ethnicity, occupation and state coming to the US between 1900 and 1930. We compare the actual distribution of immigrants by intended (ex-ante) and by actual state (ex-post) of residence to counterfactual distributions constructed by allocating flows according to network proxies. We find the ex-ante distribution is best approximated by allocating migrants where ethnic and occupational networks exist while the ex-post distribution is mostly driven by ethnic-specific occupational networks. The importance of the latter decreases and that of occupational networks increases over time, which is consistent with migrants adopting the occupations of their ethnic network at arrival but slowly reverting to their original occupation as they learn more about local labor markets.	Jose	 Tessada	Jeanne	 Lafortune
2010	122	Labor Market Networks	Intermarriage and Immigrant Employment: The Role of Networks	Social networks are commonly understood to play a large role in the labor market success of immigrants. Using 2000 U.S. Census data, this paper examines whether access to native networks, as measured by marriage to a native, increases the probability of immigrant employment. We start by confirming in both least squares and instrumental variables frameworks that marriage to a native indeed increases immigrant employment rates. Next, we show that the returns to marrying a native are not likely to arise solely from citizenship rights acquired through marriage or characteristics of native spouses. We then present several pieces of evidence suggesting that networks obtained through marriage play an important part in explaining the relationship between marriage decisions and employment.	Delia	 Furtado	Nikolaos	 Theodoropoulos
2010	123	Aging in Developing Countries: Intergenerational Support and Living Arrangements	Shifting Coresidence Near the End of Life: Comparing Decedents and Survivors of a Follow-Up Study in China	What we know about transitions in coresidence of elders in China is based on panel data involving survivors. This paper examines the tendency to and determinants of shifts in coresidence among the very old, comparing survivors with those that died. Data come from the CLHLS. Baseline and follow-up surveys indicate shifts in coresidence, defined as a change from not living to living in the same household as an adult child, and the reverse. Rates of shifting are adjusted for time to follow-up. Regressions examine predictors among four groups: baseline coresidents and non-coresident survivors and decedents. Decedents and non-coresidents are more likely to shift than survivors and coresidents. Covariates related to physical and material need and marital status are the strongest predictors of shift. We conclude that the period nearing the end of life is a time of flux and coresidential shifts are underestimated when those that die during a follow-up study are ignored.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Kim	 Korinek
2010	123	Aging in Developing Countries: Intergenerational Support and Living Arrangements	Response of Family Elder Support to Changes in the Income of the Elderly in Korea	The population of South Korea is aging rapidly and the threat to elderly well-being from the erosion of traditional family care is of much concern. Despite its implications to public policy, relatively little is known about the extent to which support by adult children responds to changes in elderly parents’ income. Do adult children vary their contributions to compensate for losses and gains of elderly parents? This paper addresses this issue using data from the first two waves of the Korean Longitudinal Study of Ageing.   Between 2005 and 2007 there was substantial variation in sources and amounts of income of elderly Koreans and in family elder support. Our results provide little evidence for the hypothesis that children’s support offset loss of income by their parents. Parents who experienced a relatively large increase in income received more financial transfers from children. The effect of changes in income on co-residence followed a mixed pattern.	Erin	Hye-Won  Kim	Philip	J. Cook
2010	123	Aging in Developing Countries: Intergenerational Support and Living Arrangements	Grandparenting and “Other” Children’s Support in Rural China	This investigation examines how siblings adjust their support to their elder parents based on their parents’ efforts to provide child care, not only for themselves, but also for other siblings in rural China. The data were from a two-wave (2001, 2003) longitudinal study of 4,531 parent-child dyads parented by 1,275 parents, aged 60 and older, living in rural areas of Anhui Province, China. Random effects regression analysis showed that providing child care increased financial support from daughters and emotional support from sons. Daughters reduced their financial support if their parents increased child care efforts for other siblings, whereas sons’ financial contributions were not influenced. Emotional support from sons was strengthened when their parents provided more child care for other siblings, while emotional support from daughters was not influenced. We suggest taking a gendered extended family perspective in intergenerational relationship research.	Zhen	 Cong	Merril	 Silverstein	Shuzhuo	 Li
2010	123	Aging in Developing Countries: Intergenerational Support and Living Arrangements	Living Arrangements and Aging: Changes and Determinants in Living Arrangements of Older Persons in Mexico, 1992-2006	Our objective is to analyze the main trends and changes in living arrangements with older people. We are also interested in showing the influence of diverse sociodemographic variables on the living arrangements for elderly people. Methods: We used similar sources of data from the National Demographic Dynamic Survey for 1992, 1997 and 2006. We considered two levels of analysis: household and individual level. In the first level, we show trends, changes and composition of households in Mexico. With the individual level we analyze the characteristics of older persons and we calculated a multinomial logistic model for determining the influence of diverse variables on living arrangements. Findings: there is an important increase in the percentage of households with single elderly people; men have greater probabilities to live in nuclear and extended families than women; elderly people with low socioeconomic backgrounds have a greater probability of living alone than others.	Verónica	Z. Montes de Oca Zavala	Sagrario	 Garay
2010	124	Demography of Health and Mortality in Bangladesh and India	Results of a Community Randomized Trial of Microcredit and Health Services Interventions in Rural Bangladesh	A community randomized intervention trial was carried out between Nov 2006 and August 2009 in 128 relatively remote villages in three Divisions of Bangladesh. The trial was a 4-celled design and the two interventions were increased microcredit activity by Grameen Bank and addition of health services (a village health worker and two satellite clinics in the village each month). A baseline survey of 3900 households in the villages was done in Sept-Oct 2006 and a follow-up survey is being carried out in the same households in the fall of 2009. The main outcome measures are women’s empowerment, use of preventive and curative health care (e.g. use of trained birth attendants; use of ORS for childhood diarrhea) and contraceptive use. Preliminary results from the followup survey indicate that over 90% of the households from 2006 have been located and tracking procedures will locate more.	Stan	 Becker	Ruhul	 Amin	Nirali	M. Shah
2010	124	Demography of Health and Mortality in Bangladesh and India	Measurement, Trends, and Predictors of Unintended Pregnancy: Bangladesh 1984-1999	Bangladesh has experienced a rapid fertility decline in the past several decades, facilitated by proactive population policies, contraceptive provision, and broader societal shifts encouraging smaller families and contraceptive use to achieve these revised norms. We present 16 years of data from the Sample Registration System, a demographic surveillance system operated by the Maternal Child Health Extension Project in 6 study areas in Bangladesh. Using prospective fertility preferences and subsequent pregnancy information, we determined the level of intended versus unintended pregnancies, as well as those that were considered to be ‘Up to God/Allah’. Over the 16-year study period, unintended pregnancy levels varied from 22-38%, with lowest levels in the mid-1990s. Fatalistic responses declined substantially over the study period, from 25% in the mid-1980s to 1% in the mid-1990s. Further analyses will explore the determinants of unintended pregnancies and discuss the trends in unintended pregnancy over time and across the study areas.	Jessica	D. Gipson	Mian	B. Hossain	Michael	 Koenig
2010	124	Demography of Health and Mortality in Bangladesh and India	Inequality in Consumption of Reproductive Health Services in India: A Longitudinal Assessment	In India, there is dearth of longitudinal studies to find out reproductive health service consumption. In the given context, this study is an attempt to understand and establish the relationship between consumption status of women measured longitudinally for reproductive health services with socio-economic and other contextual variables. It tries to relate this with demographic transition by studying three Indian States at different level of demographic transition viz. Bihar, Jharkhand, and Maharashtra. The research was mainly secondary in nature. It included analysis of data collected by International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS) and The Johns Hopkins University (JHU) as a follow up study to the 1998-1999 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2). The sample consisted of 6303 women. The analysis is based on composite index, cross tabulation and logistic regression analysis. The findings on contextual differentials and determinants clearly reflect upon the relationship between socio-economic inequality, regional imbalances and consumption of reproductive health facilities.	Sandip	 Anand	R	K  Sinha
2010	124	Demography of Health and Mortality in Bangladesh and India	Hindu-Muslim Differentials in Child Mortality in India	In India, Muslim children exhibit lower child mortality than Hindu children, in spite of the fact that, on  average, their mothers are poorer and less educated -- characteristics typically associated with higher  child mortality. Using data from the National Family and Health Survey (NFHS 1-3), we seek  explanations for this paradox. We test the hypothesis that this paradox may be explained by lower son  preference among Muslims. Indeed, lower son preference could produce a more typical pattern of sex  differentials in mortality among Muslims and generate lower child mortality among them at the national  level, compensating for their lower socio-economic status. However, we find no evidence for this  hypothesis in the NFHS data. We find that Muslims are subject to a number of advantages, in addition to  the better known disadvantages, which appear to contribute to their lower child mortality. However, part  of the Muslim mortality advantage remains unexplained.	Michel	 Guillot
2010	125	Health Insurance and Health Care Utilization	The Double-Edged Sword: Financial Source of Household Healthcare Expenditure in Ghana	In many regions, some of the most formidable enemies of health are joining forces with the allies of poverty to impose a double burden of disease, disability and premature death in many societies. This article identifies the main financial sources used by households to finance household health care. The article examines the spatial and socio-economic status (SES) dynamics and the challenges this poses to health and development. Data from the Ghana 2003 World Health Survey (WHS) was analyzed descriptively. Approximately 40% of households depend on more than one financial source with 88% depending on household income to finance household healthcare expenditure. The high dependency on household income will erode gains in the economic and health sector in the face of global economic recession. Comprehensive reforms with national health insurance programs that cover emerging disease conditions will mitigate the strain of the double burden of disease on households in emerging economies.	Henry	 Tagoe
2010	125	Health Insurance and Health Care Utilization	Climbing the Ladder to Equitable Access for Mothers and Children: Health System Transitions to Universal Coverage in Urban and Rural Settings	With increasing urbanisation there is a need to identify population groups that are excluded or marginalised from receiving healthcare. Furthermore, the implementation of appropriate interventions to increase access is required. This paper will propose a general theory of the transition that a country undertakes from a situation where no healthcare is offered to one where the whole population, irrespective of location or wealth, obtains healthcare. Using information from Demographic and Health Surveys, countries with more than two surveys will be analysed to assess inequalities in health care with regards to wealth and urban/rural residence. It is proposed that a country moves through a series of different stages, or rungs, in the transition towards universal coverage. Throughout this transition access in rural and urban areas differ, with urban areas usually having higher utilisation rates. Interventions to improve healthcare access will be proposed for each step of this transition ladder.	Andrew	A. R. Channon	Zoe	 Matthews	Sarah	 Neal
2010	125	Health Insurance and Health Care Utilization	National Health Insurance and Health Inequality in Taiwan	Health care reform is under heated debate in the United States. Although prior research shows that having public health insurance improves individual health (e.g., Quesnel-Vallée 2004), not everyone is convinced that a universal insurance coverage will improve population health and reduce health inequality. The National Health Insurance of Taiwan implemented in 1995 that provides a universal coverage to all citizens provides a natural experiment to address this issue. Using eight waves (from 1990 to 2005) of repeated cross-sectional data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey and an identifiable age-period-cohort model with a linear spline specification, we find that the National Health Insurance improves population health and especially health of those with low education, which thus reduces health inequality by education.	Jui-Chung	Allen Li	Yu-han	 Jao
2010	125	Health Insurance and Health Care Utilization	Why Do the Sick Not Use Health Care? The Case of Thailand’s Universal Health Coverage Scheme	A primary motivation of public health insurance programs is to promote access to and use of health care services in order to improve population health. Yet, a frequently occurring puzzle is that the insured often do not utilize those publicly-provided health services, even though they are provided at little or no monetary cost. This study examines the factors that affect the decision to utilize public health providers in Thailand’s Universal Health Coverage (UC) Scheme, compared to the alternatives of using private providers or self-medicating. With data from the 2007 Health and Welfare Survey, health care choices of individuals are analyzed using a multinomial logit framework and predictors such as individual and household’s characteristics. Preliminary results suggest that age, income, copayment, and area in which the household is located have significant impacts on the individual’s decision in using publicly-provided health services.	Phatta	 Kirdruang
2010	126	Gender and the Division of Labor in Developing Countries	Women’s Nonagricultural Employment in Rural China	This study uses in-depth interviews collected from four villages in China during 2000-2009 to investigate to what extent women are involved in nonagricultural employment, how they acquire such jobs, and how their employment strategies are affected by market and family factors. Along with the growth of non-agricultural employment in rural China, there has been a revival of traditional divisions of labor between men and women. But rural China does not converge on a uniform pattern of employment. Instead, women's employment choices are shaped by the characteristics of the local farming system, the availability of external jobs and home-based work, the resources for home business, and local policies on land property and economic development. The study looks at family behavior as the adaptation of cultural rules, including perceptions of manhood, womanhood, and the role of the family, inchanging political and economic circumstances.	Jing	 Song
2010	126	Gender and the Division of Labor in Developing Countries	Mexican Women and Food in Rural and Urban Contexts	Activities involved in the preparation of food are particularly important for women since they absorb much of the time they spend in domestic work. Gender norms establish the activities performed by men and women and more so in rural societies. Using data from the Mexican National Survey on the Use of Time carried out in 2002, I seek to find the determinants of the time rural and urban women spend in activities related to food preparation. I estimate a model where the type of assets available in the household, household structure and women’s characteristics are included in order to explain the time spent in food preparation. I intend to demonstrate that cultural norms prevalent in rural households and the lack of household appliances impose a huge burden on rural Mexican women. Preliminary results suggest rural women in Mexico spend large amounts of time in food preparation.	Carla	 Pederzini
2010	126	Gender and the Division of Labor in Developing Countries	Women’s Wages in Rural India’s Informal Sector: Does Access to Health Care Matter?	There is convincing and ample evidence in the social science literature on the interrelationships between health/nutrition and wages and on the persistence of gender discrimination. There are, however no updated studies investigating health care access as a predictor of wages in India. India presents a unique case owing to its recent high economic growth rates co-existing with a large sized rural unregulated informal sector workforce. Also, India is one of the select developing countries that has implemented developmental programs and decentralized system of governance at the village level. Improved health care access is central to decentralization. This paper using the 2006 Rural and Demographic Survey data analyses the relationship between health care access and labor market productivity in India’s rural informal labor market. It estimates the role of health care access in predicting wages and therefore helps shed light on the efficacy of decentralization in improving the health care delivery system.	Veena	S. Kulkarni	Hari	K. Nagarajan
2010	126	Gender and the Division of Labor in Developing Countries	Left Behind to Farm? Women's Labor Re-Allocation in Rural China	The transformation of work during China’s rapid economic development is associated with a substantial but little noticed re-allocation of traditional farm labor among women, with some doing much less and some much more. We study how the work, time allocation and health of non-migrant women are affected by the out-migration of others in their household. We find that the women left behind are doing more farm work than would have otherwise been the case. We also find evidence that this is a persistent effect, and not just temporary re-allocation. For some types of women (notably older women) the labor re-allocation response comes out of their leisure.	Ren	 Mu	Dominique	 van de Walle
2010	128	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality	The Dynamics of Health Disparities; U.S. Mortality Disparities by Education, 1989-2005	In this paper we examine the extent to which newly emerging or growing mortality disparities by education are present in the U.S. and the role that they play in the perpetuation of U.S. mortality disparities. We focus on ~100 major causes of death and for each one investigate whether mortality disparities increased or decreased from 1989-2005. The results indicate that widening disparities play a substantial role in U.S. mortality disparities: were it not for newly widening disparities from 1989 to 2005, then the level of mortality disparities in the U.S. would be 20% smaller than it is today. We find also that it is surprisingly easy to predict which causes of death will widen in the near future. We conclude that serious efforts to reduce mortality disparities in the U.S. should focus not only on reducing existing mortality disparities, but also on preventing new ones from forming or growing.	Richard	 Miech	Fred	C. Pampel	Jinyoung	 Kim	Richard	G. Rogers
2010	128	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality	Socioeconomic Differences in Education Reporting and Their Effect on Estimates of Life Expectancy by Educational Attainment in the U.S.	This paper analyzes education reporting on the death certificate and its effect on estimates of life expectancy by education level in the U.S. The National Longitudinal Mortality Study was used to compare educational attainment as reported on the death certificate for individuals to their educational attainment as reported in the Current Population Survey. Blacks and Hispanics were found to be more likely than members of other groups to have their educational attainment underreported on the death certificate. The NLMS was also used with vital statistics data to produce estimates of life expectancy by educational attainment in the U.S. that were adjusted for education misreporting on the death certificate. These estimates show large disparities in life expectancy by education level in the U.S., on the order of 10-12 years for females and 11-16 years for males.	Brian	 Rostron
2010	128	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality	Socio-Economic Status and Mortality: Perceptions and Outcomes	This paper uses over 300,000 person-years of observation in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to study the relationship of education, income, and wealth to mortality expectations and mortality outcomes in older Americans. Using quintiles to facilitate comparison across variables, we find that all three SES measures significantly predict mortality, but that education is weaker than the other two which are realized later in life. Conversely, the mortality expectations offered by HRS respondents place greater weight on education and less on wealth. SES accounts for most of black-white differentials in mortality, whereas it unveils an Hispanic advantage relative to whites that was masked by lower SES. Hispanics and women consistently overestimate their mortality relative to others. The final version of the paper will incorporate measures of health and health behaviors.	David	 Weir
2010	128	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality	How Do Rising Educational Levels Affect Individual Lifespan Variation? Estonia and Lithuania Examined over the 1990s	In a previous study we showed how individual level lifespan variation could be decomposed into the sum of between-group inequalities and within-group variation. Here we extended this work by decomposing time trends in lifespan variation to include direct and compositional changes on the between- and within-group components. We applied these methods to Estonia and Lithuania over the 1990s, countries that experienced both widening educational inequalities in mortality and upward shifts in the educational composition. We found that in Estonia, the increased lifespan variation owed to both higher between- and within-group components, albeit tempered by the upward shift in education. In Lithuania, lifespan variation declined during the 1990s. This was entirely due to compositional changes, as the subgroups themselves experienced both widening differences in average lifespan and increases in the spread around that average. Such decompositions improve our understanding of the determinants of mortality, and their impact on lifespan variation.	Alyson	A. van Raalte	Anton	 Kunst	Johan	P. Mackenbach
2010	129	Demographic Studies Based on Biomarkers	Measuring Diurnal Cortisol Change in a Population-Based Field Study: Don’t Try This at Home (Alone)	Biomarkers are increasingly used in population-based field research. This paper describes evaluation of a three-sample, one-day, post-interview protocol for collecting saliva and assaying cortisol concentrations in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) Wave IV Pretest. The Pretest included 193 Add Health respondents, 97% of whom agreed to collect and return samples by mail. Only 88% of consenters returned samples. Of samples received, 25% were missing self-reported collection times. For respondents not missing times, 73% reported adhering to protocol, but only 43% verifiably adhered to key morning procedures designed to estimate cortisol response to awakening. Embedded experiments indicated no consistent effects of monetary incentives or respondent awareness of monitoring on adherence. The short-term reliability of cortisol was low, partly due to protocol non-adherence. Findings indicate that population-based field studies should carefully evaluate the feasibility of, adherence to, and reliability of biomarkers assayed in unsupervised, participant-conducted biospecimen collection protocols.	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern	Eric	A.  Whitsel	Brandon	 Wagner
2010	129	Demographic Studies Based on Biomarkers	The Feasibility of Collecting Physical Measures and Biomarkers in Cross-National Studies	Two new and innovative trends are changing the face of population-based studies of health and ageing: the integration of physical measures and biomarkers into large-scale population surveys, and cross-national survey collaborations. Using three longitudinal studies of middle-aged and older adults as examples, we discuss the processes, benefits and challenges involved in physical measure and biomarker data collection in cross-national studies. The surveys include the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) in the U.S., the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA); and the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE), which spans fourteen countries. The paper focuses on different aspects of the collection of physical measures and biomarkers: collection protocols, personnel used to collect the measures, standardization of training, and information provided to respondents. Additionally, we present data on cooperation rates for the physical measures and biomarkers across countries, as well as interviewer variability on several of the key measures.	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Heidi	 Guyer	Carli	 Lessof	Kate	 Cox
2010	129	Demographic Studies Based on Biomarkers	Biological Indicators in a Nationally Representative Sample of Young Adults: How Do Add Health Wave IV Biomarkers Measure Up?	While most large-scale, population-based social surveys with biomarkers have focused on aging in older populations, the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) collected biomarkers from a cohort of young adults 24-32 years old in the study’s fourth wave (2007-2008). These biomarker data representing multiple systems, in combination with rich longitudinal data on demographic, psychosocial, and behavioral information across all four waves, are a valuable resource for understanding how health problems and subclinical disease emerge at earlier ages. We compare the collection, measurement, assay techniques, and distributions of biomarkers in Add Health with data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2007-2008. Sociodemographic patterns of high risk levels of individual biological indicators in Add Health are examined. This paper provides a descriptive profile of biomarkers in Add Health that is important for informing research using these data to study the transition from adolescence to young adulthood.	Laura	 Chyu	Thomas	W. McDade	Emma	 Adam
2010	129	Demographic Studies Based on Biomarkers	Field Study of Gallbladder Diseases in Rural Gangetic Basin of North India, Impact of Environmental and Life Style Risk Factors	In this paper an attempt is made to study the prevalence of gallbladder diseases (GBD) including Gall bladder cancer (GBC) and gall stones in villages in the Gangetic basin in Northern India and to evaluate lifestyle and environment as potential risk factors. An ultrasonography of the abdomen was done for those with symptoms, 5,100 (2,078 men and 3,022 women) along with an asymptomatic group of 1,448 (547 Men and 901 women) as controls. Heavy metal and organochloride pesticide content was estimated in soil and water, Ultrasonography revealed GBD in 3.7% males and 6.3% females. GBD is 1.8 times more in females> 50 years age. The relative risk of GBD was higher in multiparous females, persons with blood relations suffering from GBD. Cluster analysis points to a correlation with pollutants – Nickel, Cadmium and chromium in water and higher incidence of villages of GBD in the Vaishali district where a cluster of 10 villages account for 75% of GBD.	Sayeed	 Unisa	Tarun	K. Roy
2010	130	The Health and Mortality Impact of HIV/AIDS	Global Trends in AIDS Mortality	This paper reviews the evolution of the HIV/AIDS epidemic and provides estimates of past trends and future projections of several AIDS mortality indicators. A cumulative total of 24 million people have died from AIDS between 1980 and 2007, and by 2030 this total is projected to reach 75 million. Despite the rapid spread of this new disease during the 1980s and 1990s, the epidemic has reached a major turning point in recent years as the rate of new infections peaked and began a decline. Worldwide, the proportion of all deaths caused by AIDS reached 3.9 percent in 2004. This proportion varies widely from a high of 15 percent in sub-Saharan Africa to around one percent in Asia and other regions. In the future, the number of AIDS deaths and the proportion of deaths due to AIDS are projected to remain approximately at their current plateaus.	John	 Bongaarts	François	 Pelletier	Patrick	 Gerland
2010	130	The Health and Mortality Impact of HIV/AIDS	Assessing the Population Attributable Fraction of the Acute Stage of HIV in Zimbabwe through Network Modeling	The proportion of new HIV infections stemming from source partners in the acute stage of infection is disproportionately high, but the importance of relational timing is not yet clear. We use dynamic exponential random graph modeling (implemented in statnet) along with a stochastic simulation model of HIV transmission dynamics to estimate the proportion of infections from three stages of HIV disease (acute, chronic, AIDS). Given behavioral data from Zimbabwe, the estimates at equilibrium are 22%, 49% and 29% respectively. The role of acute infections was more strongly affected by concurrency than by the range of published stage-specific transmission probabilities. Although acute transmission appears to account for a minority of new infections, reducing its impact -- by reducing either acute viral load or the probability someone has additional partners during early infection – could bring the epidemic below the reproductive threshold in populations marked by low rates of partner change but relatively high rates of long-term partner concurrency.	Steven	M. Goodreau	Susan	L. Cassels	Martina	 Morris	April	A. Greek	Danuta	 Kasprzyk	Daniel	 Montano
2010	130	The Health and Mortality Impact of HIV/AIDS	Caring for African Orphans: A Comparative Review of Existing Institutional Arrangements	Africa’s orphan population has trebled in the last two decades, and this growth raises questions about how societies care for these orphans. My paper addresses two questions: (1) Do extended families –that have historically been relied upon-- still adequately accommodate orphans in sub Saharan Africa? (2) How effective are alternative arrangements –notably international adoption, foster care, and orphanages-- relative to extended families? I begin with a typology of existing care institutions then develop a framework for analyzing their relative effectiveness. My analysis shows that the extended family system still provides the greatest coverage for African orphans; yet, it is limited in quality and accountability. I then discuss possible complementarity and synergy between the various care institutions.	Vongai	 Kandiwa
2010	130	The Health and Mortality Impact of HIV/AIDS	HIV/AIDS in the Slums Of Nairobi: The Capacity of the Private Health Sector to Respond to the High Disease Burden	Amidst rapid urbanization which has led to a majority of urban residents to live in slums, Kenya with a prevalence of 6.7 % is also grappling with the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Hefty rural-urban and intra-urban differences have been exhibited. The undeserved slums with high HIV burden have proliferation of private health providers. We conducted a cross-sectional survey of 503 health facilities in three slums in Nairobi. Among 498 were private clinics. Among the private facilities, 87.5 % were private-for-profit (PFP) and others were private-not-for-profit (PNFP). The PNFP were more likely to offer HIV/AIDS related services than PFP providers. Less than 5% of facilities offered Anti-retroviral therapy and TB treatment with DOTs. Only 8% of all facilities had full capacity to offer HIV/AIDS services. Health policies that allow all players in the health field to offer high quality services tailored to the needs of slum dwellers are needed to reduce the burden.	George	 Mgomella	Akaco	 Ekirapa	Catherine	 Kyobutungi
2010	131	Contextual and Policy Influences on Reproductive Health and Fertility	Wanted Fertility, Unwanted Fertility, and Fertility Decline: A Fresh Assessment	Fertility decline occurs as a result of decline in desired fertility and/or reduction in unwanted births. The relative weight of these two sources of decline is subject to dispute, with direct implications for public policy (in particular, the justification for investment in family planning programs). This paper takes a fresh look at this issue. The contribution is substantive and methodological: (i) The analysis encompasses three decades (roughly 1975-2005), a longer time-span than previous analyses. (ii) Change in fertility is directly examined, rather than inferring change from cross-sectional patterns (as in other past influential analyses). (iii) The analysis uses new methodology for estimating the percentage of births unwanted and wanted/unwanted fertility rates. (iv) A new decomposition of fertility decline into contributions of wanted and unwanted fertility is developed and applied. Patterns by major region and stage of transition are examined. Particular attention is given to prospects for further decline in Africa.	John	B. Casterline	Jennifer	A. Mendoza	Laila	 El-Zeini
2010	131	Contextual and Policy Influences on Reproductive Health and Fertility	Reproductive Health Laws, Contraceptive Use, and Fertility Trends Around the World	In this paper we examine the effect of changes in reproductive health laws on contraceptive use and fertility outcomes around the world. We develop an index of abortion, contraception, and voluntary sterilization laws around the world dating from 1970 to the present. Merging this with data from the Demographic and Health Survey, we analyze how changes in the laws affected contraceptive use, and then how the laws and uptake of abortion, contraception, and sterilization affected the fertility rate over time and across countries. Using data from the 76 DHS countries merged with the reproductive health index, we find that more liberal abortion, contraceptive, and sterilization laws are associated with higher contraceptive prevalence and lower fertility rates. However, religion and a country’s legal origins play key roles in explaining the heterogeneous relationship between the law, use, and fertility trends across countries and over time.	David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning	Jocelyn	E. Finlay
2010	131	Contextual and Policy Influences on Reproductive Health and Fertility	Using Population Policies and Non-Governmental Organizations to Explain HIV/AIDS Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa	There exists no consistent explanation for why some countries are successful in combating HIV/AIDS and others are not (de Waal 2006). We need an explanation in order to design effective policies and programs to improve reproductive health. This paper combines short case studies (Senegal, Nigeria, and Malawi) with analysis of quantitative, country-level data to determine how strategies used in sub-Saharan African countries in the 1980s and 1990s to slow population growth impacted later success in reducing the prevalence of HIV/AIDS. Specifically, I test the model that countries with strong efforts to reduce population growth were left with 1) reproductive health care infrastructure, 2) non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and 3) practice convincing people to alter intimate behaviors that then translated into effective HIV interventions. This paper thus considers the organizational and institutional context, set by population policies and NGOs working on both family planning and HIV/AIDS, for reproductive health outcomes.	Rachel	S. Robinson
2010	131	Contextual and Policy Influences on Reproductive Health and Fertility	Community Factors Shaping the Sexual Behavior of Married Males in 8 African Countries	It is now recognized that heterosexual transmission is the most common mode of transmission of HIV in developing countries. However, the role of structural elements of the community in shaping male sexual behaviors remains poorly understood. The aim of this project was to investigate the associations between community-level characteristics and the sexual behaviors of married men (15-54) using DHS from 8 African countries: Chad, Ghana, Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The analysis models an ordinal variable measuring whether the respondent reports that he had risky sex. The results demonstrate that there is no single community influence on men’s sexual behavior, and the significant community-level factors vary across each of the 8 study settings. The results highlight a range of community level factors that can be harnessed in the development of interventions aimed at improving safer sexual practices and stemming the heterosexual transmission of HIV.	Rob	 Stephenson
2010	132	Separation and Divorce	Trends in the Gender Education Gap in Marriage and Marital Dissolution	In contrast to the traditional pattern in which men marry women with less education than themselves, today, when one partner has more education than the other in the U.S., it is likely to be the wife. Previous research has found that couples in which wives’ education exceeds their husbands’ are more likely to divorce. Nevertheless, we might expect the negative effects of wives’ higher education on marital stability to decline as these relationships become more common. The goals of this study are to (a) describe the changing characteristics of marriages in which wives “marry down” and (b) investigate the changing relationship between spouses’ relative educational attainment and marital dissolution.	Christine	R. Schwartz	Hongyun	 Han
2010	132	Separation and Divorce	Household Income after Separation: Does Initiator Status Make a Difference?	This study investigated whether and to what extent taking the initiative to separate impacted on equivalised annual household income after separation. The analytic sample comprised 6,476 first marriages of men and women at wave 1 of the Household Income and Labor Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey who are followed over the subsequent 6 waves. Using mixed effect regression models, the results suggested there were no significant differences in equivalised annual household income for men or women who initiated separation relative to men or women who reported a partner or jointly initiated separation. Overall, men who remained married had significantly lower equivalized household income than those who separated. In contrast women who separated experienced a significant drop in their equivalised household income relative to women who remained married. These gender differences were significant. The findings are consistent with previous research indicating men’s equivalised household income increases and women’s decreases after separation.	Belinda	 Hewitt
2010	132	Separation and Divorce	Her Value Orientations, His Value Orientations, and Marital Dissolution Risk	Prior research has found associations between marital dissolution risk and measures of spouses’ value orientation, but results have conflicted regarding the relative importance of the orientations of wives and husbands. This paper outlines six distinct perspectives on the relationship between value orientations and marital dissolution. It also discusses limitations in previous empirical approaches that render them unable to differentiate between those perspectives and, in turn, to accurately describe how value orientations of wives and husbands predict dissolution risk. It examines the various perspectives using multiple modeling strategies, including a typological approach that allows for clear, intuitive empirical tests of the predictions produced by each perspective. Results show that both spouses’ value orientations matter and that the observed associations of one spouse’s values are contingent on the orientation of the other. Dissolution risk is highest among couples with a traditionally-oriented husband and a wife with a more modern orientation.	Andrew	 Clarkwest
2010	132	Separation and Divorce	Relationship Stability Following An Unintended Birth	Extensive research has shown that children increase union stability, particularly for marital unions. However, the impact of intendedness of births on relationship stability has not been empirically examined. Since intention status reflects both perceived relationship stability and perceived readiness to parent, the impact of intended and unintended births is likely to differ. Given the high proportion of unintended births in the United States, assessing possible differences is important in understanding the stability of cohabiting and marital unions. This analysis compares relationship outcomes after first and higher-order intended and unintended births. Results using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth show that both marriages and cohabitations are more likely to dissolve after an unintended first birth than after an intended first birth. The instability associated with an unintended first birth is persistent, and an unintended higher-parity birth following an intended first birth also increases instability.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2010	133	Globalization and Family Changes	International Fertility Change: New Data and Insights from the Developmental Idealism Framework	Many structural and ideational explanations have been offered for family and fertility changes. In this paper we focus on developmental idealism—an important set of beliefs endorsing development, family change, and the causal connections between development and family behavior. Developmental idealism is argued to be a force affecting the family-related behavior of ordinary people. We present new survey data from Argentina, China, Egypt, Iran, Nepal, and the United States about the extent to which developmental idealism is believed in everyday life. We ask if individuals believe that fertility and development are correlated, that development changes fertility, and that fertility declines increase standard of living. Finally, we ask whether individuals prefer very low fertility. The data show a widespread linkage in people’s minds between fertility and development, as large fractions believe that fertility and development are correlated and that fertility and development mutually affect each other.	Arland	 Thornton	Georgina	 Binstock	Mohammad	J. Abbasi-Shavazi 	Dirgha	J. Ghimire
2010	133	Globalization and Family Changes	Explaining Attitudes Towards Demographic Behaviour	Economic and demographic developments are closely related. Although there is variation across countries, it is clear that the first demographic transition – characterized by fertility and mortality declines, was accompanied by dramatic economic and structural progress. Following the first demographic transition, new and more sophisticated demographic behaviour emerged, which, in the demography literature, is termed the Second Demographic Transition. A precondition for these new types of behaviours to take place is that individuals’ attitudes towards demographic behaviour also change. Whereas the demography literature makes a clear distinction between the First and Second Demographic transitions, evolutionary biologists argue that today’s modern attitudes and value orientations follow a diachronic path predominantly driven by economic development. Our paper provides a critical review of these explanations. Using unique individual level data from the European Social Survey, we develop a Modern Family Attitude (MFA) index and compare 25 countries.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Vittorio	 Bassi	Maria	 Sironi
2010	133	Globalization and Family Changes	Marriage Timing in Post-Transition Kazakhstan: Who is the Minority Group Now?	Event history models using the nationally representative 1995 and 1999 Kazakhstan Demographic and Health Surveys investigate the transition to marriage among women between ages 15 and 49, comparing marriage timing for women who were of marriage age before the fall of the Soviet Union to that for women of marriage age during the dissolution period and independence. A double paradox is found for marriage timing in Kazakhstan. The post-transition cohort in Kazakhstan shows a trend opposite to that seen in some post-transition eastern European countries--women at risk of marriage during and after the transition marry earlier, not later, than women marrying before the transition. Across all education groups, Europeans marry the earliest regardless of cohort. Russified Kazakhs, most like Europeans linguistically, economically and culturally, nevertheless marry significantly later than either Europeans or other ethnic Kazakhs.	Elwood	 Carlson	Heather	 Griffis
2010	133	Globalization and Family Changes	Economic Foundation of Marriage in the Context of Labor Market Changes	Using representative panel data with rich information on labor market experience, this study examines to what extent the recent shifts in economic structure and substantial labor market changes under the process of economic globalization are associated with transition into first marriage, one of the key behaviors in recent family changes. This preliminary analysis focuses on Japan, where family changes and economic restructuring have been substantial in recent years relative to other nations with advanced economies. Results indicate that higher income is positively associated with transition into first marriage, that self-employment and family work decrease the hazard of first marriage, and that working hours play important mediating roles between employment and first marriage among the Japanese women. Subsequent extensions of these analyses will seek to compare these results with U.S. data (NLSY) and interpret differences between patterns observed among women in Japan and the U.S. in a comparative perspective.	So-jung	 Lim
2010	134	Latino Family Structure and Economic Well-Being	Parental Immigration Documentation History and Second Generation Education Attainment	This analysis aims to bridge the issues of undocumented status and the assimilation of the immigrant second generation in the U.S. by exploring the impact that first generation parental documentation history may have on the number of years of schooling achieved by the second generation. Data for this analysis is drawn from the Mexican American Study Project, a survey of more than 1,000 Mexican-Americans in Los Angeles and San Antonio first conducted in 1965 with follow-up interviews of both the original participants and their adult children in 2000. While there was no evidence that having a parent who was one-time undocumented affects the number of years of schooling achieved by a child, the inclusion of documentation history increases the importance of maternal human capital and diminishes the effect of private schooling on second generation outcomes.	Alejandro	 Rivas
2010	134	Latino Family Structure and Economic Well-Being	“We Are Family” – Family Identity and Obligation across Contexts: A Comparison of Latino Youth in North Carolina and Southern California	Social contexts are often ignored as a possible explanation for ethnic group differences in reports of family obligation. One reason is that too often, social scientists rely on the false dichotomy between economic versus cultural explanations as the culprit behind human social behavior. This study adds much needed nuance to the literature on family obligation, caregiving norms and so-called cultural differences among ethnic minority youth and their majority peers by using data from North Carolina and Southern California to investigate how social contexts shape ethnic identities, which in turn influence feelings of future family obligation. The study controls for potential ethnic group differences by examining Latino adolescents only; it also takes into account socioeconomic conditions by controlling for parents’ education and work status. What is left is a rare comparison of the effects of social contexts on family identity and ethnic identity among Latino youth in the United States.	Jenjira	 Yahirun	Krista	 Perreira	Andrew	 Fuligni
2010	134	Latino Family Structure and Economic Well-Being	Individualism or (Inter)Dependence? Familism and Acculturation among Low-Income Latina Mothers and Its Links to Child Wellbeing	Using longitudinal ethnographic data collected as a part of Welfare, Families, and Children: A Three-City Study, this study examined 39 low-income Latina mothers of young children to investigate the intersection of familism and acculturation, links to family interdependence, and how these processes relate to child wellbeing. By situating the analysis in acculturation theory and a transactional model of child development, this study revealed that mothers employ different strategies for family support and dependency according to their acculturation level and endorsement of familistic values. The findings also discredited the idea that the acculturation/familism association is strictly an inverse one, and showed that endorsement of familistic values can be high even among highly acculturated mothers who maintain an emphasis on their ethnic identity. Support for familism as a protective characteristic for child development was mixed, as children showed a range of troubling outcomes on school achievement, behavior, and health.	Angela	 Valdovinos D'Angelo
2010	134	Latino Family Structure and Economic Well-Being	Household Structure, Migration Communities and Child Poverty: An Investigation of Poverty among the Children of Mexican Migrants	The children of Mexican immigrants to the United States both experience higher rates of poverty and reside in extended-household living arrangements to a greater degree than other ethnic groups. I use 2000 Census data to investigate the nature of the relationship between various kinds of living arrangements and poverty among such children and their families. Viewing extended-households as a form of social support that results primarily from processes of network migration, I expect that different kinds of extended living arrangements offer varying degrees of economic support to household members. Furthermore, I expect that the nature of the relationship varies across destination regions given much diversity in both economic activities and development of migration networks in the places that Mexican immigrants settle. My findings are largely consistent with my expectations that children who reside in households indicative of less settled migration networks, all else equal, experience higher rates of poverty.	Mark	A. Leach
2010	135	Interrelationships between Parents, Schools, Sexual Behavior, and Fertility	High School Sports and Teenage Births	Past studies find that high school athletes are much less likely to experience a teenage birth. We find that this correlation depends on the additional controls included in the model. We exploit the rapid expansion of sports participation among girls created by Title IX and find that overall just the opposite is true. We find that a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of girls playing sports in a state increases the teen birth rate by 0.3 percentage points (about a 10% increase). However, there are racial differences in the effect of sports participation. The increase in the teen birth rate is most pronounced for white young women with some suggestive evidence that sports decrease teen birth rates among black young women.	Joseph	P. Price	Daniel	 Simon	Betsey	 Stevenson
2010	135	Interrelationships between Parents, Schools, Sexual Behavior, and Fertility	Sex and the Classroom: Can Boosting Teenage Schooling Rates Be a Weapon Against HIV?	Recent evidence suggests that Conditional Cash Transfer Programs (CCTs) for schooling are effective in raising school enrolment and attendance. However, there is reason to believe that such programs can also affect other outcomes, such as the sexual behavior and subsequent HIV risk of their young beneficiaries. The Zomba Cash Transfer Program (ZCTP) is a randomized ongoing CCT intervention targeting young women in Malawi that provides incentives (in the form of school fees and cash transfers) to current schoolgirls and recent dropouts to stay in or return to school. An average offer of US$10/month conditional on satisfactory school attendance led to significant declines in early marriage, teenage pregnancy, self-reported sexual activity and HIV risk among program beneficiaries after just one year of program implementation. Overall, these results suggest that CCT programs not only serve as useful tools for improving school attendance, but may also reduce sexual activity and risk of HIV.	Sarah	 Baird	Berk	 Ozler
2010	135	Interrelationships between Parents, Schools, Sexual Behavior, and Fertility	Is it Necessary to Walk the Talk? The Effects of Parental Experiences and Communication on Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Recent social marketing campaigns exhort parents to talk to their children about drug and alcohol use and/or sexual abstinence. The efficacy of such campaigns is difficult to ascertain, however, if parents are more likely to broach these topics with adolescents with otherwise greater propensities for risky behavior. While extant research recognizes the importance of family environment and parenting activities, little has been done to separately control for the various aspects of parenting that might confound the influence of the marketing campaigns. This research aims to separately identify the effects of parenting style, a parent’s own risky behavior, and the parent’s communication about risky behavior on her adolescent’s sexual behavior.	Susan	L. Averett	Sarah	M. Estelle
2010	135	Interrelationships between Parents, Schools, Sexual Behavior, and Fertility	Does the Number of Sex Partners Affect School Attainment?	We use data on young women from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to explore the relationship between number of sex partners and educational attainment. Using the average physical development of male schoolmates to generate plausibly exogenous variation in number of sex partners, instrumental variables estimates suggest that number of sex partners is negatively related to educational attainment, a result that is consistent with the argument that romantic involvements are time consuming and can impose substantial emotional costs on adolescent and young adult females. The estimated relationship between number of sex partners and educational attainment is robust to controlling for teen fertility and age at first intercourse, and persists when age at first intercourse is treated as an endogenous variable. We conclude that reducing the number of sex partners during adolescence and young adulthood may yield modest educational benefits.	Joseph	J. Sabia
2010	136	Transition to Adulthood	Standardization of Pathways to Adulthood? An Analysis of Dutch Cohorts Born Between 1850 and 1900	This paper examines pathways to adulthood among cohorts born in the second half of the nineteenth century. Although largely overlooked by previous studies, theory suggests that life courses of young adults born during this period were already influenced by a process of standardization, in the sense that they became more similar over time. Using data from a Dutch registry-based sample, we examine household trajectories, that is, sequences of living arrangements of young adults aged 15-40. Our study shows that for successive cohorts household trajectories became more similar. We identified six types of trajectories: early death, life-cycle service, early family formation, late family formation, spinster- and bachelorhood, and childless and with partner. Over time, early family formation gradually became the ‘standard’ trajectory to adulthood. Laboring class youths, farmers’ daughters, young people of mixed religious background, and urban-born youngsters were the nineteenth century forerunners of a ‘standard’ pathway to adulthood.	Hilde	 Bras	Aart	C. Liefbroer	Cees	H. Elzinga
2010	136	Transition to Adulthood	Divergents Paths to Adulthood in Mexico	The socioeconomic changes that Mexico experienced before the turn of the century altered the context in which young people transitioned to adulthood. To understand the effects of these socioeconomic changes and the particular institutional settings, the paper explores how Mexican adolescents born between 1976 and 1988 experienced five transitions: leaving school, entering the labor force, leaving the parental home, starting a union and becoming a parent. The paper attempts to advance this field by studying several transitions together and linking them with the particular demographic conditions, social context and institutional arrangements. The results showed that the persistent social inequality in Mexico resulted in two distinct transition patterns to adulthood—one applying to the great majority and the other to a small elite group. Social institutions had a very weak influence on the timing of the transitions in the productive sphere and family resources influenced the transitions in the reproductive sphere.	Silvia	 Giorguli-Saucedo
2010	136	Transition to Adulthood	Transitions to Adulthood by Housing Status: A Cross Cohort Comparison	Living in public housing as a child has been consistently linked to a wide range of indicators of disadvantage during adulthood, but there also is evidence that the relationships have changed over time. Focusing on transitions from school and the parental home and into employment, partnership and parenthood, we examine differences in the timing of transitions to adulthood by the type of housing status at age 16. We hypothesize that differences in the timing of important transitions might help explain the significant link between childhood social housing and negative adult outcomes by setting in place pathways to disadvantage. Preliminary analyses show no significant differences in home leaving by housing status at age 16 but significantly faster transitions into partnerships and parenthood. Cross cohort comparisons suggest that the transition to adulthood for owner occupiers became more protracted over time while for those in social housing there was less change.	Dylan	 Kneale	Wendy	 Sigle-Rushton
2010	136	Transition to Adulthood	Cross-Time and Cross-National Comparisons of the Transition to Adulthood: Brazil, Mexico, and South Korea, 1970-2000	Using census data from Brazil, Mexico, and South Korea in 1970 and 2000, we conduct cross-time and cross-national comparisons of the transition to adulthood. The three countries, which showed relatively similar levels of demographic, economic, and educational development in 1970, have, since then, followed considerably different trajectories of economic and educational models. We examine how these different national “scenes” produced very different patterns of transition to adulthood. To measure the timing and complexity of the transition to adulthood as a whole, we apply entropy analysis that provides a single measure summarizing combinations of multiple demographic statuses held by young people. We compare the age distributions of entropy measures across countries in each year to identify which countries show more heterogeneity in status combinations at specific stage of life course, how the patterns have changed over time, and how they relate to the economic development trajectories of these three countries.	Hyunjoon	 Park	Carlos	 Costa Ribeiro	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2010	137	Family Structure and HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa	Female Headship, Status and HIV/AIDS in Rural South Africa	Female headship is often equated with vulnerability, crisis, disorganization, and by extension, low social status. Epidemic levels of HIV/AIDS in South Africa further compound these portraits of hopelessness. With increasing percentages of female-headed households, it is critical to examine the ways that financial and social status mediate female heads’ ability to cope with negative disruptions to their households—like an AIDS illness, death, or caring for orphaned children. Without diminishing the importance of the enormous responsibilities confronting female-heads, we argue that considerable heterogeneity in status and coping exists. We analyze qualitative interviews with female heads and members of their households in a rural community in South Africa to assess the role of female heads’ status in the coping capabilities of their households. Important policy implications emerge from the ways in which our typologies of status highlight individual and household vulnerabilities, but also illuminate the potential for agency and resilience.	Enid	 Schatz	Jill	 Williams
2010	137	Family Structure and HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa	Child and Young Adult Households in the Context of the AIDS epidemic in Zimbabwe , 1988-2006	It has been assumed that the emergence of Child-Headed Households (CHH) and Young Adult Households (YAH) is an indicator of the erosion of the traditional safety nets and a direct consequence of the increasing number of orphans in sub-Saharan Africa. However, the initial evidence presented so far suggests the process of formation of CHH and YAH is more complex than it appears to be. Using the four available waves of the DHS in Zimbabwe (1988, 1994, 1999, and 2005/2006) we find that the proportion of households with no adults have remained stable in the last years, although the number of orphans have increased significantly. In fact, a large number of children living in CHH are non-orphans which suggests that these kind of living arrangements are not always a direct consequence of parental death. Moreover, our analysis show that CHH and YAH are less likely to have unmet basic needs than children in households headed by working-age adults.	Daniel	 Ciganda	Eric	 Tenkorang
2010	137	Family Structure and HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa	HIV-Related Deaths and Economic Shocks: Does Survivors’ Consumption Recover Over Time in Kwazulu-Natal?	AIDS-related death represents a long-term shock episode characterised by a series of events that unfold as illness progresses and households respond to deaths. Recent research on the impact of HIV and AIDS on rural livelihoods in Sub-Saharan Africa has highlighted the heterogeneity of impacts of HIV and AIDS morbidity and mortality on households’ demographic and economic resources. This paper explores the temporal dimension of the impact of adult deaths on survivors’ consumption differentiating by cause of death and sex of the dead person. Effects can in fact be heterogeneous with deaths affecting welfare differentially depending on how long ago they occurred. This paper contributes to the estimation of the gross effects of adult mortality while addressing the endogeneity of adult deaths to consumption, unobserved heterogeneity and correcting for bias due to the temporal auto-correlation of household consumption.	Alessandra	 Garbero	Ian	M. Timaeus
2010	137	Family Structure and HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa	Men’s Labor Migration and Women’s Informal Communication on HIV/AIDS in Mozambique	This study employs social capital perspectives to examine men’s labor migration and informal communication about HIV/AIDS of wives who stay behind in southern Mozambique. We compare three groups: women whose husbands were current labor migrants, those whose husbands have been away for some time and those who were married to non-migrants. Using multi-level random intercept models, we find that women married to current migrants were more likely than those whose husbands have been away and non-migrants’ wives to converse about HIV/AIDS. Such communication was likely to occur with social network partners whose husbands have also migrated. We also find that women who are very worried about getting HIV/AIDS infection from their husbands are more likely to engage in conversations about HIV/AIDS. We analyze qualitative data collected in parallel with our survey and interpret our findings within the context of labor migration and the social construction of HIV/AIDS risk and prevention in sub-Saharan Africa.	Victor	 Agadjanian
2010	138	Men's Roles in Families and Relationships	Father Care, Father Share in Comparative Perspective	Using harmonised data from the national time-use surveys of USA, Australia, Denmark, Italy and France, we draw on the records of both members of couple households (except in the USA) to compare by gender absolute and relative time parents spend in i) childcare as a main activity; ii) the activities that comprise childcare and iii) time caring for children in sole charge. Overall parental care time is highest in Australia and the USA, and lowest in France. In all the countries mothers spend more time caring for children than fathers, more of the childcare they do is routine and physical care, and they take much more sole responsibility for childcare. The gender gap in both amount and nature of care is smallest in Denmark, where policy and rhetoric explicitly aim to both support women’s workforce participation and involve fathers in childcare. Within other countries, households in which women work fulltime have similar outcomes on some measures.	Lyn	 Craig	Killian	 Mullan
2010	138	Men's Roles in Families and Relationships	Fathers’ Involvement and Fathers’ Wellbeing Over Children’s First Five Years	Despite the growing scholarly attention to father involvement, the consequences for men of being fathers have been little explored. Most studies have focused on whether and how father involvement affects children. Yet, since family relationships are dynamic and influence individual-level change, one would expect that fathers’ investments in children--and the affective quality of relationship that results (whether close, distant or contentious)--could potentially affect fathers’ own wellbeing. In this paper, we use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study with random and fixed effects models to examine how the level of and change in fathers’ involvement with children is associated with men’s own wellbeing with respect to educational attainment, employment, earnings, income, physical health, depression, substance use, religious attendance and whether ever incarcerated. We find notable differences between co-resident and non-resident fathers, and we discuss the implications of our results for future research and public policy.	Marcia	J. Carlson	Kimberly	 Turner
2010	138	Men's Roles in Families and Relationships	A Study of Involvement of Men in Maternity in Jammu and Kashmir, India	Both men and women make important contributions to the production of children, yet demographic studies of fertility and family planning have tended to focus on women alone or have looked at men from a narrow range of approaches. The main objectives of this study is to know the attitudes of men regarding the family size preferences, family planning and women’s health, their involvement and participation in maternity, delivery, post-natal care and family planning. We plan to use the National Family Health Survey-3 data conducted in India during 2005-2006. We have also conducted a few focus group discussions to examine the issue. We use both bivariate as well as logic regression analysis and results show that men in Jammu and Kashmir are now participating in accompanying their spouses to utilize antenatal and post natal care services but are not taking the responsibility of accepting male methods of contraception.	Bashir	A. Bhat
2010	138	Men's Roles in Families and Relationships	Role of Men in the Modern Georgian Family; What is More Important for Georgians: Traditions or the New Social Realities?	This paper is based on the results of the first wave of the “Generations and Gender Survey” conducted in by the Georgian Centre of Population Research in 2006. This study provides comprehensive data allowing us to analyse for the first time the features of gender relationships in the Georgian family on the basis of a large-scale representative statistical survey. The recent social changes in Georgia are accompanied by the resistance of two contrasting processes: progress toward an open and more human society with European style of life from one side and oriental model, inherited from the long-standing traditional values and attitudes – from the other. This resistance makes a significant impact on the relationships between partners and gender roles in the family and society.	Shorena	 Tsiklauri
2010	139	Historical Demography	Gender and the Laws Of Migration: A Reconsideration of Nineteenth-Century Patterns	Scholars in many disciplines have observed that men historically outnumbered women among international movers. Among internal migrants, however, the picture has never been so clear. E.G. Ravenstein's influential laws of migration argued that short-distance and within-country moves were typically dominated by women. Focusing on internal migration, our paper uses new census microdata to take a fresh look at the relationship between gender and geographic mobility in nineteenth-century Europe and North America. We argue that there was a significant flaw in the analysis that led Ravenstein to his conclusions about gender and migration, and that this flaw has implications for more recent studies of the long-term feminization of migration. Whereas Ravenstein relied on published summary tables from the 1881 British census, our analysis uses complete-count individual-level data from that census, as well as similar data from the United States and Norway during the same period.	Trent	 Alexander	Annemarie	 Steidl
2010	139	Historical Demography	The Reward of Audacity? Looking at Migration Gains in Urbanizing France, 1870-1940	Migration may be view as a way to take advantage of opportunities on distant labor markets. However few studies were able to quantify the relationship between social and geographic mobility. By combining a large database that gives information on both individuals and their family with military registers that provide detailed migration history, we can assess social and wealth mobility for both migrants and stayers. At the end of the 19th century, France experienced high economic growth that created spatial heterogeneity and a standardization of education levels. Then we expect social mobility to be high. We show that, indeed, migrants are more socially mobile but they also have much less wealth than stayers. This may be linked to the high cost of migrating as well as to different strategies or tastes regarding assets accumulation. Finally, we use family characteristics to account for migrants’ selection.	Lionel	 Kesztenbaum
2010	139	Historical Demography	Household Predictors of the Presence of Life Cycle Servants in Orkney, Scotland, 1851-1901	In household formation systems that feature late age at marriage, such as those of preindustrial Northwest Europe, young people often leave the parental home, in which they were born and raised, to circulate among other households as servants before marriage. In preindustrial agrarian societies, such as 19th century Orkney, Scotland, a household’s food consumption needs and available labor force were largely determined by its age and sex composition. The presence of a life-cycle servant is likely to have consequences for both household production and consumption. By adding a servant, or sending a member out as a servant, a household can adjust its composition during changing economic conditions and times of labor shortage or surplus. This paper investigates which household-level factors, including household composition, predict whether a household is likely to take in a life-cycle servant and if these factors change over time, particularly as life cycle service becomes less common.	Julia	A. Jennings
2010	139	Historical Demography	The Economics of Malaria and Malaria Eradication in the United States	This paper examines the major ecological and demographic determinants of malaria using the United States as a case study. In addition, we estimate the effects of New Deal policies on malaria’s decline during the 1930s. Given the accessibility and completeness of historical data on the United States, our research contributes to the malaria literature by providing the most comprehensive estimates of the predictors of malaria to date. Our research design estimates the relationship between malaria death rates and various ecological factors, demographic factors, and New Deal policies, at the county level in 1920, 1930, and 1940. Our results indicate that the Agricultural Adjustment Act and migration away from malarial counties are a major reason for malaria’s demise in the United States.	Alan	 Barreca	Shawn	 Kantor	Price	 Fishback
2010	140	Job Insecurity and Displacement	Labor Policy and Worker Security	Flexicurity is a policy approach that de-links workers' protections from the employment relationship, replacing employer-provided benefits with government benefits. Theoretically this should offer workers a safety net while not distorting businesses' decisions. Flexicurity advocates argue that employer-provided protections encourage longer unemployment durations and higher unemployment rates while critics argue that workers' security is a valid policy goal. This paper develops indices measuring the government-provided and employer-provided safety nets in ten countries and uses those indices to test these competing claims. One analysis examines individual employment outcomes as a consequence of policy and another examines workers' and unemployed individuals' life and job satisfaction. The analysis also considers individual and country-level controls including the role of cultural norms around work. If the flexicurity hypothesis is valid, workers should be equally satisfied under the two regimes, with higher unemployment rates or duration under the mandated protection regime.	Debra	 Hevenstone
2010	140	Job Insecurity and Displacement	Job Displacement and Intragenerational Mobility	The analysis presented here uses the 1968 through 1993 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine how job displacement influences intragenerational earnings and income mobility. Using individual labor earnings, this study shows displacement increases the probability of downward mobility for several years after separation occurs. Furthermore, the probability of being in the bottom half of the labor earnings distribution increases significantly, not only in the year of job loss, but also for several years following displacement. However, income from other family members and government transfer payments mitigates displacement’s adverse effect. After considering these additional measures of financial well being, the short-term impact of displacement on movements throughout the income distribution is reduced, and the long-term effect is eliminated.	Nicholas	A. Jolly
2010	140	Job Insecurity and Displacement	Husband’s Job Loss during the “Great Recession”: Are Wives Picking Up the Slack?	American families are experiencing the effects of the “Great Recession.” Most of the job losses are accruing to men, so families may find it strategic for wives to enter the labor force, or increase their work hours. We consider this possibility using the May 2008 and 2009 Current Population Survey, and compare findings to May 2004 and 2005 data, a time of relative prosperity. Our results suggest that wives of husbands who stopped working during the recession were more likely to increase work hours (if they worked part-time), and more likely to commence or seek work (if they were out of the labor force). During the 2008-2009 recession years, the effect for wives entering the labor force is significantly greater than during the earlier years of relative prosperity.	Marybeth	J. Mattingly	Kristin	 Smith
2010	140	Job Insecurity and Displacement	Downward Mobility, Unemployment and Mortality	Downward mobility and unemployment are assessed in this study as contributors to increased risk of death from 1994-2005 in Russia. This research offers fresh evidence on the contribution of social mobility to health differentials. I propose that downward mobility itself may have an immediate impact on health, above and beyond selection, origin or destination effects. Using RLMS data and Cox proportional hazard models, the results demonstrate that men were at greater risk of mortality when they experienced downward mobility, relative to men who did not. Women’s mortality did not appear to be linked to downward mobility. Both men’s and women’s risk of death substantially increased when experiencing unemployment, relative to low-mid grade workers and relative to non-participation in the labor market. Whereas the impact of downward mobility appears immediate and short-term, the impact of unemployment was longer term and not limited to the year in which unemployment occurred for men.	Sunnee	 Billingsley
2010	141	Mathematical Aspects of Mortality and Longevity	Understanding Population Mortality and Demographic Heterogeneity from a Two-Process Vitality Model	The model established in this work is trying to understand population mortality through two interactive stochastic processes: the intrinsic process defines the survival capacity (vitality) of an organism declines as a Wiener process and hits a zero-boundary where intrinsic death occurs; the extrinsic process assumes extrinsic mortality as the intensity of external challenges exceeding the internal vitality level. With the parameter framework, the model is able to fit mortality data for the entire human life from infants up to 110 years old. With a realistic heterogeneity structure, the model is capable of assessing mortality heterogeneity within a population. And with the construction of two processes, the model can also conduct mortality partition which allows direct analysis of senescence process. Unlike the Strehler and Mildvan (SM) theory, the model can be applied to both period- and cohort-based human mortality data to explore survival patterns without artificial constrains on the parameters.	Ting	 Li	James	 Anderson
2010	141	Mathematical Aspects of Mortality and Longevity	Modeling Mortality Surfaces: The Influence of Period and Cohort Components on Elderly Mortality	In this paper we consider two main questions: To what extent do early-life and current factors determine trends in old-age mortality? Did early life factors determine the decline of adult and old mortality in the second half of the 20th century in the European countries? We present a new explanatory but flexible relational model to analyze mortality surfaces including period and cohort indicators. This two-dimensional model is estimated via a semi-parametric approach by smoothing the general mortality trend over age and time with penalized B-splines. This allows, on one hand, to keep the non-linear structure of mortality dynamics over the long term, and on the other hand to evaluate simultaneously the relative importance of period and cohort effects. We apply the described model to two case studies, Sweden and Italy, which have been chosen because of their different past mortality dynamics.	Elisabetta	 Barbi	Carlo	G. Camarda
2010	141	Mathematical Aspects of Mortality and Longevity	Analytic Expressions and Plausible Approximations for Life Expectancy at Birth in Gamma-Gompertz Mortality Settings	In a population with Gamma-distributed individual frailty and Gompertz-distributed mortality the life-expectancy integral can be calculated analytically. The resulting expression is inversely proportional to the Gompertz mortality rate coefficient b. However it contains a Gaussian hypergeometric function, which can sometimes lead to computational difficulties. In order to avoid the latter, we derive simplifications in a number of special cases, as well as propose a general plausible approximation.	Trifon	I. Missov
2010	141	Mathematical Aspects of Mortality and Longevity	Perturbation Analysis of Longevity Using Matrix Calculus	Perturbation analysis derives the effect of changes in one or more parameters on some dependent variable. The first applications to longevity were due to Keyfitz, Pollard, and Vaupel, who derived the sensitivity of life expectancy to changes in mortality. These results can be extended by describing demography with age- or stage-classified matrix models and applying Markov chain theory and matrix calculus. Individuals are classified by age, maturity, developmental stage, health status or other measures. Many indices of longevity can be calculated from the resulting model. Matrix calculus gives the sensitivity and elasticity of these indices with respect to stage-specific vital rates. I present the sensitivity and elasticity of life expectancy, variance in lifespan, life lost (e-dagger), and the distribution of age or stage at death, to changes in age- or stage-specific mortality. The sensitivities and elasticities are easily computed for arbitrarily complicated life cycles or individual transition structures.	Hal	 Caswell
2010	142	Work Schedules and Family Time	Time for Children? The Declining Availability of Parents, 1979-2008	This paper examines parental employment patterns over the past 30 years. Utilizing the March supplement to the Current Population Survey, we analyze the declining availability of parents from the perspective of children. We find that increasing female labor force participation and the growth in single-headed households has led to dramatic declines in parental availability. The share of children with all parents working full-time has risen from 38 to 49 percent between 1979 and 2007. Particularly striking is the reduction from 47 to 36 percent in the fraction of young children (0-5 years old) with a full-time parental caregiver. Increases in family work hours have primarily occurred at the extensive margins, with the movement of mothers from no work, to full-time employment.	Liana	 Fox	Wen-Jui	 Han	Christopher	 Ruhm	Jane	 Waldfogel
2010	142	Work Schedules and Family Time	Time for Each Other: Work and Family Constraints among Couples	Our project investigates the time married couples spend together in the United States. Though time together is a premium among couples in our work-centered American society, we know little about amount and nature of the time couples spend together and sources of variation. Specifically, we focus specifically on heterogeneity in couples' time together by life stage and couple-level employment status. We draw on data from the American Time Use Survey (2003-2008) and use multivariate techniques to address two specific issues: 1) the effects of single vs. dual-earner status on the time couples spend together, and 2) the effects of life stage (i.e. the age of the youngest child) on couples' time allocation.	Sarah	 Flood	Katie	 Genadek
2010	142	Work Schedules and Family Time	Keeping Child Care a Family Affair: Maternal Nonstandard Work Hours and Dual-Earner Couples' Child Care Arrangements	Using Australian time diary data, this study examined the effects of maternal nonstandard work hours on child care choice and utilization among dual-earner couples. Findings showed that increases in maternal nonstandard work hours reduced the odds of dual-earner couples choosing relative- or market-provided child care compared with parental-provided child care. And, increases in maternal nonstandard work hours decreased the odds of dual-earner parents utilizing more hours of relative- or market-provided child care each week if these types of child care were chosen. Results for control variables agreed with past findings in the literature. This study offers new knowledge on the link between mothers scheduled work hours and family-produced child care services.   Key words: Nonstandard work hours, work-family balance, time diaries, child care.	Peter	D. Brandon
2010	142	Work Schedules and Family Time	Nine to Five No More? The Persistence of Nonstandard Work Schedules within Families	The widespread prevalence of employment outside of the standard workday interrupts family meals, childcare, and sleep routines for a sizable portion of Americans, complicating their attempts to manage work and family demands. This study uses 1987-2003 data from the National Survey of Families and Households to examine the persistence of nonstandard employment schedules. By analyzing the work hours of dual-earner married couples at three time points, we investigate families’ continued risk of experiencing shift work by socio-demographic characteristics. Secondly, we address the issue of family schedule synchronicity by examining the extent to which couples are employed during times that do not overlap. Finally, we assess schedule stability by estimating the likelihood that shift workers’ employment varies among evening, night, and weekend hours.	Katrina	M. Leupp	Sabino	 Kornrich	Julie	E. Brines
2010	143	Fertility, Maternal Health and Family Planning in Asia	Landholding and the Demand for Children in Rural Nepal	The notion that fertility decisions may be related to arable landholding in agricultural areas of the developing world is long established. However, there is widespread disagreement about the importance of this link and even its existence. It is hypothesised that the lack of consensus is due to the methods used in previous attempts to solve this problem; a conclusion may be reached with judicious use of available data. This paper presents evidence for the relationship in Nepal. Two hypotheses are considered: (1) landholding and children can both act as forms of security/insurance and thus they are substitutes, (2) operational landholdings and children are complements since children are a source of relatively cheap/secure labour. Analysis using the Nepal Living Standards Surveys indicates that the relationship between landholding and fertility is as the two hypotheses predict; the effect of land ownership is negative and the effect of operational landholdings is positive.	Melanie	D. Frost
2010	143	Fertility, Maternal Health and Family Planning in Asia	Fertility Intention and Fertility Behavior: Why Stop at One?
 The Socioeconomic Factors Behind China’s Below Replacement Fertility	While it is often considered as a privilege to have a second child in the context of China’s restrictive one-child policy, many Chinese couples are forgoing the opportunity of having a second child, citing economic factors as main constraints. In this paper, we follow up a cohort of reproductive age women interviewed three years ago in Jiangsu province, China, to examine the relationships among fertility desire, fertility intention and fertility behavior. We seek to undercover how fertility decision is made within the Chinese families and how socioeconomic factors come into play in their reproductive decisions.	Yong	 Cai	Feng	 Wang	Baochang	 Gu	Zhenzhen	 Zheng
2010	143	Fertility, Maternal Health and Family Planning in Asia	Improving Quality of Family Planning Services for an Urban Slum Population: Experiences from Bangladesh	To enhance quality of family planning services provided by NGO clinics in selected urban slum areas in Bangladesh, an operations research study was conducted. Findings suggest improvements in the service providers’ competence in client screening. Clients visiting clinics were offered informed counseling – most of the clients were provided with information on the effectiveness of the chosen method, how to use the method, possible side-effects and complications, and follow-up visits. Due to interventions, service providers were more likely to use BCC materials during counseling. Findings also indicate improvements in the providers’ interpersonal interactions with clients. It was observed that training on systematic screening enabled providers to identify client’s unmet needs for family planning and subsequently to provide those services. Key lessons learned are that training contributes to improvement of services, but for achieving the expected level of quality in services, effective supervision and encouragement from senior officials is necessary.	Md.	Noorunnabi  Talukder	Ubaidur	 Rob
2010	143	Fertility, Maternal Health and Family Planning in Asia	Utilization of Maternal Health Services in Uttar Pradesh: A Comparison between Logistic and Multilevel Regression Analysis	India accounts for about one-quarter of maternal deaths worldwide with the highest number of deaths occurring in the state of Uttar Pradesh. Utilization of antenatal, natal and postnatal care is important for reducing maternal morbidity and mortality. Uttar Pradesh, however, is characterized by low uptakes of maternal health services. Using RCH-DLHS-2 (2002-2004) dataset, present study attempts to investigate the importance of community and individual level variables in explaining factors affecting the utilization of antenatal, delivery and postnatal services in Uttar Pradesh by using techniques of simple logistic regression analysis and multilevel regression analysis. Multilevel analysis has number of advantages over logistic regression analysis. From the analysis it is evident that the standard error of the coefficients under both the techniques present different picture. When data has hierarchical structure more and more community level variables emerge as significant associates of antenatal, natal and postnatal services.	Divya	 Tiwari
2010	144	Short- and Long-Term Consequences of Parental Absence or Death	The Effects of Parental Loss on Child's Human Capital - Evidence from Taiwan	We examine the causal effect of parental death (PD) on children’s educational attainment (EA). Previous studies have often treated PD as an exogenous event despite the fact that empirical studies have shown that morbidity is often correlated to SES. Our empirical strategy is aimed at overcoming such limitation. We use information on parental cause of death to introduce a source of exogenous variation that is orthogonal to a child's characteristics while still related to a child’s EA. Moreover, we employ parametric and nonparametric specifications to disentangle the effect of PD on EA from possible confounding factors. Our findings show that PD has a negative effect on a child's EA when the child is from a low income family; yet, it presents more severe negative effects on children from higher income families. Furthermore, the death of a mother presents larger negative effects on children’s EA than the death of a father.	Lea	 Gimenez-Duarte	Shin-Yi	 Chou	Jin-Tan	 Liu	Jin-Long	 Liu
2010	144	Short- and Long-Term Consequences of Parental Absence or Death	Longer-Term Consequences of Parental Death on Teenage Children's Well-Being: Evidence from an Exogenous Shock in Indonesia	The question of how parental death affects teenage children’s welfare has become more prominent as the AIDS epidemic has generated rising proportions of children in such circumstances. Arriving at answers however is complicated by the fact that researchers are rarely able to exploit situations where parental deaths are exogenously determined with respect to other behaviors that affect the children’s welfare. This paper addresses these issues using a unique multiwave panel dataset (STAR) collected before and after the December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. In general, the evolution of well-being in the aftermath of the tsunami has proceeded differently for orphans and non-orphans. There are sizeable gender differences in the impact of parental death, with orphaned boys increasing workforce participation and orphaned girls marrying. These effects grow over time.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Ava	 Cas
2010	144	Short- and Long-Term Consequences of Parental Absence or Death	Understanding the Mechanism Behind the Effects of Maternal Prison and Jail Incarcerations	This study empirically tests three mechanisms commonly suggested to disadvantage youths whose mothers are incarcerated in prison or jail. An event history analysis of school dropout is conducted on a sample of 8,584 adolescents in a large city. Findings reveal that adolescent children are at greater risk of school dropout during the year(s) their mothers are incarcerated, but these effects are not observed to last after her release from prison or jail. Children who are removed from maternal guardianship and placed under paternal guardianship or under the guardianship of a non-relative adult are observed to have lower odds of school dropout than children who remain under maternal guardianship after the mother’s incarceration. Lastly, stigma associated with maternal incarceration is not found to place adolescent children at greater risk of school dropout when controlling for school quality.	Rosa	M. Cho
2010	144	Short- and Long-Term Consequences of Parental Absence or Death	‘Like Father, Like Son?’: Family Structure and the Intergenerational Transmission of Fatherhood and Fathering	Research has consistently shown that living away from one’s father is associated with a higher risk of adverse outcomes for the next generation (McLanahan and Sandefur 1994; Sigle-Rushton and McLanahan 2004). The link between family structure and fatherhood and fathering behaviors across generations is less well understood. In this paper, we examine how father absence in childhood is linked to sons’ fertility behaviors and to his subsequent fathering behaviors. Preliminary results from the NSFG suggest that, despite some prior research to the contrary, childhood family structure influences fathers’ fertility behaviors and we expect that our findings (using the NSFG and Fragile Families data) will also show that childhood father absence is linked to less father involvement for the next generation. We expect that the intergenerational transmission of father absence and fathering may be an important aspect of the growing inequality by socioeconomic status in the U.S. (McLanahan 2004; McLanahan and Percheski 2008).	Robin	S. Hognas
2010	145	Fertility Intentions, Reproductive Health and Fertility	Unmet Fertility Expectations, Education, and Fertility Postponement among U.S. Women	Using the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), we use mismatches between women’s fertility expectations expressed in 1982 and their completed fertility in 2006 as a tool to analyze educational differences in fertility during this time period. We find very little difference across educational groups in their fertility expectations in young adulthood. We find that about 23 percent of women exceeded their fertility expectations, while a much larger percentage (about 42 percent) of women fell short of their fertility expectations. Within every educational group but especially for college graduates, women were more likely to fall short of their educational expectations than to exceed those expectations. We conclude that unmet fertility expectations had the largest effects on fertility, and on educational differences in fertility, for the NLSY79 cohort.	Steven	P. Martin	Kelly	 Musick
2010	145	Fertility Intentions, Reproductive Health and Fertility	A Baby Is Always a Blessing? The Effects of Unintended Childbearing on Health throughout the Life Course	Very limited research examines the longer-term impacts of unintended childbearing on women’s physical and mental health. Our project will utilize the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to examine the relationship between unintended childbirth (either unwanted or mistimed) at various ages and mental and physical health outcomes in later life (near age 40). We are particularly interested in how the effects of unintended childbirth may differ by the age at which the event occurred. Our preliminary results show that younger (unintended) mothers are more likely to experience depressive symptoms at age 40 than women who never experienced an unintended birth. Similar results are found for self-rated health in older adulthood. Education may play a pivotal role in mediating the impact of an unintended birth on subsequent health. In our ongoing analysis we hope to disentangle the relationship between selection and causation for these respondents through propensity score matching.	Heather	M. Rackin	Melanie	 Sereny
2010	145	Fertility Intentions, Reproductive Health and Fertility	Attitudes Predicting Unintended Pregnancies Reported in an Online Weekly Survey: Preliminary Results	This paper uses longitudinal data from a weekly mixed-mode (online or phone) survey spanning 2.5 years, or 130 weeks. We use these data to examine which attitudinal aspects of sex, contraception, and pregnancy influence the risk of pregnancy among 1,000 18-21 year old women. We draw on the Prototype/Willingness model, which posits that behavior is socially reactive not rationally planned. Positive perceptions of norms, positive attitudes/beliefs/preferences, and prototypical similarity increase behavioral expectations and behavioral willingness, which in turn increase the probability of the behavior. We therefore assess the effects of general attitudes, perceived norms, beliefs, behavioral expectations and behavioral willingness on the risk of pregnancy. In the final paper to be presented at the PAA conference, we will further develop our theoretical framework and will expand our models to include dynamic measures of these attitudes.	Jennifer	S. Barber	Heather	H. Gatny	Jennifer	 Yarger
2010	145	Fertility Intentions, Reproductive Health and Fertility	Pregnancy Intentions and Maternal Health Behaviors Reexamined:  A Multidimensional Analysis	Past research on the relationship between pregnancy intention status and maternal health behaviors has not found a consistent link. Many researchers have suggested the ambiguous findings occur because pregnancy intention status is measured too simplistically and fails to capture true intention status as understood by the women involved. Our research uses suggestions from critics of the current measure to see if an improvement in the measurement of intended pregnancy as it relates to maternal health outcomes can be found. We find that if measures of intentionality are represented as multiple dimensions rather than timing alone, the prediction of smoking cessation during the pregnancy and prenatal care received in the first trimester is strengthened.	Maggie	 Rechel
2010	146	Gender, Race and Class	The Best Laid Plans: Social Capital and the Development of Girls' Educational and Occupational Plans	This paper draws on theories of social capital to understand how young women develop and plan to accomplish their educational and occupational aspirations. Using data from 61 in-depth interviews, I show that adolescent girls are embedded within family, school, and community social networks, which inform their plans for the future. Social class plays an important role in determining the depth and breadth of available resources. Middle class adolescents lay claim to a wide range of relationships with educated adults who offer assistance in developing future plans. Girls from poor and working class backgrounds are situated in smaller social networks comprised largely of kin and school-affiliated adults. While these adults encourage their school and work-related aspirations, they are less likely to offer information and guidance. Together, these findings reveal the importance of social networks in the lives of young people, and the limits and extensions of current theories of social capital.	Jessica	H. Hardie
2010	146	Gender, Race and Class	Racial-Ethnic Differences in U.S. Married Women’s and Men’s Housework	Black husbands do more housework than white husbands but Black wives do no more housework than White wives (John and Shelton 1997; Orbuch and Custer 1995; Orbuch and Eyster 1997). Studies are limited because they do not explore how race-ethnicity affects housework, they compare only Blacks and Whites, and they overlook timing and duration of housework. We use time diary data from the 2003-2007 ATUS to address these limitations. We hypothesize one source of racial-ethnic variation in household work is disparate employment conditions and also anticipate the association of economic resources and housework may differ by race-ethnicity. Preliminary results indicate race-ethnicity affects hours of housework and associations of earnings with housework vary among women by race-ethnicity. We will extend early results with OLS and event history models to estimate racial-ethnic variation in hours, engagement in, and the timing and duration of housework and how these are conditioned by economic resources.	Liana	C. Sayer	Leigh	 Fine
2010	146	Gender, Race and Class	Community Influences on White Racial Attitudes: What Matters and Why?	The impact of race composition on the racial attitudes of white residents has received growing research attention. However, some researchers have argued that low socioeconomic status among local whites is the more potent force, purportedly indexing “stress-inducing” deprivations and hardships in whites’ own lives that lead them to disparage blacks. Here this “scapegoating” claim is re-assessed, using data from 1998-2002 General Social Surveys linked to 2000 census information about communities. Across many dimensions of racial attitudes, there is pronounced influence of both local racial proportions and college completion rates among white residents. However, the economic dimension of SES exerts negligible influence on white racial attitudes. If the environmental education effect is just that, not a proxy for economic hardship and distress, the scapegoating interpretation of contextual education effects is implausible. The conclusion outlines alternate interpretations of the environmental effects of local race composition and white education level.	Marylee	C. Taylor
2010	146	Gender, Race and Class	Knowledge and Beliefs Concerning Development and Income Inequality in China and the United States	This paper investigates the knowledge and beliefs of Chinese and Americans about levels and trends in societal development and income inequality. We investigate whether Chinese and Americans believe that development and inequality are positively or negatively interrelated. We examine the hypothesis that views about development and income inequality are affected by the dissemination of ideas about these topics and by trends in development and inequality in a person’s country. Our study uses three surveys in the United States and two surveys in China conducted in 2006 and 2007. People in both countries perceive a hierarchy of countries on development that is similar to the hierarchy of the United Nations Human Development Index. These data also show that there is little correspondence between views of income inequality and actual levels of inequality in countries. Both Americans and Chinese perceive positive links between development and income inequality.	Arland	 Thornton	Yu	 Xie
2010	147	Family and Household in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Legal and Residential Partnership Status in Europe	The last review of partnership patterns in Europe uses data from the 1990s. Since then new legal partnership options have emerged, yet we know little about contemporary patterns or who opts for new alternatives. Using 2006/7 European Social Survey data from 23 countries (N=41,117), we show partnership patterns of both sexes, then focus on 13 countries that have recognized legal partnerships and apply a multilevel multinomial logit model to compare country differences. Preliminary results show those in legal partnerships are significantly less religious, less traditional, younger and less likely to have children. Differences between countries emerge such as the presence of children in nonmarital unions and varying educational levels by type of union. We conclude with a discussion about the relevance of this research in relation to unintended consequences and lack of legal clarity in certain unions (paternity rights, inheritance, status after death or divorce).	Melinda	 Mills	Anne-Rigt	 Poortman
2010	147	Family and Household in Historical and Comparative Perspective	Marriage Prevalence and Education in Developing Countries	The main objective of this paper is to examine the degree of convergence between countries regarding marriage prevalence and timing among young adults as a function of educational attainment. This research is based on three well-documented socio-demographic observations: Educational expansion in most low and middle income countries over the past 4 decades; early marriage timing in low and middle-income countries as compared to high-income countries; and the effects of increasing education on marriage timing and prevalence, most studies on this having developed in Europe and North America. We use IPUMS census microdata since 1980 from 16 countries to examine the effect of education on marriage prevalence and timing among younger cohorts. We use multilevel logistic regression models. Preliminary results show that net of all control factors, differences in marriage prevalence between countries persist but are significantly lower when considering only higher educated individuals.	Albert	 Esteve	Timothy	 Riffe	Jeroen	J.A. Spijker
2010	147	Family and Household in Historical and Comparative Perspective	The Fewer, The Merrier: Compulsory Schooling Laws, Education, and Fertility in the United States	I investigate the effect of the introduction of compulsory schooling laws on education and fertility in the United States, 1850-1920. I find that compulsory schooling was associated with a 7 percent increase in enrollment and with a 15 percent decline in the fertility of women of reproductive age. My identication strategy is based on a difference-in-differences (DID) methodology involving individuals living in the vicinity of the state border where legislation changed. The results are robust to the inclusion of a number of socio-demographic and geographic controls. The effects on education are particularly strong for black children, whereas the effects on fertility are concentrated among young women. The results suggest that compulsory schooling laws may be a crucial policy for hastening both the demographic transition, and the transition to modern growth.	Juan	Manuel  Puerta
2010	147	Family and Household in Historical and Comparative Perspective	A Sudden Transition: The Rise of the Empty Nest for Older Women	At the beginning of the twentieth century, fewer than half of all mothers experienced all of their children leaving home. By the turn of the twenty-first, the emptying of the nest had become the dominant experience. This paper uses micro-level United States Census data for 1880-2000 to examine the factors associated with living arrangements for white mothers aged 50-69 and young adults aged 20-29. It finds that fewer mothers lived with their children at each census, but the proportion of young adults remaining at home declined only between 1940 and 1960. Multivariate analysis and contrasting trend analysis reveal that the increasing separation of older mothers and their children was shaped not only by long-term demographic and economic changes – including reductions in fertility and the decline of agriculture – but also by such period-specific factors as the expansion of higher education at mid-century and the restriction of immigration between 1921 and 1965.	Emily	 Merchant	Brian	 Gratton	Myron	P. Gutmann
2010	148	Demographic Determinants and Consequences of War, Conflict, and Terrorism	Short- and Longer-Term Effects of Forced Migration on Child Health and Mortality in Angola	This study investigates the effects of forced migration on child survival and health in Angola. Using survey data collected in Luanda, Angola, two years after the end of prolonged civil war, we compare three groups: migrants who moved primarily due to war, migrants whose moves were not directly related to war, and non-migrants. Using event-history approaches, we find that hazards of child death in any given year were higher in families that experienced war-related migration in the same year or in the previous year. Assessing longer-term effects of forced migration, we observe mortality disadvantages of children of forced migrants born in Luanda but this is explained by other characteristics. On child health outcomes, we detect disadvantages of forced migrants relative to non-migrants; however this extends to war unrelated migrants. We interpret these results within the context of the literature on short- and long-term effects of forced migration on child health.	Winfred	A. Avogo
2010	148	Demographic Determinants and Consequences of War, Conflict, and Terrorism	The Impact of Terror Attacks on Birth Rates in Israel from 2000-2005	War and crises have long been studied to shed light on the demographic consequences of conflict and stress. Essentially, the basic framework underlying existing evidence relies on a single before-after experiment. In this paper, we build upon the unique situation of Israel where we have both highly detailed, daily data on birth counts and over 100 terror attacks repeated over the period 2000-2005. Our hypotheses focus on whether an effect is identifiable and in what direction. We make use of data both on the overall number of births and the sex ratios of birth to tease out the separate effects of terror on the number of conceptions and the effect on fetal mortality.	Guy	 Stecklov
2010	148	Demographic Determinants and Consequences of War, Conflict, and Terrorism	New Light on Cambodia’s Darkest Years: A Reappraisal of the Khmer-Rouge Death Toll	Extant estimates of the number of deaths that resulted from the Khmer-Rouge ruling of Cambodia range from half a million to over three million excess deaths—a huge range considering that the country’s total population size was about 8 million at the outset of the Khmer-Rouge regime. This paper investigates this unsatisfactory range and whether it can be refined with either new data or new methodologies. It considers in particular the demographic reconstruction method—an approach several researchers have already applied to this estimation problem and which can always benefit newer or better data. This paper is the first to make full use of three new sources of data for the purpose of refining the death-toll estimates. The paper’s second innovation is to explore the uncertainty inherent to these estimates. Namely, it develops a stochastic approach to generate a distribution of 1,000 estimates, which then allows for various confidence intervals.	Patrick	 Heuveline
2010	148	Demographic Determinants and Consequences of War, Conflict, and Terrorism	The Long-Term Demographic Consequences of War and Genocide in Bosnia and Rwanda	How did war and genocide affect demographic trends in Bosnia and Rwanda? Initially, of course, war caused an enormous number of casualties: it is estimated that around 2% of the population in Bosnia and 8% of the population in Rwanda died during the war. A large share of the population was also displaced in both countries during and after the war. This paper examines how fertility and marriage patterns changed in both countries over the course of the post-war period. Drawing from a multi-method, multi-site study involving data analysis from nationally-representative household surveys and 117 qualitative interviews with women in both countries, I argue that post-war fertility trends were influenced by the age and sex composition of victims, the degree of economic collapse, and by the relative success of political and ethnic reconciliation.	Sarah	E. Staveteig
2010	149	Methods for Morbidity and Mortality Analysis	Continuous Summary Measures for Changes in the Distribution of Ages at Death	Since the beginning of the twentieth century, remarkable changes have occurred in terms of distribution of ages at death in human populations. As some of today’s lowest mortality countries have completed their compression of mortality regime, the conditions they are now facing still remain uncertain. Recent studies have identified the shifting mortality scenario as a plausible successor, but deviations from this scenario have also been noticed. Based upon the premise that mortality change over age and over time is regular, we use a two-dimensional nonparametric smoothing approach to study recent modifications in the distribution of ages at death. Continuous summary measures such as the modal age at death function over time and associated variability indicator functions help us gain greater perspective on what should be expected in the coming years among low mortality countries. Data are taken from the Human Mortality Database.	Nadine	 Ouellette	Robert	R. Bourbeau
2010	149	Methods for Morbidity and Mortality Analysis	Estimation and Analysis of Child Mortality for Indian States Through a Bayesian Approach	The proportion of children dying up to four years of age is one of the important health indicators in terms of impacts of overall health and nutritional programs by Indian government. Probabilities of child deaths among Indian states are varying from 0.001 to 0.0288 according to NFHS –III (National Family Health Survey – III). Based on three rounds of national family health surveys and sample registration systems data in India, we have performed Bayesian analysis through which, we estimated posterior probabilities for all the major states. We also correlate these probabilities with socio economic status of Indian States. Interpretation based on Bayesian estimators justifies that there is a link between the socio economic indicators, mother’s education and age of the mother. Improving the age of the mother at the time of delivery in constructing prior probabilities has improved our understanding of posteriors.	Reetabrata	 Bhattacharyya	Arni	 S.R. Srinivasa Rao
2010	149	Methods for Morbidity and Mortality Analysis	On the Correspondence between CAL and Lagged Cohort Life Expectancy	It has been established that under the linear shift assumption, CAL(t) is equal to the life expectancy for the cohort born at time t-CAL(t), or, equivalently, e0c(t) is equal to CAL for the period t+e0c(t). This correspondence is important, because the cohort life expectancy for the cohort currently reaching its life expectancy, or lagged cohort life expectancy (LCLE), has been discussed in the tempo literature as a summary mortality measure of substantive interest. In this paper, we establish that the CAL-LCLE correspondence holds in a variety of empirical situations, present or historical, including ones in which the linear shift assumption doesn't apply, and we provide some more general principles about the extent to which CAL can be used as an estimate of LCLE. Finally, we discuss the implications of the CAL-LCLE correspondence for using CAL (or LCLE) as a summary mortality measure, and for the projection of cohort mortality.	Michel	 Guillot	Hyun	Sik  Kim
2010	149	Methods for Morbidity and Mortality Analysis	Shifting Mortality: Inevitable or Anomaly?	While shifting mortality was conceptualized as a shift in mortality rates across age, trends in variability of age at death are used to evaluate whether or not a country is exhibiting signs of shifting mortality. In this paper, I reexamine the relationship between mortality change and trends in variability age of death in order to evaluate whether shifting mortality is an inevitable outcome of the mortality transition. Through simulation exercises, perturbation analysis, and decomposition analysis, I arrive at a better understanding of how initial mortality conditions interact with the age-pattern of mortality change to produce mortality compression, expansion, or shifting. I find that proportional mortality change that is fixed across ages does not necessarily lead to a parallel shift in the death distribution. In addition, I demonstrate that certain initial mortality conditions are particularly primed for compression.	Sarah	 Zureick
2010	150	Low Fertility and Its Association with Macro-Economic Trends	The Reversal of Fertility in High Developed Countries. 
What’s behind this Phenomenon ?	We are concerned about the importance of economic development related to fertility in OECD countries. Knowing about the J-shaped relationship between the HDI and fertility rates that was recently found by Myrskylä, Kohler and Billari (2009), we single out the impact of economic development on fertility. We empirically test the hypothesis of a convex impact of economic advancement on fertility, implying a U-shaped pattern of fertility along the process of economic development, using data from the OECD area that spans the years 1960 to 2007. We use a range of econometric techniques to deal with left-out variable bias, unobserved heterogeneity, non-stationarity and endogeneity. The empirical results confirm our hypothesis even when controlling for postponement of birth. Moreover, we designate a clear turning point in the relationship between economic development and fertility. However, we find that economic development is not sufficient to explain the fertility rebound that could have been observed recently in several highly developed OECD countries.	Angela	 Luci	Olivier	 Thevenon
2010	150	Low Fertility and Its Association with Macro-Economic Trends	The Impact of Economic Context on Tempo and Quantum of Fertility. Some Evidence from GGS Countries	The economic recession that recently manifested itself on a global scale raises interest on the effect of economic context on fertility. This paper investigates the effect of unemployment on age-specific first birth hazards. The focus is on period-induced reduction of birth hazards at younger ages and on recuperation mechanisms where births postponed due to adverse period conditions are recuperated later in life. As economic context is likely to differentially affect socio-economic groups, the analysis is stratified by level of education. This allows me to control effectively for the expansion of educational attainment among recent births cohorts and its effect on timing of fertility. Results for Belgium indicate that unemployment has adversely affected birth hazards at younger ages in all socio-economic groups between 1960 and 2000, but that higher educated women have been more successful in overcoming adverse period conditions afterwards. Results for Belgium are compared to those for other GGS countries.	Karel	 Neels
2010	150	Low Fertility and Its Association with Macro-Economic Trends	The Increasing Importance of Economic Conditions on Fertility	This paper investigates whether there has been a fundamental change in the importance of economic conditions on fertility. Through the 1980s econometric studies had found a mixed, neutral, or negative effect of economic conditions on fertility. Notably, Butz and Ward (1979) concluded even that fertility was counter-cyclical; fertility fell in good times, with rising opportunity costs of childbearing. More recently, fluctuations in fertility appear to have become pro-cyclical, with good economic times coinciding with higher birth rates, and the recent recession with lower birth rates. Here, we use panel methods to study short term changes in aggregate fertility and economic measures in OECD countries from 1976-2008. We find indeed that fertility became positively associated with good economic conditions. Furthermore, the increasing importance of economic conditions was detected for both tempo and quantum.	Deniz	Dilan  Karaman Örsal
2010	150	Low Fertility and Its Association with Macro-Economic Trends	Fertility in Alberta (Canada) in a Context of Rapid Economic Growth, 1997-2007	By the early 1970s all Canadian provinces had reached sub-replacement fertility below 2.1 children per woman. In recent years Alberta province has shown unexpected increases in fertility. Its Total Fertility Rate (TFR) has been increasing while in most other parts of Canada rates remain at around 1.5 children per woman. By 2007, the TFR in Alberta had risen to almost 1.9. In this study I examine the contemporary and historical pattern of fertility in Alberta, noting similarities and differences with the other provinces and the county as a whole. I also look at macrostructural correlates of overall and parity specific fertility in Alberta between 1997 and 2007, a period of unprecedented economic expansion. I argue that a rise in economic prosperity may underlie the recent birth surge in Alberta. Economic buoyancy during a period of unprecedented growth may have created a favorable context for fertility increase.	Frank	 Trovato
2010	151	Mexican Immigrant Integration: Health, Family, and Identity	Unions that Divide: Interracial and Intergenerational Marriages among Mexicans	Qian and Lichter (ASR 2007) argued that Hispanic intermarriage had reversed its upward trend in the 1990s due to the increased inflow of coethnic immigrants. This research assesses this claim with respect to Mexicans with particular attention to marriages across generations. Two questions are asked: in the past 15 years, have Mexican intergenerational marriages increased compared to Mexican-white marriages? Do Mexican intermarriages involve such a status exchange as observed in black-white marriages? Quasi-independent and quasi-symmetric log-linear models are performed on 1994-2009 CPS March data. The results indicate that intergenerational marriages have been generally stable; Mexican-white marriages have also been stable except a slight decline for immigrant husbands. “Social distance” is stable within Mexicans, while it is somewhat widening between Mexican-immigrant men and white women. Further investigation into the earlier periods will be imperative. Status exchange was observed among Mexican husbands who tend to exchange their higher education with wives’ higher generational status.	Yukio	 Kawano
2010	151	Mexican Immigrant Integration: Health, Family, and Identity	Mothers’ Investments in Child Health in the U.S. and U.K.: A Comparative Lens on the Immigrant 'Paradox'	Research on the “immigrant paradox” is mostly limited to the U.S. Hispanic population and to the study of birth outcomes. Using U.S. and U.K. birth cohort studies, we: 1) examine whether the healthier behaviors of Hispanic immigrant mothers extend to other foreign-born groups; 2) consider the persistence of the paradox into early childhood; 3) examine whether nativity disparities are weaker in the U.K.; and 4) examine whether differences in mothers’ social support explain healthier behaviors among the foreign-born. We find that healthier behaviors among immigrants are not limited to Hispanics or to low SES groups; that nativity differences are fairly persistent over time; that the immigrant advantage is equally strong in both countries; and that mothers’ support plays a trivial explanatory role. These findings lead us to speculate that what underlies nativity differences in mothers’ health behaviors may be a strong parenting investment on the part of immigrants.	Margot	 Jackson	Kathleen	E. Kiernan
2010	151	Mexican Immigrant Integration: Health, Family, and Identity	Immigration, Generation, and Children’s Weight	In contrast to most research on immigrant health, researchers have yet to find a clear association between child obesity and exposure to the American environment. In grappling with this puzzle, we investigate the roles of selection into migration streams and cultural resistance as additional factors affecting obesity among children of immigrants. We offer some preliminary evidence for these ideas based on data for children of Mexican origin who reside in Mexico or in the United States. Our findings suggest that selection into immigration streams does not account for the relatively high levels of obesity observed among the children of Mexican immigrants. However, the results do not support the idea that simply living the United States accounts for Mexican-Americans’ high obesity rates either. Rather, the results are more consistent with the idea that another factor—which we refer to here as cultural resistance—may be at work.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Elizabeth	H. Baker	Claire	 Altman
2010	151	Mexican Immigrant Integration: Health, Family, and Identity	What  Qualitative Interviews Reveal that Surveys Do Not: Evidence on Ethnic Identity from the Mexican American Study Project	This paper examines the ethnic identity of Mexican Americans based on in-depth qualitative interviews for roughly 80 of the respondents from the Mexican American Study Project.   These respondents represent parental and child generations from 34 families of Mexican Americans, of various generations since immigration, selected from a random sample of Mexican Americans.  	Issues of identity are especially difficult to gauge in a survey interview in which the questions are rigidly phrased in particular ways and respondents must respond with one of a limited number of response categories, with no further explanation. I deepen the survey analysis with long, less-structured interviews among a subsample of the survey respondents.  These interviews produced more complete and nuanced understandings of Mexican American national and ethnic identities. The process of comparing such in-depth interview results with survey results provides a methodological contribution about the relative merits and weaknesses of the two approaches.	Edward	E. Telles	Christina	 Sue
2010	152	Effects of Government Policies and Incentives on Fertility and Reproductive Health	Protect Young Mothers from Cigarettes, Help Their Babies?
A Regression Discontinuity Study on Minimum Cigarette Purchase Age	A key target in the U.S. health policies is to reduce costly adverse birth outcomes to which prenatal smoking is one of the most significant contributors. This paper is the first to address whether implementing minimum cigarette purchase age of 21 at Pennsylvania can improve infant health through curbing young mother smoking. My research question is crucial because young mothers are more heavily engaged in smoking and more likely to have poor birth outcomes, and smoking prevalence among PA mothers also exceeds the national average. I find a 16 percent decrease in the average cigarettes smoked per day and a 20 percent decrease in LBW for mothers subject to the regulation. The 2SLS regression discontinuity estimates indicate smoking 1 more cigarette per day worsens infant health. For smokers, it reduces birth weight by 61.17 grams, increases LBW by 2.8 percentage points, and decreases the APGAR 1-min score by 0.13 points.	Ji	 Yan
2010	152	Effects of Government Policies and Incentives on Fertility and Reproductive Health	Arkansas' Family Planning Waiver: Assessing Effects on Unintended Births and Other Outcomes	Approximately half of all pregnancies in the United States are either unwanted or earlier than desired. The adverse consequences of unintended pregnancy are significant, including later entry into prenatal care, risky behaviors during pregnancy and other poor outcomes. In an effort to increase access to family planning services and in turn, reduce the rate of unintended pregnancy, a number of states have expanded Medicaid coverage for family planning services. This paper uses data from the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System to examine whether the Medicaid family planning Waiver implemented in Arkansas beginning in the late 1990s reduced barriers to and increased use of contraceptives and unintended births. Our preliminary findings, which are based on a difference-in-differences approach suggest that the waiver increased the post-partum use of family planning services; the only impact found on unintended births was for teens, which is consistent with national studies on Medicaid Waivers.	Kathleen	 Adams	Genevieve	 Kenney	Katya	 Galactionava
2010	152	Effects of Government Policies and Incentives on Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Contribution of Recent Increases to Family Benefits to Australia’s Early 21st Century Fertility Increase: An Empirical Analysis	Following forty years of almost continual decrease, between 2001 and 2007 Australia’s TFR increased from 1.73 to 1.93. This increase has overlapped with a series of changes to family-related benefits which were designed primarily to provide financial assistance to families. However a pronatalist intent was also apparent. Of the changes, the most significant was the introduction in 2004 of a universal, flat-rate payment to parents of new-born children. This paper analyses recent fertility patterns in Australia, using data from a large-scale household longitudinal survey. The main research questions are: 1) What effect has the “Baby Bonus” had on the level of fertility? 2) How does the effect vary between population subgroups? 3) Which other variables have affected fertility? Preliminary results show the effect of the new ‘Baby Bonus’ has been, if anything, to raise fertility slightly. Parity, marital status and a woman’s highest education are other significant factors.	Nick	 Parr	Ross	 Guest
2010	152	Effects of Government Policies and Incentives on Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Mythology of Two Hundred Million People: Equalitarianism, Welfare Benefits, and Population Growth	Around 202 million additional births in rural areas increased within only two decades under Chinese People’s Commune which is characterized by egalitarianism and a high share of welfare benefits. However, the relationship between the welfare benefit and its incentive on fertility is ambiguous since the absence of plausible control group and an endogeneity problem. This paper uses the exogenous variance across counties in the timing of abolishment of People’s Commune from 1978 to 1984 as a “natural experiment” to identify the causal link. We find robust evidence that the welfare benefit matters for fertility: 2 extra births per thousand people born in rural China can be attributed to the collective commune system.  In other words, institutional conditions alone accounts for about 7 percent of increased population.	Shuo	 Chen	Huadong	 Song	Jie	 Chen
2010	153	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Food Subsidy in Child Care: Correlates of Program Participation and Associations with Child Outcomes	This study uses the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) to study child care food subsidies under the Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP). Because of limited prior research on the CACFP, we address three basic questions: (1) Does CACFP reach targeted low-income children? (2) How do participating families and child care providers differ from non-participating families and providers? (3) How is attending CACFP-participating child care associated with children's food consumption, weight, and food security? Findings include that provider incentives to participate strongly associate with the probability that a child will attend CACFP-participating child care. As a result, provider decisions, in combination with program rules, leave many poor children outside of CACFP. Results also suggest that CACFP may be associated with positive child outcomes such as increased milk consumption and healthier weight.	Sanders	 Korenman	Kristin	 Abner
2010	153	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Positive Income Shocks and Very Preterm Births among Black Mothers in California	Infants born to black mothers of lower socioeconomic position exhibit an elevated incidence of very preterm birth. It remains unclear whether scarce financial resources per se account for this finding. Consistent with the notion that financial resources improve birth outcomes, we test whether an income shock, in the form of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), reduces the odds of very preterm. We use time-series methods and capitalize on differences in credit eligibility and the timing of disbursement among pregnant women in their second or third trimester. Contrary to our hypothesis but anticipated by the literature, the odds of very preterm among low-income black women that qualify for the EITC rose 29 percent above expected values two months after the disbursement. Examination among similarly low-income non-Hispanic white mothers also shows a positive association. Findings indicate that the EITC income shock may adversely affect the gestations of low-income women.	Tim-Allen	 Bruckner	Ralph	 Catalano
2010	153	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	Parental Involvement Laws, Sexual Activity, and Youth Suicide	Using state-level data on suicides from the period 1987 through 2003, we find that the adoption of a parental involvement law is associated with a 15 to 25 percent  reduction in suicides committed by females between the ages 15 and 17. In contrast, the adoption of a parental involvement law is not associated with a reduction in the number of suicides committed by older females or by males belonging to the same age group. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that parental involvement laws increase the expected cost of having unprotected sex, and, as a consequence, serve to protect young females from depression and what have been termed “stressful life events” such as conflict with a parent or an abortion. Using microdata drawn from Add Health, we find that sexually active females are at increased risk of attempting suicide, but little evidence of a similar relationship for male adolescents.	Joseph	J. Sabia	Daniel	I. Rees
2010	153	Public Policy and Child Outcomes	The Effects of Soft Drink Taxes on Child and Adolescent Consumption and Weight Outcomes	Childhood and adolescent obesity is associated with serious lifetime health consequences and has seen a recent rapid increase in prevalence. Soft drink consumption has also expanded rapidly, so much so that soft drinks are currently the largest single contributors to energy intake. In this paper, we investigate the potential for soft drink taxes to combat rising levels of adolescent obesity through a reduction in consumption. Our results, based on state soft drink sales and excise tax information between 1988 and 2006 and the National Health Examination and Nutrition Survey, suggest that soft drink taxation, as currently practiced in the United States, leads to a moderate reduction in soft drink consumption by children and adolescents. However, we show that this reduction in soda consumption is completely offset by increases in consumption of other high calorie drinks.	Jason	 Fletcher	David	 Frisvold	Nathan	 Tefft
2010	154	Health and Socioeconomic Consequences of Obesity	Overweight Adults May Have the Lowest Mortality.  Do They Have the Best Health?	Several recent studies have reported that overweight adults experience lower mortality than those who are underweight, normal-weight, or obese. These widely-publicized findings carry critical implications for public health policy because they suggest that overweight may be the optimal weight category for adult health and longevity. In this study, we test this assumption using nationally representative NHANES surveys (2005-2008) with adults age 20-80 (N=9,655). We employ generalized additive models, a type of semiparametric model, to examine the relationship between body mass and key biological risk measures, including inflammatory markers and indicators of respiratory, cardiovascular, and metabolic function. The key finding is that the association between BMI and biological risk factors is generally monotonically increasing rather than U-shaped as mortality analyses suggest. We document the modifying effects of age on the BMI-risk association and attempt to reconcile our findings with those from the mortality literature.	Anna	 Zajacova
2010	154	Health and Socioeconomic Consequences of Obesity	The Labor Force Participation Effect of Old-Age Obesity	Old-age obesity is prevalent and increasing; there is no systematic research on the economic well-being generally, and employment outcome particularly, of obese elders, a vulnerable subpopulation that is growing rapidly. I propose to analyze the impact of obesity on employment among white men aged 70-79 using data from the Health and Retirement Study with panel econometrics allowing for individual fixed-effects and endogeneity of obesity. I explore potential pathways through which the obesity-work relationship operates. This research will inform efforts to improve the well-being of obese elders, and the impact of the rising elderly obesity trend on Social Security and Medicare funds	Bo	 Macinnis
2010	154	Health and Socioeconomic Consequences of Obesity	The Impact of Obesity on LTC Disability and Mortality: Population Estimates from the National Long Term Care Survey	Purpose: To estimate the impact of obesity on LTC disability and mortality above age 65 using the 2004 NLTCS with LTC disability based on the HIPAA ADL and CI Triggers. Methods: Self-reported height and weight yielded three measures of BMI: current, age 50, and one year prior; with standard cutpoints       	Eric	 Stallard
2010	154	Health and Socioeconomic Consequences of Obesity	The Effect of Obesity on Intergenerational Income Mobility	Utilizing the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), this paper examines the likelihood of upward and downward mobility by obesity status (normal, overweight, and obese) and gender. Using temporal ordering to establish a direction of causality, we examine parental income when the child was living at home, BMI in early adulthood, and adult family income at age 38-43. We find that obesity both dampens upward mobility and increases the likelihood of downward mobility for women. We do not find the same trends for obese men, who alternatively have a greater likelihood of upward mobility. This research finds that obesity in early adulthood places women on a poor income trajectory throughout adulthood relative to parental income. The health consequences and social stigma of obesity perpetuate and deepen economic disparities among women. The lasting impact of obesity highlights the need for intervention in adolescence and early adulthood.	Liana	 Fox	Nathan	 Hutto
2010	155	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation Dynamics	White Ethnic Residential Segregation in Historical Perspective: U.S. Cities in 1880	Investigating immigrant residential patterns in 1880 offers a baseline for understanding subsequent assimilation trajectories. This study uses complete information from the 1880 Census to tabulate the neighborhood characteristics of 66 cities for Irish and German residents. The analysis measures segregation across groups in each city and estimates the effects of individual and city-level variables on the exposure of ethnic group members to the native white population. Neighborhoods are defined in two ways: by enumeration districts and by the specific local street segment the person lives on. Results are better defined at a finer geographic scale. We find support for some assimilation hypotheses about who lived in more mixed neighborhoods. We also find substantial effects of contextual factors including regional location, city population size, the relative size of the immigrant groups, and group-specific characteristics in each city such as their mean occupational standing and occupational segregation from native whites.	John	R. Logan	Weiwei	 Zhang
2010	155	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation Dynamics	The Misunderstood Consequences of Shelley V. Kraemer	Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) is one of the most celebrated decisions in the history of the United States Supreme Court. Nevertheless, some have argued that it was largely superfluous, because blacks lacked the capacity to enforce their rights and white neighborhoods and institutions had other methods available to stop black entry. Oddly enough, no one (to our knowledge) has ever undertaken an empirical examination of how Shelley changed the housing opportunities of affected minorities – blacks in particular, but Jews, Asians, and Hispanics as well. In this paper, we attempt such an evaluation, and we find strong support for the proposition that Shelley had a dramatic impact upon the housing opportunities available to blacks. Just as important, we find that this shift in opportunities changed the dynamics of black ghettos in ways that have important implications for basic debates about urban policy and the black underclass.	Yana	 Kucheva	Richard	 Sander
2010	155	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation Dynamics	Residential Settlement Mechanisms in U.S. Metropolitan Areas	In this project we analyze Census 2000 data for 36 metropolitan areas in the United States that have only two major racial/ethnic groups, using a recently developed statistical framework for modeling systems with complex dependencies that allows for the inference of social mechanisms from cross-sectional data (Butts, 2007). Our results show remarkable similarity among these areas in terms of xenophobia, the tendency of the groups to separate spatially based on ethnicity. On the other hand, they show much wider variation in the levels of ethnic homophily manifested by the minority and majority groups, which are linked mainly to the proportion minority in the metropolitan area: the bigger the minority group, the weaker the minority homophily effect and the stronger the majority homophily effect. We discuss the contribution of the project to our understanding of residential settlement and segregation and suggest some directions for future work.	Miruna	 Petrescu-Prahova
2010	155	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation Dynamics	Immigrant Residential Segregation in the Inner-City of Johannesburg, South Africa	Tract-based measures of residential segregation cannot take into account geographic proximity at the individual level (household or person). In contrast, an explicitly spatial approach is provided by an egocentric measure of residential segregation that takes into account both proximity and scale. Using unique point data from a survey carried out in inner-city Johannesburg, we describe multi-group residential segregation patterns between Black South African host population and Congolese (DRC) and Zimbabwean immigrants. We adapt methods from spatial point process analysis, extending the K function to the case of multiple groups, and to survey data with incomplete residential information. We then engage in a multivariate analysis to estimate a model of residential assimilation to quantify the effect of immigrant nationality on neighboring with the South African host population, while controlling for individual socio-demographic characteristics. Our study raises important substantive questions about the applicability of existing theories of immigrant incorporation in non-Western contexts.	Gayatri	 Singh	Seth	 Spielman
2010	156	Infant and Child Mortality in Stressful Contexts	Does Famine Have Long-Term Impact on Female Fecundity? Evidence from the Great Leap Forward Famine in China	Using data from the 2001 National Family Planning and Reproductive Health Survey, I look at the difference between women who were born during and after the Great Leap Forward Famine (1959-1961) regarding the timing of first pregnancy, pregnancy frequency, pregnancy interval, the odds of miscarriage and stillbirth, and the odds of infant mortality. The results show no significant cohort difference regarding all but one of these indicators - infant mortality: children of women born during the famine have a much lower infant mortality than children of women born after the famine. These findings suggest two different kind of post-famine selection processes: selection by biological factors and selection by socioeconomic factors. The famine-born women are not necessarily biologically stronger than the non-famine-born women, but they tend to have higher SES and are more likely to take advantage of modern medical facilities such as prenatal care.	Shige	 Song
2010	156	Infant and Child Mortality in Stressful Contexts	The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural Experiment	A growing literature highlights that in-utero conditions are consequential for individual outcomes throughout the life cycle, but research assessing causal processes is scarce. This paper examines the effect of one such condition– maternal stress – on birthweight. Birthweight is an early outcome shown to affect cognitive, educational, and socioeconomic attainment throughout the individual lifecycle. Using a major earthquake as a natural experiment and a difference-in-difference methodology, I show that maternal stress has a substantial detrimental effect on birthweight. This effect is focused on the first trimester of gestation, and it is mediated by reduced gestational age rather than intra-uterine growth restriction. Several robustness checks reject the hypothesis that the association is driven by unobserved selectivity of mothers. The findings highlight the relevance of understanding the early emergence of unequal opportunity and of investing in maternal wellbeing since the onset of pregnancy.	Florencia	 Torche
2010	156	Infant and Child Mortality in Stressful Contexts	Economic Crisis and Demographic Change in Indonesia	During the 1997/1998 economic crisis in Indonesia GDP declined by 15% and the rate of inflation increased by 75%. Does this crisis have any impact on demographic change in Indonesia? This paper tries to address this question using the panel data of the Indonesian Family Life Study 1997, 2000 and 2007. Special attention will be given on the impact on infant and child mortality. Preliminary investigation reveals that during the period, mortality of male children age 0-3 among in the household with less than six years of education increased between 1997 to 2000 and then declined by 2007. What factors contribute to this demographic change will be further explored, including mother’s education, income, sanitation and hygiene, pre-natal care, size of the baby at the time of birth, etc.	Wayan	 Suriastini	Amalia	 Rifana
2010	156	Infant and Child Mortality in Stressful Contexts	The Effectsof Maternal and Child Migration on   Under-Five Mortality in Informal Settlements of Nairobi	Between 60 and 70% of Nairobi City’s population live in congested informal settlements, commonly referred to as slums, without proper access to sanitation, clean water, health care and other social services. Children in such areas are exposed to uniquely high health hazards and most of the residents in-migrated from rural areas. In this study, we examine the impact of maternal and child migration on the survival of children in two slum settlements between July 2003 and June 2007. We used a two-stage Cox model, controlling for attrition and various factors that affect child survival. Childhood mortality in the two slums remains very high, especially among children born in the slums to new migrant mothers. While emerging evidence highlights the need to pay attention to the plight of slum dwellers in African cities, this study demonstrates the need to look at inequities in health outcomes even within the so-called ‘marginalized groups’.	Philippe	 Bocquier	Donatien	 Beguy	Kanyiva	 Muindi	Yazoumé	 Yé
2010	157	Innovations in Data and Measurement in Spatial and Network Analysis	Using Google Street View to Measure Neighborhood Physical Disorder	The Street View project assesses the feasibility, reliability, and validity of using new technology, freely available online via Google, to measure neighborhood physical disorder and built environment features at a fraction of the cost of field studies. In this paper, we compare the psychometric properties and predictive power of physical disorder subscales that can be captured via Google technology to original physical disorder scales, previously used in analyses of the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Study (LA FANS) and the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN). Ascertaining the value of Street View-able subscales of physical disorder inventories will establish the potential for Google Street View to replace field studies as a way of contextualizing survey data, at a fraction of the cost of sending people into the field.	Julien	O. Teitler	Kathryn	 Neckerman	Yeonjin	 Lee	Andrew	 Rundle
2010	157	Innovations in Data and Measurement in Spatial and Network Analysis	Innovation in the Measurement of Place: Systematic Social Observation in a Rural Setting	Data collection strategies to support research on neighborhoods and health in urban settings do not necessarily translate well to rural contexts. An example is systematic social observation (SSO), an approach that involves structured observations of urban blocks or block faces. What investigators might choose to observe and measure in urban areas might or might not be worth considering in rural areas (and vice versa). But the more important challenge is defining an appropriate unit of observation for rural areas. Intersection-to-intersection road segments equivalent to urban blocks are in many instances too long and heterogeneous to serve as units. This paper develops an innovative approach to the problem, combining principles of sampling and spatial analysis, and applies and tests it in a rural county in the Southeast. It also assesses the validity and reliability of indexes originally created for urban settings when applied to rural settings, e.g., physical disorder.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Heather	B. Edelblute	Brian	 Frizzelle	Philip	 McDaniel
2010	157	Innovations in Data and Measurement in Spatial and Network Analysis	Conceptualizing and Measuring Urban Locations:
Comparing a Satellite View with the Demographic & Health Surveys	There is widespread awareness that the world is becoming increasingly urban, both in terms of urbanization and urban expansion. However, understanding of these trends is limited by the lack of a consistent framework: there is no standard definition of an “urban” area nor agreed upon spatial boundaries of them. By comparing Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) data, which uses each country’s rural/urban classification system, against the Global Rural Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP) data, which primarily uses night-time lights as an urban proxy, we are able to better understand what is meant by “urban” in the two data sources and to learn more about how to conceptualized an urban continuum. This is achieved by analyzing the distribution and characteristics (i.e. household electrification, rural/urban classification, poverty) of DHS clusters falling in and out of GRUMP urban extents.	Audrey	 Dorelien	Deborah	L. Balk	Megan	 Todd	Mark	R. Montgomery
2010	158	Race and Ethnic Disparities in Morbidity and Mortality in the United States	Trends in Suicide among Urban White and Urban African American Males: 1980 to 2002	Historically, whites have committed suicide at a greater rate than blacks. However, recent reports show this gap is narrowing, primarily due to a significant rise in young African American male suicide. While many explanations for this increase have been proposed, we know of no empirical research that has examined the causes of increased rates nor made comparisons of long term trends in these patterns across cities. Using data from the Multiple Mortality Cause of Death Records, the Supplemental Homicide Reports, and the U.S. Census for 1980-2000, we employ latent growth model approaches, as well as pooled time series to examine the process by which variation and change in the demographic, economic, and cultural characteristics of cities have influenced suicide subpopulations. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the causes and correlates of rising suicide rates among young black males over the last twenty plus years.	Tim	 Wadsworth	Charis	 Kubrin	Jerald	 Herting
2010	158	Race and Ethnic Disparities in Morbidity and Mortality in the United States	Dyed Black: Homicide and Racial Classification on Death Certificates	Using the 1993 US National Mortality Followback Survey (NMFS), we show a relationship between cause of death and racial classification of the decedent. The NMFS contains racial data from two sources: the death certificate, and a followback survey of relatives or friends of the deceased. Thus, there is the possibility of racially-discordant classification between how race is recorded in the death certificate (and in vital statistics), and how race is recalled by relatives or friends. Homicide mortality is highly and statistically-significantly associated with being coded black on the death certificate (viz., by the medical examiner). This relationship is net of controls for followback-survey race, so the homicide-black relationship we see is not simply a restatement of the fact that homicide is a more prevalent cause of death among blacks. The plasticity and context-specificity of racial classification in the United States extends to death classification, and cause is important	Andrew	 Penner	Aliya	 Saperstein
2010	158	Race and Ethnic Disparities in Morbidity and Mortality in the United States	Race, Gender, and Hypertension: Findings from the NHANES-III	Differential treatment regimens for hypertension by race have been recommended in the U.S. for at least three decades. Using the nationally representative NHANES-III data (1988-1994), we explore the extent to which Black and White hypertensive adults are placed on different treatment regimens, and whether this is due to differences in socioeconomic and demographic factors, relevant comorbidities, and blood biochemistry profiles. A series of logistic models - controlling for or stratified by race - are used to estimate race differences in the prevalence of five different pharmaceutical interventions for hypertension. The analyses showed persistent racial differences in the prescription of antihypertensive drugs. With some exceptions, these differences were not explained by a comprehensive set of potential socioeconomic, demographic, and biomedical mediators. An unexpected insight is the moderating effect of sex on the race differences in prescribing different medication types. Our findings suggest that race and sex act as implicit guides for pharmacological treatment of hypertension.	Leslie	 Hinkson
2010	158	Race and Ethnic Disparities in Morbidity and Mortality in the United States	Disparities in Birth Weight between Non-Hispanic Blacks and Non-Hispanic Whites: The Effect of Rural Residency	This research assesses the prevalence of low birth weight among non-Hispanic Blacks and non-Hispanic Whites along the rural/urban continuum. Degree of social isolation and lack of social support are proposed mechanisms for explaining the high prevalence of low birth weight observed among Blacks in rural counties. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 Child data, the relative odds of low birth weight were estimated for Black and White women via logistic regression. Living in a predominately rural county exacerbates disparities in birth weight outcomes between Blacks and Whites. Logistic regression models also revealed that racial disparities in low birth weight were almost completely accounted for by the presence of the father in the household. Our results highlight the importance of place of residence and family structures for health outcomes among racial minorities.	Theresa	M. Fedor	E.	Helen  Berry	Eric	N. Reither
2010	159	What is 'Race' in Education Research?	The Impact of Education on Inter-Group Attitudes: A Multiracial Analysis	How does education affect racial attitudes? Past research addressing this question has focused almost exclusively on Whites’ attitudes toward Blacks, neglecting important racial minority populations. This study transcends this narrow focus by analyzing the effect of education on beliefs about racial stereotypes, discrimination and racial preference policies among Whites, Blacks, Hispanics and Asians. Data from the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality 1992-1994 indicate that there are important racial differences in the relationship between education and inter-group attitudes. Highly educated Whites and Blacks were more likely to reject negative racial stereotypes, but the link between education and beliefs about out-group stereotypes was less consistent among Hispanics and Asians. In addition, education was positively associated with perceptions of discrimination against racial out-groups among Whites, Blacks and Asians but not among Hispanics. Finally, a more advanced education was not associated with greater support for racial preference policies among any group in the study.	Geoffrey	T. Wodtke
2010	159	What is 'Race' in Education Research?	Ethnic Group Disparities in Academic Skill Development across Four Low-Income Countries	Many countries experienced dramatic economic growth in recent decades, but within country growth was unequally distributed, and disparities persist by race, ethnicity, and social class. Although education should promote equity across social groups, this idealization falls short when educational resources are unequally distributed. Instead, educational disparities perpetuate within country inequality. We examine disparities in academic skill development by ethnicity in Ethiopia and Vietnam, caste in India, and race in Peru using data from the Young Lives Study, a longitudinal study of childhood poverty. Three mechanisms may help explain this achievement gap. First, marginalized families have fewer economic and educational resources. Second, they are geographically concentrated in urban slums or inaccessible rural regions. Finally, they often prefer traditional languages not used in the educational system. We will decompose academic skill indicators to highlight the particular factors contributing to observed disparities. Understanding the role of these factors will elucidate policy intervention points.	Jessica	 Heckert	Rukmalie	 Jayakody
2010	159	What is 'Race' in Education Research?	Understanding Racial Differences in Educational Outcomes: An Examination of Positional, Relational, and Interactional Processes	We draw on recent scholarship calling for more sophisticated approaches to the measurement, modeling, and theories of race to articulate a conceptual framework of the potential pathways through which racial differences in education outcomes may occur. An empirical application of this framework using Add Health data and structural equation models examines direct and indirect paths through which racial categories associate with educational attainment and achievement for adolescents. We integrate a reflexive conceptualization of race into a unified framework and modeling strategy that considers ecological contexts and social processes that are salient to understanding racial differences. We find that indirect effects of race make up a considerable portion of the total effects, meaning that a substantial amount of the association between education outcomes and racial categories occurs through the social process mediators in the models, providing strong evidence in support of the conceptualization of race as being enacted through social processes.	Sarah	K. Bruch	Lawrence	M. Berger
2010	159	What is 'Race' in Education Research?	Bio-Ancestry and Social Construction of Race and Ethnicity	Social construction and bio-ancestral base of race and ethnicity have long been two sharply divided perspectives. Instead of treating the two perspectives as diametrically opposed, this application proposes to examine evidence for the coexistence of socially-constructed and bio-ancestrally-rooted racial identity in the contemporary United States. Drawing on decades of scholarship in race and ethnicity, recent advances in human genetics, and data resources from the Add Health, we (1) investigate whether and why self-reports of race and ethnicity depart from bio-ancestry; (2) assess the accuracy of a panel of 186 genetic ancestral informative markers in predicting self-reported race/ethnicity using a racially and ethnically diverse sample of 17,000 adolescents; (3) examine to what extent self-reports of race and ethnicity follow the one-drop rule; (4) address whether and why individuals change their racial/ethnic identity under different social circumstances; (5) examine the relationship between bio-ancestry and friendship social network in a school context.	Guang	 Guo
2010	160	Women's Empowerment and Disempowerment in Developing Countries	Women's Empowerment and Achievement of Desired Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	Substantial research supports that women’s empowerment is associated with use of contraceptives, lower fertility, and longer birth intervals. Some suggest that women’s empowerment is a key pathway through which education influences fertility. This study explores factors that influence women’s ideal family size and achievement of wanted fertility using data from the Women’s Status module of two recent DHS surveys in four sub-Saharan African countries: Guinea, Mali, Namibia, and Zambia. Multiple linear regression models using matched couples data revealed that women’s empowerment indicators, including norms against wife beating and refusing sex, inter-spousal age difference, age at first birth, and ability to get permission to seek healthcare treatment, were significantly associated with women’s ideal family size. In the same models, controlling for sociodemographic factors, husband’s ideal family size was strongly associated with women’s desired fertility. This analysis suggests that women’s desired fertility is significantly associated with empowerment in a spousal relationship.	Ushma	D. Upadhyay	Deborah	 Karasek
2010	160	Women's Empowerment and Disempowerment in Developing Countries	Poverty, Microcredit Program Membership and Domestic Violence in Bangladesh: A Study Using Propensity Score Matching	This paper explores the relationship between women’s participation in microcredit groups and domestic violence in Bangladesh. Several recent studies have raised concern about microcredit programs by reporting higher levels of violence among women who are members. These results however maybe attributable to selection bias as members might differ from non-members in significant ways to begin with that make them more susceptible to violence. Using a sample of currently married women from the 2007 Bangladesh Demographic Health Survey (N=4,467), we use propensity score matching (PSM) as a way of addressing selection bias in this relationship. Preliminary results suggest that the previously seen strong positive association between membership and violence does not hold when an appropriate comparison group generated using PSM is used in the analyses. Multivariate analyses also suggest that levels of violence between members and non-members are not significantly different and instead could depend on context-specific factors related to poverty.	Ashish	 Bajracharya
2010	160	Women's Empowerment and Disempowerment in Developing Countries	Methods for Assessing Attitudes toward Intimate Partner Violence in Rural Bangladesh	This paper presents preliminary qualitative findings from a project to develop better methodological tools to understand women’s and men’s attitudes about intimate partner violence (IPV) in rural Bangladesh and their perceptions of norms about IPV in their communities. In-depth cognitive interviews with men and women and in-depth open-ended interviews with women are used to explore subjective understandings of standard survey questions that are meant to elicit individual attitudes about IPV. Findings suggest that additional context should be incorporated into questions on IPV attitudes to make responses to them more meaningful.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler
2010	160	Women's Empowerment and Disempowerment in Developing Countries	Gender, Absenteeism and Menstruation: Evidence from Rural Malawi	The management of menstruation has recently emerged as a promising domain for international interventions with the ultimate goal of increasing and reinforcing girls’ schooling. While menstruation may negatively impact girls’ quality of life in particular cultural and physical environments, few studies have examined whether a relationship between menstruation and girls’ schooling outcomes exists. We use cross-sectional data from rural Malawi to examine gender differences in school absenteeism. These data allow us to examine the factors that are associated with absenteeism and to evaluate the interaction of these factors with gender. In particular, we focus on the availability and quality of toilet facilities in relation to girls’ attendance patterns. Given that toilet facilities and hygiene issues have been given substantial attention in the policy domain, our analysis will provide insights into current patterns of gender disadvantage and the potential impact of such interventions on girls' school outcomes.	Monica	J. Grant	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Barbara	S. Mensch
2010	161	Gender, Couple Context and Sexual Activity	Predictors of Concurrent Sexual Relationships among Young Males in the U.S.	The study used data from multiple waves of National Survey of Adolescent Males (NSAM), and examined concurrent heterosexual relationships among young males in series of cross-sectional analyses. The study first examined the correlates of concurrent relationships using respondents who had been sexually experienced at each wave among those who participated in all three waves (N=1,290), and then repeated the analysis using respondents participated at each wave (N1988=1,880, N1991=1,676, and N1995=1,377). The results showed a consistent trend that number of sex partners was a single factor associated with ever having concurrent relationship status, and its association persisted over time. Respondents’ sociodemographic characteristics (Black, and lived with 1 step parent at age 14) showed significant association with concurrent relationships at later waves. These results suggested concurrent relationships at earlier stage of males’ life were explained by behavioral factors, and race and living environment at age 14 became important as they age.	Michiyo	 Yamazaki	Frangiscos	 Sifakis	Jacinda	K. Dariotis	Nan	M. Astone	Joseph	H. Pleck	Freya	 Sonenstein
2010	161	Gender, Couple Context and Sexual Activity	Sexual Concurrency in Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe: The Role of Gender, Economic Status, and Migration	Much speculation has arisen as to what is driving the extreme global disparities in HIV. Recently attention has focused on the possibility that concurrent sexual partnerships could be a key driver of both the uniqueness and severity of the epidemic in Sub-Saharan Africa. Maintaining multiple partnerships is often identified as a means for poor women to achieve some level of financial security. In contrast, men may turn to non-marital partners when they cannot fulfill their provider role in the family due to economic conditions. In a context where gender, economic status, and migration are closely intertwined, this paper examines concurrent sexual partnerships among men and among women in Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe using recent Demographic and Health Surveys. Multivariate logistic regressions stratified by sex suggest a complex relationship between these three factors—gender and domestic relations, economic status, and migration—and concurrency in Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.	Megan	Klein  Hattori	Sarah	 Braun	Hope	 Chapman	Carolyn	 Chuong	Monique	 Morales	Sushant	 Wagley
2010	161	Gender, Couple Context and Sexual Activity	Health Correlates Associated with Women’s and Men’s 
Experiences of Intimate Partner Violence in Canada	While the negative health consequences of intimate partner violence (IPV) are well documented, most research has focused on physical violence. However, some researchers argue that failure to consider the extent of coercive control obscures our understanding of the impact of IPV. This study used latent class analysis (LCA) to examine the health consequences associated with different patterns of physical violence, sexual coercion, psychological abuse, and controlling behavior in a Canadian population-based sample of over 15,000 respondents. The findings revealed that experiencing any pattern of physical or non-physical abuse is associated with a range of negative health experiences for both women and men. However, results also documented the increasingly negative effects of IPV for those experiencing more severe patterns of violence and control. This finding was particularly strong for women. These results suggest that the health consequences of IPV is influenced by gender and by the nature of the abuse experienced.	Donna	L. Ansara
2010	161	Gender, Couple Context and Sexual Activity	Women's Narratives of Gender-Based Violence: Using Discourse of the Collective Subject as a Qualitative Data Analysis Technique	Gender-based violence against women is a profound human rights violation and a challenging topic across the globe. The use of statistical analysis procedures to measure the magnitude of the phenomenon - prevalence, risks and correlates – is an important avenue to unveil the dimensions of the problem. However, additional techniques should be used to demonstrate the intensity of this type of abuse. This cross-sectional study, conducted in a metropolitan area of Brazil’s capital, interviewed 278 women aged between 15-49 years with a questionnaire developed by World Health Organization. At the end of the interview, 195 women depicted their personal narratives of violence. This paper presents the results of these narratives using the “Discourse of the Collective Subject”, a qualitative technique with roots in the Theory of Social Representation. The findings highlight the individual and collective thought and a stratum of the social representation of interpersonal violence experienced by the survivors.	Leides	 Barroso Azevedo Moura
2010	162	Comparative Perspectives on Nonmarital Fertility	Examining the Antecedents of U.S. Nonmarital Fathering using Two National Datasets	The dramatic rise in U.S. nonmarital childbearing in recent decades has generated considerable attention from both researchers and policymakers alike, particularly with respect to the implications for women and children. In turn, an extensive literature has examined the factors that predict women’s nonmarital childbearing. Far less is known about the antecedents of nonmarital fatherhood, largely because data about men, especially low-income men who are disproportionately unmarried fathers, have been much less readily available. In this paper, we use data from two national datasets with multinomial logit models and event history analysis to examine the antecedents of contemporary U.S. nonmarital fathering. Preliminary results suggest that black and Hispanic men are much more likely to have a child outside of marriage, and higher education and older age at first sex strongly diminish the likelihood of having a nonmarital birth. We discuss the implications of our results for future research and public policy.	Marcia	J. Carlson	Natasha	 Pilkauskas	Alicia	 VanOrman
2010	162	Comparative Perspectives on Nonmarital Fertility	Family Arrangements in Chile	This article describes the family arrangements in which women in Chile live, focusing on their current socioeconomic situation, and exploring to what extent such scenario is the result of long term disadvantages, coming from the structure and the socioeconomic status of the families where they grew up in. Data come from a post-partum survey, implemented in Chile during 2008-2009 (sample size 686). Results show the socioeconomic situation of women in different arrangements varies significantly. Women in nuclear marriages are quite apart in terms of age, education and economic resources. Nuclear cohabiters and married women in extended households follow. Cohabiters in extended households and non cohabiters are a third unit. They are the youngest, least educated, and more economically vulnerable women. The link with the household the respondents grew up in is strong. The original family socioeconomic status matters more than its structure to locate women in their current family arrangements.	Viviana	 Salinas
2010	162	Comparative Perspectives on Nonmarital Fertility	Materialism, Gender, and Family Values in Europe	Ideational change has been posited as one of key factors behind shifting family and fertility behaviors. Values are thought to be driving factors behind subsequent practices. Still, factors that shape those family and parenthood values have received relatively less attention. Moreover, the possibility that these factors vary in type or extent by gender or across socio-cultural context has not been adequately explored. Using the 1999 European Values Survey, this paper aims to contribute to knowledge about family values formation by examining whether the tendency to express traditional views about family is associated with the extent to which a person adheres to “(post-)materialist” values. Additionally, we examine the extent to which geopolitical context is associated with family values. Our results suggest that the relationship between materialism and traditional family values varies by gender and the particular family value in question, and that geopolitical boundaries had a strong association with family values.	Kimiko	 Tanaka	Deborah	 Lowry
2010	162	Comparative Perspectives on Nonmarital Fertility	Examining the Gap between First and Higher-Parity Cohabiting Births: Findings from across Europe	Although cohabitation has rapidly become a common setting for childbearing in European countries, the percent of first births within cohabitation is substantially higher than that of higher parity births. Using harmonized union and reproductive histories from 10 countries in Europe, we analyze the potential reasons for this gap: 1) marriage between first and subsequent births and 2) lower overall fertility among long-term cohabitors. We also examine whether entering cohabitation after bearing a child as a single or divorced mother may increase the percent of higher order births within cohabitation. By comparing changes in union status between first and second births, as well as analyzing women’s partnership trajectories after a first birth, we will investigate how nonmarital fertility and the meaning of cohabitation differs across countries.	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris
2010	163	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health	Older Sexual Partners and Teens’ Mental Health	Using two waves of data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this paper investigates the influence of having an older sexual partner on subsequent mental health among girls. We describe and test status asymmetry and social age theories to explain this association. Our preliminary findings indicate that having sex with an older partner is associated with decreases in self-esteem and increases in depression. Higher levels of relationship conflict in age disparate partnerships account for a small portion of the association between having an older partner and increased depression. If age is tied to status as suggested by past research on adolescence (Brown 1999), then our findings suggest that the age-related status asymmetry between age disparate partners may help to explain negative associations between having an older partner and mental health.	Ann	 Meier	Gina	A. Erickson	Heather	 McLaughlin
2010	163	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health	Hanging Out, Hooking Up and Falling in Love on College Campuses: A Continuing Behavioral Trend?	The popular press is obsessed with the adolescent “hookup”—a one-time encounter including anything from kissing to intercourse without further relationship expectation. We offer a set of observations and arguments based on an extant literature review and our own study at Duke based on a representative survey of more than 1,500 freshmen and senior students. With these data, we describe a very different scene than does the popular media. Through this paper, we assess how the relationships between demographic/social factors and college hooking up are mediated by previous hookup behavior and, to a lesser extent, college contextual factors. This paper highlights the continuity in hooking up and engaging in relationships as youth transition from: (1) a high school to a college environment for freshmen students; and (2) from junior to senior year in college for senior students.	S.	Philip  Morgan	Suzanne	 Shanahan	Wendy	 Brynildsen
2010	163	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health	Relationship Dynamics and Contraceptive Use Reported in an Online Weekly Survey: Preliminary Results	This paper examines the role of young women's dynamic relationship experiences on their contraceptive behaviors. I use new longitudinal data from a weekly mixed-mode (online or phone) survey spanning two and half years. I investigate the effects of time-varying measures of intensity and instability within and across relationships on imperfect contraceptive use among a sample of almost 1000 18-21 year old women. The results are preliminary but suggest that conflict with a partner and transitions between relationships, such as getting back together with a partner or breaking up with one partner and starting a relationship with another partner, increase the likelihood of imperfect contraceptive use. In the final paper to be presented at PAA, analyses will include additional time-varying relationship measures and will also investigate the reported reasons for imperfect use.	Yasamin	 Kusunoki
2010	163	Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health	Trends Across Adolescence and Sociodemographic Correlates of the Age Gap Between Romantic Partners	Dating an older partner has been found to be a risk factor for early sex, nonuse of condoms, and STI diagnosis among adolescent girls. However, little is known about prevalence of older male/younger female relationships and risk factors for such relationships. For example, the few studies that have predicted dating an older partner typically look at a single relationship, not an adolescent’s dating history over time. Using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, waves 1-3, this paper examines trends in the age gap between dating partners across adolescence into young adulthood, using sociodemographic characteristics to predict both the average age gap in an individual’s relationships and also the amount of change across adolescence. Separate analyses also look at patterns of dating, e.g., those who always date older partners vs. those who always date same-aged partners.	Christine	M. Flanigan
2010	164	Racial/Ethnic Segregation and Discrimination	Whites’ Residential Preferences in a Multi-Ethnic Context: Likes, Dislikes, and the Reasons Why	Scholarship on racial residential preferences has increasingly focused on identifying factors that shape preferences (e.g., race/class; ethnocentrism/prejudice) and better-measuring preferences in our increasingly racially/ethnically diverse nation. This paper contributes to these efforts by reporting an extension of Charles’ (2006) multi-ethnic measure of preferences in which we asked a random sample of white householders to (1) draw their most and least desired neighborhood racial composition; (2) include Arab Americans among the possible neighbors; and (3) explain, in their own words, why they liked/disliked the neighborhood they drew. We use two-step cluster analysis, logistic regression, and open-ended coding techniques to: (1) create a typology of the most/least desired neighborhoods; (2) identify their socio-demographic correlates; and (3) analyze respondent's explanations for the neighborhoods they drew. Results for the “most desired” neighborhood suggest a superficial commitment to the norm of diversity, while the “least desired” results point to our nation’s persistent racial hierarchy.	Maria	 Krysan	Courtney	 Carter	Marieke	 Van Londen
2010	164	Racial/Ethnic Segregation and Discrimination	Perceived Discrimination and Neighborhood Racial Composition among Black, White and Latino Young Adults in Chicago	This study explores the relationship between perceived discrimination and neighborhood racial context among black, white and Latino young adults using the Project for Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods. Results indicate that all groups perceive discrimination in their everyday lives. These perceptions are reduced as the proportion of coracial neighbors increases following predictions based on the contact hypothesis. Among blacks and Latinos these reductions are moderate to non-existent, suggesting that neighborhood racial context may not be as important for minority populations as suggested by previous literature. Surprisingly, whites’ perceptions are the most sensitive to fluctuations in neighborhood racial composition. Whites also perceive more discrimination than blacks or Latinos when whites are small minorities in their neighborhoods (less than 25%). Findings suggest that perceptions of discrimination among whites may constitute an additional obstacle for residential racial integration on top of the more often studied racial prejudice.	Daniel	 Herda
2010	164	Racial/Ethnic Segregation and Discrimination	Cybersegregation in Dallas and Boston: Is Neil a More Desirable Tenant Than Tyrone or Jorge?	Housing that is available via the internet is an increasingly important part of the housing market. Yet, little research has explored whether those with racially/ethnically identifiable names are treated differently by housing providers. This paper seeks to fill this void. Between January and June of 2009, housing audits were conducted of electronic advertisements made over the popular internet site, Craigslist. Identical inquiries were made by males with white-, black-, and Hispanic-sounding names in response to a random sample of rental-unit advertisements in the Dallas and Boston metropolitan areas. Preliminary results suggest that Neil is a more desirable tenant than Tyrone or Jorge. Significant disparities exist between testers with white-sounding names and those with black- or Hispanic-sounding names in their access to rental housing. When access involves potential contact with the provider, there appears to be more negative treatment against minorities, than on the other indicators.	Samantha	 Friedman	Gregory	 Squires	Chris	 Galvan
2010	164	Racial/Ethnic Segregation and Discrimination	Does Latino Population Induce White Flight? Evidence from Los Angeles County	Whether local minority population induces white flight to suburbs or private schools is a question of interest to many researchers. However, empirically identifying the causality is difficult due to residential sorting. Relying on a residential sorting model, I assume that similar people live in the same neighborhood. I identify the effect of local Latino population on white flight by using the cohort-to-cohort change in the race composition within each neighborhood, which is a credibly idiosyncratic variation. Using Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey, I find that for every 10 percentage points increase in the share of Latinos in a white child’s cohort and neighborhood, she is more likely to attend private school by 3 percentage points, or her household is more likely to move to a less Latino neighborhood in the next two years by 6-8 percentage points.	Ying	 Pan
2010	165	New Data on Same- and Different-Sex Unions: Issues and Estimates	Best Practices for Asking Questions about Sexual Orientation on Surveys	Population-based survey data are critical for assessing the need for and impact of public policies that address group disparities in health and social outcomes. Data that would allow scholars to assess whether and how life experiences differ by sexual orientation are limited, creating a large scientific research gap. The Ford Foundation supported a project designed to increase the quantity and quality of sexual orientation data. Over a five year period, a multidisciplinary team of social scientists met to identify the best scientific approaches to gathering data on sexual orientation within the context of population-based surveys. The team pooled decades of knowledge and experience, conducted new methodological research, and met with survey specialists. This paper summarizes their findings and offers best practices regarding measuring sexual orientation and analyzing data. Topics include: what to ask, where to ask it, and how to analyze data, all in the context of a diverse population.	Gary	J. Gates	MV	Lee  Badgett
2010	165	New Data on Same- and Different-Sex Unions: Issues and Estimates	Neither Marriage, Nor Cohabitation. The Development of the Civil Solidarity Pact (PACS) in France	By creating the PACS in 1999, France has implemented the legalisation of same-sex couples. But compared to most European legislation on same-sex partnerships, the French PACS displays a noticeable difference as it also applies to different-sex couples. Ten years after its adoption, it comes across as a form of union well suited to the needs of different sex couples, since 140,000 PACS were registered in 2008, of which 94% were heterosexual (vs. 270,000 marriages). How should we interpret the choice of this new type of union? This paper presents a three-dimensional analysis. Firstly, it highlights the characteristics of the PACS with regard to marriage and informal cohabitation. Then, it focuses on PACS partners and their main characteristics in order to understand the factors behind its development. Finally, the cross-exploration of in-depth interviews and topical surveys sheds light on what might come across as a French specificity.	Wilfried	 Rault
2010	165	New Data on Same- and Different-Sex Unions: Issues and Estimates	New Estimates of Same-Sex Couple Households from the American Community Survey	Estimates of same-sex couples from surveys may be sensitive to the format design of the questionnaire. Changes were made to the 2008 American Community Survey (ACS) questionnaire reflecting the addition of questions and the desire to make the overall design of the survey more consistent with the 2010 Census. This resulted in changes to the format and layout of the questionnaire. Technological improvements were also made to the processing systems used in the data collection phase. We believe a latent effect of these design and processing changes was to produce a decline in the estimated number of couples who reported themselves as same-sex spouses between 2007 and 2008 but by doing so, have improved the estimates of same-sex couple households. This paper will evaluate the impact of these changes and examine the potential effect of these changes on overall estimates and characteristics of same-sex couples between 2007 and 2008.	Martin	 O'Connell	Daphne	A. Lofquist	Tavia	 Simmons	Terry	 Lugaila
2010	165	New Data on Same- and Different-Sex Unions: Issues and Estimates	Embracing the Institution of Marriage: The Characteristics of Remarried Americans	It has been suggested that marriage in the U.S. has become deinstitutionalized, as a consequence of its diminished status in American society. However, many Americans continue to remarry, occasionally multiple times. Given the context of deinstitutionalized marriage, this paper explores who remarries and how they differ from those marrying for the first time and those who have yet to remarry. This paper uses new marital history questions from the 2008 American Community Survey (ACS), the most representative and large-scale data ever collected on marital patterns. We explore three possible explanations why Americans remarry: cohort effects; variations in social and demographic characteristics such as education, income, race, and ethnicity; and geographic variations promoting a “culture” of marriage. We find evidence that all three explanations matter and vary differently for those married one, two, or three or more times relative to their peers.	Diana	B. Elliott	Jamie	M. Lewis
2010	166	Immigrants' Families and Households	Extended Kin, Acculturation and Asian Adolescent Well-Being	The tendency for immigrant ethnic groups, particularly Asians, to co-reside with extended kin is well-established, but few studies have examined the prevalence of extended family living among Asian adolescents, and none have considered the role of living with relatives on adolescent well-being. We use Wave I of Add Health to examine the impacts of residing with extended kin and immigrant acculturation (generation status and English language use) on the health, substance use, and educational well-being of 1,380 Asian adolescents living in the U.S. We also examine competing explanations, such as family integration and peer attachment. We find that both living with relatives and greater acculturation increase the likelihood of being overweight and reduce the likelihood of having high college expectations, while acculturation is also positively associated with binge drinking. Although family integration and peer attachment have independent influences, they do little to mediate effects of kin co-residence or immigrant acculturation.	Holly	 Heard	Adrianne	 Frech	Rachel	T. Kimbro
2010	166	Immigrants' Families and Households	Better Fortunes? Living Arrangements and Wellbeing of Migrant Youth in Six OECD Countries	Using recent census data, this paper documents cross-national variation in the living arrangements of youth with migration backgrounds in six industrialized countries—France, Greece, Portugal, Spain, Israel and the United States, and evaluates nativity and generational differences that are related to child wellbeing. After characterizing each nation’s context of reception, including changes in policies that favor family migration, we illustrate how operational definitions that exclude children not living with parents not only distort estimates of migrant youth, but also exclude the most vulnerable. We find migrant youth are more likely to live without parents (an especially vulnerable group excluded in most research) or in extended families relative to native-born youth; youth in complex and nonparental households are more likely to be recent immigrants, and tend to fare worse in terms of school enrollment. The concluding section identifies the strengths and limitations of census data and further research needs.	Audrey	N. Beck	Marta	 Tienda
2010	166	Immigrants' Families and Households	Generational Change and Cultural Preferences: 1.5 and Second Generation Adults Living with Parents	This paper asks if percentages of young adults living with parents vary by immigrant generational status, and for groups that originate from countries characterized by an emphasis on individualism versus familism. 2006 Canadian census data for single (never-married) 20-34 year olds show young adult-parental co-residency rates differ considerably by immigrant generational status, gender, and origins. In general, percentages living with parents decline for across the 1.5, second and third-plus generations, and young women in each generation are less likely than men to reside with parents. Further, young men and women whose parents are born in the USA, the UK, France and Germany have levels of co-residency with parents that approximate those observed for the third-plus generation. Those whose parents are born in Italy, Portugal, China, Hong Kong, South Korea, India and Pakistan have much higher percentages residing with parents, a pattern that suggests the persistence of cultural preferences across generations.	Monica	 Boyd	Stella	 Park
2010	166	Immigrants' Families and Households	Cohort Progress toward Homeownership and Household Formation: Immigrant Experiences in Los Angeles and Toronto Compared	This paper examines residential assimilation of five young immigrant cohorts in Los Angeles and Toronto over a five year period in the early 2000s. Results show that, while immigrants enjoy significant progress, there are large variations between immigrant cohorts. The Mexicans in LA have struggled. The Chinese as housing “high achievers” have attained homeownership by compressing household formation and experienced only modest progress in household formation. In contrast, the lower achievers such as black immigrants have the highest rates of household formation and increased further over the study period. We interpret that country-of-origin groups sharing the same culture and having a similar desire to own homes in both countries, and that variable rates of household formation represent a household strategy to achieve homeownership in the face of different assimilation contexts. The findings strongly support the need to account for household formation in the study of homeownership attainment.	Zhou	 Yu
2010	167	Gender in Developing Countries	The Interrelationships between Female Autonomy, Empowerment and Demographic Change: Some Unexpected Pointers from History	This paper reexamines the interrelations between gender and demographic behavior in the contemporary world by looking at these relations in the past in today’s industrialized world. While analyses on developing countries conclude that demographic change comes with increasing ‘autonomy’ of women, the historical literature on social change in the developed world is more ambiguous. The new emphasis on women during the 17th to 19th centuries both idealizes the mother and makes a martyr of her. I juxtapose evidence of changes in women’s autonomy in the industrialized countries with changes in child mortality to conclude that it was social change which increased the constraints on women’s lives that accompanied (and probably contributed to) better child survival. I extrapolate from this to ask whether the link between our standard measure of female autonomy and child health could also be interpreted to imply a relationship between decreasing empowerment and declining mortality and fertility.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu
2010	167	Gender in Developing Countries	Gender Inequality in Education and Employment: China’s Urban Labor Markets in Transition, 1982-2005	This paper examines the trend in gender inequality in educational attainment and non-agricultural employment in urban China since the 1990s. Based on the analyses of the micro-sample data from the 1982, 1990 and 2000 population censuses and the 2005 mini-census, we found that: (1) the gender gap in education, though still existing, has been substantially reduced; (2) the increase in women’s education in China did not lead to higher rates of labor force participation. Instead, women’s employment rate drops over time; (3) despite the fact that education increases in the likelihood of employment, this effect has declined over time for both men and women; (4) While married men are more likely to hold employment, married women are less likely to do so. The evidence suggests a return to traditional gender roles that used to be shaped by the socialist ideology on gender equality.	Xiaogang	 Wu	Xi	 Song
2010	167	Gender in Developing Countries	Women’s Status during Reform in Vietnam	One of the most recent changes in Vietnam, occurring in 1986, was the call for a transition from a collectivist to a free market economic system. While the economic consequences of this transition are well documented, the specific implications for women need further exploration. This study examines Vietnamese women’s status during the course of economic reform using: 1) the 1989 and 1999 Vietnam Census; 2) the 2006 Vietnam Population Change Survey; 3) the 1992, 1998, and 2002 Vietnam Living Standard Surveys; and 4) the 1997 and 2002 Vietnam Demographic and Health Surveys. Pooled cross sections are analyzed and findings indicate that: 1) the absolute position of women improved in both domains; 2) their relative status compared to men increased in the public domain but not in the domestic domain; and 3) urban women and Southern women seemed to experience a larger gender gap with men in both domains.	Phuong	 Pham	Rukmalie	 Jayakody
2010	167	Gender in Developing Countries	Influences of Women’s State-Level Empowerment on Educational Inputs and Gender Gaps in Primary Schooling	We use a “gender and political-economy” framework to explore the influences of women’s state-level empowerment on levels and gaps in girls’ and boys’ primary schooling. We explore whether women’s institutional and grassroots empowerment influence state-level schooling outcomes directly, or indirectly through state-level inputs into education. Our analysis extends recent studies in India showing differences in the policy preferences of male and female politicians and a tendency for village councils where women have greater representation to implement policies that promote the collective good. We will extend prior work by (1) exploring a wider range of measures for women’s institutional and grassroots empowerment and state-level educational inputs and (2) estimating the pathways by which women’s state-level empowerment influences girls’ and boys’ primary schooling, directly and through changes in state-level schooling inputs. We anticipate that women's greater institutional and grassroots empowerment will improve primary-school entry, attendance, and attainment, overall and especially for girls.	Kathryn	M. Yount	Solveig	 Argeseanu Cunningham	Rohini	P. Pande
2010	168	Gender and the Labor Market	The Effect of Child Gender on Parents’ Labor Supply: Responses among Natives, Immigrants, and Racial and Ethnic Subgroups	Research has shown that child gender affects household behavior in both developing and developed countries. Child gender affects many aspects of parents’ behavior, including labor supply, marital stability, and time spent with children. Research using PSID and NLS data has found conflicting results on the direction, but in both cases, that child gender affects parents' labor supply. We explore whether parents’ apparent bias may be attributable to culture, which changes slowly but may have developed in response to economic incentives, such as a higher return on investment in sons, or old age support provided by a son. We use data from the March CPS and Census to examine U.S. parents with a young child to determine whether having a son rather than a daughter has a significant effect on parents’ labor supply and whether the culture of immigrants or racial/ethnic subgroups results in different effects of child gender across groups.	Sabrina	 Pabilonia	Jennifer	 Ward-Batts
2010	168	Gender and the Labor Market	Understanding the Gender Pay Gap in the Federal Workforce over the Past 20 Years	This paper examines the extent to which the pay gap between men and women in the federal workforce changed over the past 20 years and the factors that accounted for the gap. Using the most recent data available for a representative sample of federal employees, we employ multivariate regression and decomposition methods to analyze the contributions of specific factors--including education level, occupation, and experience--to the pay gap. We find that the raw gap—-before controlling for differences between men and women in factors that affect pay—-declined dramatically over the past 20 years. However, the unexplained pay gap remained level over this period.	Benjamin	 Bolitzer	Erin	M. Godtland
2010	168	Gender and the Labor Market	Fertility Timing and Opting Out: A Cohort Comparison of Women with Advanced and College Degrees for Birth Cohorts 1931-1975	This paper adds new evidence to the ‘opt out’ debate regarding white married mothers with high levels of education. We use the CPS June files on fertility (1979—2006) to address differences in age and cohort (1930-1975) trends in labor force participation and full-time employment rates between women with college and women with advanced degrees. Furthermore, we estimate a series of logistic regressions to assess the effect of age at first birth on labor force participation rates. We do not find evidence for increased levels of retreat from the labor market; however, the lfp rate clearly stalled for both educational groups, and full-time rates declined. Also, the child penalty in  labor force participation is 10% higher for college educated women compared to women with advanced degrees. Moreover, throughout the cohorts, women who had their first birth between 26 and 33 are subsequently significantly less likely to be employed than women who had their first child either earlier or later in the life course.	Natalie	 Nitsche	Hannah	 Brueckner
2010	168	Gender and the Labor Market	Employment Transitions and the Division of Household Labor among New Parents	This study considers whether employment transitions are one mechanism through which the gendered division of labor becomes more defined over the transition to parenthood. Using The American Time Use Survey in conjunction with new, innovative data from the New Parents Project, we assess how employment transitions, in the form of parental leave, affect the division of labor between first time married and cohabiting parents. We ask whether longer parental leaves result in a more highly differentiated division of labor between mothers and fathers. We expect to find that employment transitions are in fact one mechanism through which the gender division of labor becomes solidified among new parents. The results of this research give us insight into how employment affects the gendered behavior of new parents, as well as how social policies encouraging longer parental leaves may have unintended consequences in the household.	Emily	 Passias	Liana	C. Sayer	Claire	M. Kamp Dush	Sarah	 Schoppe-Sullivan
2010	169	Gender in Higher Education	The Female Advantage in College Academic Achievements and Horizontal Sex Segregation	This study offers a structural explanation for the female advantage in college completion rates, stressing the importance of horizontal sex segregation across fields of study in shaping educational outcomes and gender inequality. The empirical investigation is based on the Beginning Postsecondary Students (BPS) dataset, which is a nationally representative sample of about 6,500 students who matriculated at any 4-year schools in 1995. I employ a straightforward analytical strategy for tracing the female advantage back to gendered selection of majors. First, I examine how much of the female advantage in college cumulative grades and graduation likelihood, that remains after netting out the effect of social and academic background, is explained by differences between fields of study in academic demands and grading norms. Second, I assess whether the gender composition of fields of study shape the behavioral effects on the female advantage.	Sigal	 Alon	Dafna	 Gelbgiser
2010	169	Gender in Higher Education	Fewer Diplomas for Men: The Influence of College Experiences on the Gender Gap in College Graduation	The contemporary advantage for women in college graduation is evident at all socioeconomic levels and for all racial and ethnic groups. Although past research has documented the effects of background and early academic performance on the gender gap in college graduation, more proximate factors should affect this gap above and beyond their role in mediating background characteristics. In this study, I examine the impact of college experiences on gender inequality in college graduation. Using data from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88), this study tests whether formative college experiences, including college major, attendance patterns, social integration, and academic performance, contribute to the gender gap in graduation. The results show that attendance patterns and academic performance benefit women relative to men in college graduation while higher rates of participation in sports increase the likelihood of graduation for men compared to women.	Stephanie	 Ewert
2010	169	Gender in Higher Education	Peer Effects and Gender in the College Classroom	The presence of peer effects in higher education has been investigated in an extensive empirical literature. Studies have addressed the impacts of peer academic ability on own academic performance (Sacerdote 2001, Zimmerman 2003, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2005, Lyle 2007, Carrell et. al. 2008); peer characteristics such as family income on own academic performance (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2005); and peer characteristics on decisions such as joining a Greek organization or athletic team (Sacerdote 2001). This paper estimates the effects of overall and gender-differentiated peer academic rating (where peer groups are defined as roommates, floormates, and classmates) on own GPA in the first semester of college. We find evidence of gender-selective peer effects. Male students perform significantly better when their male classmates have higher average academic performance but do not respond to female peer academic performance, while females respond to neither own-gender or general peer performance	Kristin	 Jones	Carlena	 Cochi Ficano
2010	169	Gender in Higher Education	Early Childhood Education: A Promising Context for Promoting Low-Income Mothers’ Postsecondary Success	The goal of this paper is to outline a new framework for a more effective approach to the promotion of postsecondary educational advancement by low-income mothers of young children. These mothers lag considerably behind their more advantaged peers, and most education intervention programs for this population have met with limited success. We will present (1) theory and empirical evidence that outline the critical importance of on-time postsecondary education; (2) findings from a small qualitative study that explores the supports and obstacles faced by a sample of low-income mothers of young children at three high-quality early childhood centers; and (3) preliminary ideas for a new intervention model that uses early childhood education programs as the point of access for enhancing low-income mothers’ postsecondary achievement.	P.	Lindsay  Chase-Lansdale	Teresa	Eckrich  Sommer
2010	170	Historical and Geographic Perspectives of Socioeconomic Differences in Mortality	Social Class, Social Mobility and Mortality in the Netherlands, 1850-2007	In the historiographic literature an extremely dark picture is painted of the state of health of the working class in the Netherlands in the nineteenth century. Contrary to previously held views, socioeconomic differences in mortality still exist today. In this paper we try to contribute to the discussion about long-term trends in social inequality in mortality by making use of a database that relates to a much longer period than usually is the case. We apply various definitions of social class for men and women because we assume that the way in which social class is defined might have an effect on the observed SES-mortality differences. We find that social class differences in mortality among adults in Dutch historical cohorts are partly in line with findings from cross-sectional studies in the late nineteenth century. This is in clear contrast with previous literature showing no such association in the twentieth century.	Niels	 Schenk
2010	170	Historical and Geographic Perspectives of Socioeconomic Differences in Mortality	Once Were Farmers: Occupation, Social Mobility, and Mortality During Industrialization in Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean, Quebec 1840-1971	According to the theory of the “fundamental social causes of diseases”, inequalities in socioeconomic status would always lead to gradients in health and mortality favouring the wealthiest. We test this theory with longitudinal data from the 19th – 20th century Saguenay region in Quebec (Canada). The data consist of socio-professional declarations extracted from the vital statistics of the BALSAC database (Université du Québec à Chicoutimi). Results indicate lower mortality among farmers and artisans than among the other occupational categories, both over the occupational life course (until age 60) or in older ages (after age 60). If anything, white-collar workers had the highest mortality of all. The critical factor could be the exposure to toxic environmental conditions that were shared by white collar workers and their employees during the active life stage. Self-selection of frailer individuals into less physically demanding occupations (white collar) could also account for the counterintuitive results.	Marc	 Tremblay	Hélène	 Vézina	Jamie	 Seabrook
2010	170	Historical and Geographic Perspectives of Socioeconomic Differences in Mortality	Income Inequality and Mortality in Costa Rica	The hypothesis that income inequality adversely affects health outcomes has been extensively debated in the economics, demography, and public health literature in recent decades. This study evaluates the relationship between income inequality and mortality in the context of a middle-income country, Costa Rica, whose social structure and history confer the unique benefit of being less susceptible to common sources of confounding. Approximately 16,000 individuals aged 30 or more were selected from the 1984 Census and linked to the Costa Rican National Death Registry until Dec. 31, 2007. Gompertz models were used to estimate the relative risk of mortality for various indicators of area-level inequality, while controlling for area and individual-level confounders. The results in the preferred models suggest residents of areas with higher income inequality in 1989 exhibit lower survival rates over the following 19 years. These results were also corroborated with an alternate measure of inequality, relative deprivation.	Sepideh	 Modrek
2010	170	Historical and Geographic Perspectives of Socioeconomic Differences in Mortality	Cause Specific Mortality and Income in the Mississippi River Delta Region	This paper uses individual level mortality data to calculate age-standardized mortality rates for five causes of death (cardiovascular disease, other noncommunicable diseases, communicable diseases, injuries and diabetes) for the Delta and non-Delta Regions; uses multinomial logistic regression to adjust individual mortality data for factors that influence death certificate reporting per Murray et al. 2008 for years 1970 – 2000; creates Preston curves and uses OLS to examine the relationship from income to cardiovascular disease and other noncommunicable diseases; and uses 2SLS to show the significant contribution of higher levels of cardiovascular death rates and other noncommunicable disease death rates to lower economic growth. The results show the Delta Region begins to fall farther behind the non-Delta Region after 1990 for all causes of death; income influences cardiovascular disease rates more than noncommunicable disease rates, and higher levels of cardiovascular disease and noncommunicable disease are detrimental to economic growth.	Diana	 Bowser
2010	171	Couple Dynamics and Fertility in Africa	The Marriage Broker: Managing Partner Selection and Union Formation in a Ghanaian Charismatic Church	Marriage remains universal in Ghana, but the risk surrounding marriage in light of high rates of divorce and remarriage is an understudied topic. Evidence suggests that changing livelihoods, urbanization, HIV/AIDS, and international migration all put pressure on one’s choice of marital partner, especially for women. Ghana is also home to a rapidly growing Charismatic movement, which primarily attracts young adults, and has both practical and theological motivations for promoting stable unions. To understand how perceptions of the risks surrounding marriage are discussed and managed within the church, and what the church does to support stable marriages, the study analyses two types of qualitative data: field observations and interviews within a Charismatic church in Accra and content analysis of three books on the topic by the church’s founding pastor. Preliminary results suggest heavy regulation of marriage within the church, along with the promotion of early marriage and marrying within the congregation.	Nicolette	 Manglos
2010	171	Couple Dynamics and Fertility in Africa	Does Wife’s Education Have a Role in Spousal Agreement on Approval of Family Planning? A Comparative Analysis between Two Muslim Majority Sub-Saharan West African Countries	Spousal approval on family planning is critical in contraceptive use dynamics. If a husband does not approve family planning it is difficult for a couple to use family planning even if a wife approves of it. Both contraceptive use rates and women’s education are low in many West-African countries. It is widely believed that women’s education is strongly associated with contraceptive use dynamics. This study examines the role of wives’ education in spousal agreement on approval of family planning in two Muslim majority sub-Saharan West African countries. This study uses matched couples’ data from Demographic Health Surveys conducted in 2005/2006 in Senegal and Niger. Logistic regression models were estimated for examining the relationship between wives’ education and couples’ agreement on approval of family planning. Gross and net effect results suggest that wives with above high school education are significantly 2 times more likely to have spousal agreement on approval of family planning.	Mian	B. Hossain	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2010	171	Couple Dynamics and Fertility in Africa	The Effect of Marriage and HIV Status on Condom Use in Rural Malawi	As the HIV/AIDS epidemic spreads to the general population, a large and increasing proportion of HIV transmissions occur within marriage. Condom use within marriage could, therefore, be an important prevention strategy in sub-Saharan Africa, but there is considerable debate about whether married couples are willing to use condoms. This paper contributes to this debate by identifying key factors that affect the acceptability of condom use within married rural Malawis using three waves of longitudinal data from Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP). Specifically, we focus on the effect of (1) first marriage, and (2) HIV status on condom use acceptability within marriage. Using fixed-effects regressions to control for unobserved characteristics that affect condom use acceptability, marriage, and HIV status, we find that getting married leads to lower acceptability of condom use; and that perceived HIV status, rather than actual HIV status, affects the acceptability of condom use within marriage.	Philip	A. Anglewicz
2010	171	Couple Dynamics and Fertility in Africa	Couple’s Agreement and Disagreement on Fertility Intention: An Insight into the Reproductive Decision Process in a  Polygamous Community in Northern Malawi	There is now widespread agreement of the importance of men's role in reproductive decision making. A number of studies have argued that the translation of fertility preference into reproductive decision – the couple's fertility decision making process - is different in a polygamous than in a monogamous union. Studies investigating the dominance of men's preferences over women's preferences, in cases of couple disagreement found mixed evidence of the effect of polygamy. However, an often cited limitation of these studies has been the inability to link husband's intention with each of his wives in a polygamous union. By linking fertility-intention questions to an on-going Demographic Surveillance Site in Karonga district in Northern Malawi we will investigate wife's and husband's fertility preferences by marriage characteristics. An analysis of the use of contraception and level of agreement and disagreement is then performed to gain an insight on the reproductive decision making process of polygamous couples.	Angela	 Baschieri	John	G. Cleland	Sian	 Floyd	Neil	 French	Anna	 Molesworth	Albert	 Dube	Judith	R. Glynn	Emmanuel	 Banda	Aulive	G. Msoma
2010	172	Abortion in Societies with Different Abortion Laws	The Estimated Incidence of Induced Abortion in Ethiopia, 2008	After recent liberalizations in Ethiopia’s abortion law, women have some access to legal abortion. Since no national study of abortion incidence exists, the impact of the law change on both legal and unsafe abortion should be documented. Data from a 2007-2008 nationally representative sample of 344 health facilities providing abortion and postabortion services and a survey of 80 health professionals were used to indirectly estimate annual abortion incidence, rates and ratios nationally and regionally. In 2008 an estimated 382,500 induced abortions were performed in Ethiopia, including 103,000 legal procedures. The annual abortion rate was 23 per 1,000 women age 15–44 and there were 13 abortions per 100 births. Unsafe abortion is still prevalent and exacts a heavy toll on women in Ethiopia. To improve women’s health, increased access to contraceptive care and safe abortion services must be provided to all women who need them.	Susheela	D. Singh	Tamara	 Fetters	Hailemichael	 Gebreselassie	Ahmed	 Abdella	Yirgu	 Gebrehiwot	Solomon	Kumbi  Hawas	Suzette	 Audam
2010	172	Abortion in Societies with Different Abortion Laws	Women’s Perceptions of the Quality of Public Sector Abortion Services in Mexico City	In a historic vote on April 24, 2007, the Mexico City legislature decriminalized abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy. To date, there has been limited research on clients’ experiences with the abortion services now legally provided by the government. From August to December 2009, we are conducting surveys with 402 women, and in-depth interviews with 30 women seeking abortion care at public sector sites (general hospital, maternity hospital, and primary health center), to investigate women’s perceptions of the quality of the services. Our survey includes measures of eleven domains of service quality. We will present descriptive findings and will use ordinal regression to test whether overall ratings of services are associated with client socio-demographic characteristics, site type, or visit-specific factors. Our study will contribute information relevant to the conceptualization and measurement of abortion service quality, including important domains to measure in future studies of abortion service quality.	Davida	 Becker	Claudia	 Díaz-Olavarrieta	Clara	 Juarez	Sandra	 García	Patricio	 Sanhueza	Cynthia	C. Harper
2010	172	Abortion in Societies with Different Abortion Laws	“At That Time, I Didn’t Understand It!”: Exploring the Subject of Contraceptive Knowledge and Use among Women with Induced Abortion Experiences in the Greater Accra Region, Ghana	Using a qualitative research methodology, twenty-four semi-structured individual interviews were conducted with women with induced abortion experiences at Korle Bu and Tema Hospitals in the Greater Accra Region, Ghana. Approximately 52 percent of the interviewed women were between ages 15-19 at the time of their first abortion. Results suggest that these women tended not to have knowledge of contraceptive methods prior to the abortion, while others were informed but failed to use because of a dislike for contraception. Some had since gained knowledge of methods and used at least one modern method. Others who had been informed on the available methods still chose not to utilize contraception due to rumors of side effects and personal negative experiences. Peer and reproductive health education must be reinforced in communities in Greater Accra to curb adolescents engaging in early sex as well as challenge rumors that exist regarding contraception in Ghana.	Adriana	A. Biney
2010	172	Abortion in Societies with Different Abortion Laws	The Life Circumstances of Women Accessing Abortion Services in the U.S.	New data from a nationally representative sample of 9,483 abortion patients in the US and 49 in-depth interviews with abortion patients at three abortion clinics collected in 2008-2009 examine women’s life circumstances at the time of their abortion. The survey data reveal that 42% of women having abortions in 2008 were poor. 61% had one or more children and 85% were unmarried. In the last 12 months, patients reported that they had experienced unemployment (20%), separation from a partner or husband (16%), and falling behind on rent or mortgage payments (15%). The qualitative data found that difficult life circumstances that led to the unintended pregnancy were closely related to the reasons for choosing an abortion, making it even harder for these women to effectively manage the legal barriers to abortion services (e.g., waiting periods and lack of Medicaid coverage).	Rachel	K. Jones	Ann	M. Moore	Lori	 Frohwirth
2010	173	Power and Coercion in Sexual Behavior	Adapting the Sexual Relationship Power Scale for HIV/AIDS Research in Malawi	In sub-Saharan Africa, gender inequality and power imbalances continue to place individuals at increased risk for HIV/AIDS. Prevention programs in Malawi are starting to incorporate relationship power into couple-based interventions; however, no local measure of power exists to evaluate intervention effectiveness. This study developed a new measure of sexual relationship power for Malawi by building upon the Sexual Relationship Power Scale (SRPS) developed by Pulerwitz and colleagues (2000). Semi-structured interviews (n=34) were conducted separately, but simultaneously, with married and dating couples in order to understand the social context of relationship power. Qualitative data were analyzed to create a preliminary pool of scale items, which were then pilot tested using a convenience sample of 254 individuals. Factor analysis supported four sub-scales: autonomy, communication, love and trust, and relationship dominance. Moderate internal consistency and construct validity were demonstrated. The sexual relationship power scale shows promising utility for future HIV/AIDS research in Malawi.	Amy	A. Conroy
2010	173	Power and Coercion in Sexual Behavior	Survival Sex or Sugar-Daddies? Gender, Wealth and HIV Infection in 16 African Countries	Researchers have traced women’s disproportionate burden of HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa to their economic dependence on men. Yet, unlike the notion of “survival sex” which points to women’s economic privation as a source of HIV risk, the “sugar-daddy” phenomenon paints a picture of men lavishing gifts and women competing for this attention. Recent evidence from demographic and health surveys (DHS) with linked HIV biomarkers defies both of these images, revealing that wealthier women are more at risk for HIV in many African countries. Using data from 16 DHS in sub-Saharan Africa, this study examined the survival sex/sugar-daddy phenomenon or the proposition that richer men and poorer women are more likely to be infected with HIV in a given area. Results from a two-level, hierarchical linear model found that while the survival sex/sugar-daddy phenomenon holds in richer regions, in poorer regions/rural areas HIV increases with wealth for both men and women.	Ashley	M. Fox
2010	173	Power and Coercion in Sexual Behavior	The Effects of Husband’s Alcohol Consumption on Sexual Violence within Marriage and Sexual Health: Experience of Female Migrants in Slums of Mumbai	The nexus between alcohol consumption and its associated effect on poor sexual decision making, unsafe sex, multiple partners, and increased sexual experimentation has been extensively established through empirical study relying on survey data. Several works have linked alcohol consumption with menacing behaviors including sexual assault through use of aggression and coercion which also impairs women's ability to perceive threats and resist attacks including sexual violence within marriage. However, research on factors associated with married women’s ability to manage sexual relations with a spouse is limited. This paper analyzes factors affecting married female migrants’ ability to influence their sexual communication with a spouse and sexual experience within marriage. It also examines the extent to which alcohol consumption by a husband leads to sexual violence and affects their sexual health. The paper is based on quantitative data collected from 513 female migrants and few in-depth interviews conducted in eight densely populated slums of Mumbai, India.	Soumya	 Mohanty	Ram	B. Bhagat
2010	173	Power and Coercion in Sexual Behavior	Coerced First Intercourse and Sexually Transmitted Infections	Victims of violence are more likely to be involved in subsequent risky sexual behaviors. Using nationally representative data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth, we explored whether coercive first intercourse was associated with self-reported sexually transmitted infections (STIs). We analyzed female respondents ages 18-44 who answered questions on both coercive first intercourse and STIs (n=6,096). We classified coercion as none/minimal, mild, or significant. In 2002, 12.3% of US women reported that they experienced mild coercion at first intercourse and 8.8% experienced significant coercion at first intercourse. Compared with women who experienced no coercion, the unadjusted odds of reporting a STI was greater for women who experienced mild (OR: 1.5, 95% CI: 1.12-2.0) or significant coercion (OR: 1.9, 95% CI: 1.4-2.7). While preventing coercive sexual experiences is an important goal, attention to the negative consequences may also help improve the sexual health of women who have already been victimized.	Corrine	 Williams
2010	174	Cause-of-Death Trends and Health Transition	Changes in Patterns of Smoking Related Cause of Death and the Impact on the “Golden Generations” in UK	It is widely recognized that tobacco use is a risk factor for many diseases such as lung cancer, oral cancer, and emphysema among others. The analysis of mortality trends for these causes of deaths suggests a strong cohort effect which differs between men and women indicating differences in gender smoking patterns as well.   The cohort approach is particularly important in the UK since changes in smoking patterns are often considered to be the main driver of 1925-1945 UK “golden” generations’ higher-than-average rates of mortality improvement.   This paper presents cohort estimates of selected smoking related causes of death in England and Wales, and analyzes the relationship between annual changes in the cohort effect for lung cancer (based on fitting an Age-Period-Cohort model) and in the cohort function for overall mortality in order to attribute the proportion of overall mortality change due to changes in smoking patterns.	Michael	 Murphy	Mariachiara	 Di Cesare
2010	174	Cause-of-Death Trends and Health Transition	The Epidemiologic Transition Revisited: Incorporating into This Seminal Theory What We Now Know About Cancers	Many researchers consider cancer a classic example of a noninfectious, chronic and degenerative disease, although much recent research suggests that many cancers indeed stem from infectious sources. These infectious sources include H. pylori, hepatitis B and C, and the human papillomavirus. Additionally, in other relevant research, investigators have tried to update Omran’s original epidemiologic transition by claiming that populations/societies have moved beyond the third stage of the transition. Our findings in this paper, drawn from currently developed countries (US, England and Wales, France, and Japan), suggest that the degree of cancer mortality that stems from an infectious origin are declining, but that cancer deaths of a noninfectious origin are increasing. The findings here, then, suggest that many countries have still not moved beyond Omran's third stage of the epidemiologic transition and indeed this stage is still very relevant and useful for explaining broad changes in disease patterns as nations develop.	Omer	 Gersten	Magali	 Barbieri	John	R. Wilmoth
2010	174	Cause-of-Death Trends and Health Transition	Trends in Avoidable Mortality in the Central and Eastern European Countries	The aim of the study of avoidable mortality is to analyze the trends and the impact of medical treatment and health care in the selected Central and Eastern European countries since 1980 up to the recent years. Since the collapse of the communist regime, mortality has improved rapidly. The concept of avoidable mortality has been used as a methodological instrument for measuring of efficiency of the health care system in order to reduce the intensity of mortality in population. Using the method of decomposition of the temporary life expectancy, contributions of each category of causes of death were investigated. The results of time analysis show that improvements in health care and prevention, and changes in lifestyle significantly contribute to the increase of the temporary life expectancy. On the contrary, impact of the health care system was not shown in the study of differences in mortality between observed countries	Ivana	 Kulhanova	Olga	 Sivkova
2010	174	Cause-of-Death Trends and Health Transition	Cause-Specific Mortality Trends in Two Caucasian Countries since the Early 1980s	In the context of the unfavourable mortality trends observed in the former Soviet republics, Caucasian countries experience a specific evolution. In this region, civil registration of vital events remains incomplete. We re-estimated mortality levels and trends in Armenia and Georgia since the early 1980s, confirming specific common mortality patterns in the two countries. To what extent are differences in life expectancy levels and trends associated with the specific cause-of-death patterns? Providing continuous series of deaths by cause may deal with changes in the classification of causes of death during the Soviet period and even later. To do so, we used a method based on the detailed examination of the medical content of the cause of death and statistical continuity. This paper aims to present cause-specific mortality trends in both countries since the early 1980s and discusses issues related to the pathway of the health transition in the Caucasus.	Géraldine	 Duthé	Irina	 Badurashvili	Karine	 Kuyumjyan	Jacques	 Vallin
2010	175	Union Status Changes and Health	Marital Dissolutions and Self-Rated Health: 
Life Course and Birth Cohort Patterns	I work from a life course perspective to explore the potentially changing relationship between marital dissolution and health over the life course and across birth cohorts. Growth curve analysis of a fifteen-year national longitudinal survey suggests that transitions from marriage to divorce and widowhood have adverse effects on self-rated health, although those who are continuously divorced and widowed exhibit health trajectories that are similar to those who remain continuously married. More importantly, I find that the health penalty of transitions to divorce and widowhood is more pronounced later in the life course for earlier birth cohorts; while this penalty is more pronounced earlier in the life course for more recent birth cohorts. These results may reflect birth cohort differences in the process of aging and/or in the experience of marital dissolution.	Hui	 Liu
2010	175	Union Status Changes and Health	Mother’s Union History and the Health of Children Born to Single Mothers	Using data from the NLSY79 linked mother-child files, we examine whether children born to single mothers who marry or cohabit have better (or worse) psychological and physical health outcomes in early adulthood than those whose mothers remained unmarried. We limit our analysis to first-born children who were born to and lived with a single mother and distinguish mothers’ union histories by marital and cohabitation status, dissolution status of the union, and paternity status of partner. Preliminary results indicate that, on average, children born to single mothers receive few mental or physical health benefits in young adulthood if their mothers subsequently marry or cohabit vs. remain unpartnered.	Kristi	 Williams	Sharon	 Sassler	Elizabeth	 Cooksey
2010	175	Union Status Changes and Health	Marital Biography and Cardiovascular-Related Biological Markers: Exploring the Role of Gender	How marital biography is associated with health-related biological processes at the population level is unknown. The aims of this study are threefold. First, we seek to understand how an individual’s marital biography is related to four health-related bio-markers: systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, body mass index, and C-reactive protein. Second, we explore in-depth how the relationship between marital biography and health varies by each of the four bio-markers. Third, we explore if and how the relationship between marital biography and health-related bio-markers varies by gender. We utilize the 2005/2006 National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP) to explore these aims. The preliminary findings suggest that marital biography may differ in its association with under-the-skin biological risk more than it does with self-reported health measures. Also, in contrast to prior studies, men -- not women -- appear more adversely affected biologically (except in terms of BMI) by marital loss.	Michael	 McFarland	Mark	D. Hayward
2010	175	Union Status Changes and Health	Married to Your Health Insurance: The Relationship Between Marriage, Divorce and Health Insurance	We investigate the relationship between divorce and health insurance coverage for men, women, and children in the U.S. Because many individuals are covered as dependents on their spouse’s health insurance policy, divorce is likely to be an important source of insurance loss. Health insurance for children may be addressed in child support agreements, so divorce also is relevant to understanding coverage for children. We use panel data from various years of the Survey of Program Participation to show the incidence of health insurance coverage before and after a divorce and changes in the type of health insurance (employer-primary, employer-dependent, other private, and public). We focus on how these patterns change with duration since divorce and identify the mechanisms that might lead to this effect (e.g., remarriage, employment, child support, and welfare). We find that coverage after divorce declines by 13 percentage points for women and 10 percentage points for men.	Jamie	C. Rubenstein	Elizabeth	 Peters
2010	176	Contraception Non-Use and Risk of Unintended Pregnancy	Willingness to Have Unprotected Sex	The prevalence and demographic patterns of occasional unprotected vaginal intercourse are poorly understood. In California, 1,382 women and men responded to the question, Would you have sex even if you did not have birth control? following family planning clinic visits in 2007 and 2008. Although respondents were not pregnant, seeking pregnancy, nor sterilized, 50% of respondents said that yes, maybe or sometimes, they would be willing to engage in unprotected sex. Our analysis fills important empirical gaps regarding people’s perceived willingness to take pregnancy risks, as well as the characteristics most strongly associated with this premeditated risk taking. The findings challenge the notion that lack of contraceptive use necessarily represents barriers relating to access, expense, or side effects. Family planning behavioral models and programs need to be expanded to acknowledge the widespread likelihood of occasional unprotected sex, even among people motivated to usually use contraceptives.	Jenny	A. Higgins	Diana	G. Foster
2010	176	Contraception Non-Use and Risk of Unintended Pregnancy	Adolescent Girls’ Ambivalence Towards Pregnancy: 
The Role of the Self-Concept and Race/Ethnic and Class Locations	An important paradox in adolescent pregnancy is the fact that adolescent girls’ stronger self-concepts (e.g., higher efficacy and self-esteem) are thought to reduce the likelihood of becoming pregnant: However, minority adolescents, particularly Black girls, have stronger self-concepts than White girls yet have higher pregnancy and birth rates in adolescence. Thus, the self-concept may be less protective against pregnancy for certain groups depending on their race/ethnicity or class. Utilizing the National Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health, N = 5,690), this paper begins to disentangle this paradox with a focus on the influence of the self-concept on adolescent girls’ ambivalence towards becoming pregnant by particular race/ethnic and class locations. Preliminary results suggest a relationship between girls’ self-concepts and ambivalence and that race/ethnic and class differences are evident. The connection between girls’ self-concepts and ambivalence may be crucial for understanding race/ethnic and class differences in the pathways leading to adolescent pregnancy.	Sarah	M. Kendig
2010	176	Contraception Non-Use and Risk of Unintended Pregnancy	Covert Contraceptive Use and Discordant Fertility Preferences among Ethiopian Couples	In some settings, women use contraceptives without the knowledge of their partners. In this study we use couple data from the 2005 Ethiopian DHS (EDHS) to estimate covert contraceptive use and to identify discordant fertility preferences. We estimated covert use from women’s responses about their husband’s knowledge of contraceptive use and from couples’ discordant responses on use and type of method. We found that 7.9% of women use contraceptives secretly, but based on discordant responses, 27% of women used contraception without full knowledge of their partners. Women who have a want fewer children than their partners reported more secret use and couples who have the lowest agreement on fertility preference were the most likely to report secret use. In settings, like Ethiopia, where modern contraceptive use is relatively low, addressing couple communication is needed to both increase male involvement and promote the use of contraception to avoid unintended pregnancies.	Biruk	T. Tessema	Michelle	J. Hindin
2010	176	Contraception Non-Use and Risk of Unintended Pregnancy	Ambivalent Fertility Preferences: Towards a Better Understanding of Reproductive Desires and Choice	Fertility preferences are known to be subject to uncertainty, ambiguity, and variation in intensity. Yet the extensive analyses of fertility preferences in developing countries (via DHS) have relied on simple categorical representations. In this analysis we make use of an item included in many DHS surveys (41 surveys in 36 countries) that provides one indicator of complexity of preferences: women are asked whether becoming pregnant soon would be a problem (none, small, big). This provides a basis for indicators of preference ambivalence. We examine the prevalence of preference ambivalence, and we investigate whether it helps explain unmet need for family planning. The data reveal that ambivalence is common (in excess of 20% of women in most surveys). We also consider whether preference ambivalence varies by stage of fertility decline and by socioeconomic characteristics (e.g. schooling). This is the most rigorous comprehensive analysis to date of preference ambivalence in DHS data.	Maggie	 Rechel
2010	177	Multi-Partnered Fertility, Complicated Families, and Child Wellbeing	Studying Post-Divorce Living Arrangements with the Residential Calendar: Testing a New Method to Map Custodial Arrangements	In this paper the post-divorce living arrangements of more than 300 Flemish adolescents were examined by using a residential calendar. Respondents were asked to indicate their residential situation on a four-week-calendar by telling by which parent they generally stayed during the day and by which parent they spent the night. First, the calendar was evaluated by comparing it to a more traditional measurement of the residential situation. Subsequently, we derived different characteristics of the residential situation from the calendar, which formed the base for developing a typology of five residential arrangements: sole custody, near sole custody, weekend arrangements, joint physical custody and father arrangement. A next purpose was to test how these residential types were associated with child and family characteristics. Finally, we conducted OLS-regression analyses to test how the residential arrangements were related to the emotional well-being of the adolescents in our sample.	An	Katrien  Sodermans	Sofie	 Vanassche	Gray	 Swicewood	Koen	 Matthijs
2010	177	Multi-Partnered Fertility, Complicated Families, and Child Wellbeing	Blended Families, Sibling Structure and Child Outcomes in Sweden	Although the association between childhood family structure and adult outcomes has been much studied, little attention has been paid to the impact of sibling structure. Björklund et al. (2007) find for Sweden that the number of half siblings is more negatively related to educational attainment than the number of full siblings. We investigate whether outcomes are influenced by the sibling structure in the family using a random sample of 35,000 individuals and their siblings. We compare children who spent part of childhood in a ‘blended’ family by educational attainment and earnings to those of who lived in a traditional ‘nuclear’ family or in a single parent family. In addition, we use sibling-difference models to analyze whether any negative associations are causal effects or the result of selection. Finally, we analyze whether marital status of blended families makes a difference for children’s outcomes using the 1989 marriage boom in Sweden.	Donna	K. Ginther	Marianne	 Sundström
2010	177	Multi-Partnered Fertility, Complicated Families, and Child Wellbeing	Educational Outcomes in Stepfather Families: 
Boundary Ambiguity, Race, and the Significance of Marriage	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, the current research investigates the significance of parental marital status for educational outcomes among youth living with a stepfather. I first explore levels of family boundary ambiguity among White and Black adolescents living with a stepfather, as reflected in discrepancies between mothers and their adolescent offspring in reports of family structure. I next assess the robustness of conclusions regarding effects associated with living in a cohabiting versus married stepfather family to the source of family structure reports. Preliminary results point to particularly high levels of disagreement between Black adolescents and their mothers regarding the experience of cohabiting stepfamily structures. Furthermore, among Black adolescents, my results suggest that the source of family structure reports has large implications for conclusions drawn about the association between living in a cohabiting stepfather family and youth educational outcomes.	Megan	M. Sweeney
2010	177	Multi-Partnered Fertility, Complicated Families, and Child Wellbeing	Children’s Long-Term Family Structure Experiences and Adolescent Outcomes	This paper documents the family living arrangements of a cohort of youth from birth through adolescence using merged mother and child data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. In the sample of 1,870 children, 187 distinct family structure trajectories were identified. Latent class analysis yielded five distinguishable trajectories of children’s living arrangements over the course of childhood: continuously married biological parent families, long-term single mother families, married biological parents who break up, cohabiting biological parents who marry or break up, and a trajectory distinguished by the addition of a stepfather at some point during childhood.   	The trajectories characterized by parental divorce and growing up with a long-term single mother were generally associated with lower levels of well-being in adolescence. Family instability, measured by the number of family structure transitions children experienced, was also associated with higher levels of depression and delinquency in adolescence independently of family structure trajectories.	Katherine	Stamps  Mitchell
2010	178	New Perspectives on Low Fertility and Policy	Fertility Dynamics in France and Italy. Who Are the Couples Who do not Give Birth to the Intended Child?	France and Italy lie at the two extremes as regards fertility levels in Europe. Although previous findings showed that desired fertility is very similar in France and Italy, an examination of intentions to have a child in the following three years points to a country-specific difference. Namely, in France reproductive intentions are higher than in Italy for all parities. Moreover, since the actual fertility levels are so different, there could be some sorts of constraints that limit fertility more strongly in Italy than in France. Taking advantage of the first two rounds of the French and Italian Gender and Generation Surveys, in this paper we aim at highlighting the profiles of those couples who do not realize their intended fertility projects in the two countries considered. This line of reasoning may provide important input to policy makers wishing to lift the constraints to fertility realization	Arnaud	 Régnier-Loilier	Daniele	 Vignoli
2010	178	New Perspectives on Low Fertility and Policy	Welfare State Context, Female Earnings and Childbearing	This paper investigates the role of female earnings in childbearing decisions in two very different European contexts. By applying event history techniques to German and Danish register data during 1981-2001, we demonstrate how female earnings relate to first, second and third birth rates. Our study shows that female income is rather positively associated with fertility in Denmark, while the relationship is the opposite in West Germany. We interpret our finding against the background of social policies that encourage Danish women to get established in the labor market before having children, while German policies during the 1980s and 1990s rather discouraged maternal employment.	Michaela	 Kreyenfeld	Gunnar	 Andersson	Tajana	 Mika
2010	178	New Perspectives on Low Fertility and Policy	A Comparative Analysis of Childbearing Norms across Europe	This paper is a first attempt to analyze the phenomenon of low and late fertility from a life course perspective and to explain how the perception of upper age limits to childbearing and attitudes towards childlessness are related to different factors and social processes. Moreover, we aim at significantly contributing to the existing literature on social norms and childbearing by adopting a comparative perspective, namely using the third round of the European Social Survey (ESS). The paper integrates the micro and the macro perspective in a way to analyze the perception of childbearing norms both at the individual and country level by running a series of multilevel models. Individual life styles and values play a major role in explaining differences in upper age limits to childbearing, while a much larger portion of variation in attitudes towards childlessness is attributed to country-level differences.	Alice	 Goisis
2010	178	New Perspectives on Low Fertility and Policy	Low Fertility and Policy: Contexts of State Concern and Policy Enactment	Policies thought to increase fertility have received increasing attention from scholars and policymakers in recent years. While many studies have sought to determine the effects of family policy on fertility levels, few have examined the extent to which national-level demographic characteristics predict state concern over low fertility or changes in family policy. This paper seeks to improve understanding of the conditions that lead to changes in state concern and intervention by examining the relationship between the timing of these changes and their demographic and political contexts. Event-history analysis is used to model two outcomes: national-level changes in family policy that increase support for families, and changes in official state views on national fertility levels from “satisfactory” to “too low”. The models test the predictive power of variables including period TFR, proportion of the population of working age, migration rates, political orientation of the governing party, and GDP.	Emily	 Marshall
2010	179	Reproductive Risks: Complications, Side-Effects and Infertility in Africa	Estimating the Incidence of Abortion in Burkina Faso	Abortion is illegal in Burkina Faso except in cases of incest, rape or fetal defect, or to save a woman’s life. In such settings, many abortions are unsafe, while measuring abortion incidence is difficult. We estimate the incidence of abortion and of associated morbidity in Burkina Faso using two methodologies: the Anonymous Third Party Reporting Method, which entails surveying women about abortions their confidantes have had, and the Health Facilities Complications Method, which involves gathering statistics on numbers of women hospitalized for abortion-related complications and surveying health professionals on the rate of complications and treatment from unsafe abortion. We present findings on the national incidence of abortion and the proportions of women who experience complications from unsafe abortion. We also compare findings from the two approaches. Preliminary results indicate that abortion incidence is low relative to some other countries in the region, while the rate of complications is high.	Idrissa	 Kabore	Clementine	 Rossier	Gilda	 Sedgh
2010	179	Reproductive Risks: Complications, Side-Effects and Infertility in Africa	Contraceptive Discontinuation and Side Effects: Evidence from Southern Ghana	Contraceptive side effects have been identified by previous studies as both a barrier to the adoption of a modern contraceptive method and also as a reason for the discontinuation of methods. This paper analyses monthly data on contraceptive use and the experience of side effects from the calendar section of a longitudinal survey of women in Southern Ghana. Using a discrete time event history approach this study examines the pattern, timing and frequency of contraceptive discontinuation and how this relates to the concurrent self-reported experience of side effects.   Descriptive analysis shows that side effects are reported during episodes of pill and injectable use with roughly the same frequency and the most often reported side effect is menstrual disruption. The modelling results show that experiencing side effects is associated with a higher probability of discontinuation of the method and that counselling from health workers is extremely important in minimizing discontinuation rates.	Claire	E. Bailey
2010	179	Reproductive Risks: Complications, Side-Effects and Infertility in Africa	Do Unplanned Pregnancies Have an Effect on Pregnancy Complications in a Rural Population Of South Africa?	The problem of unplanned-pregnancy continues to be a burden in many countries in the sub-Saharan Africa region. Women who have unplanned-pregnancy face significantly more hurdles which subsequently increase risk of pregnancy complications and both maternal and child mortality. The aim was to determine the association of unplanned pregnancies and pregnancy complications in the Agincourt Health and Demographic Surveillance Site (AHDSS) South Africa. Secondary data from the AHDSS database were used to examine the relationship using logistic regression in 10,225 single pregnancies that occurred between 01 January 1998 and 31 December 2002. Unplanned pregnancies for the entire period was 3,898(50.19%) and 2,458(24.04%) pregnancies had missing information. Results suggest that unplanned-pregnancies increased the likelihood of pregnancy complications. Factors that were protective against pregnancy complications were antenatal clinic attendance, mother’s age and not being a first time mother.  In contrast, women with post secondary education were more likely to have pregnancy complications	Akeem	T. Ketlogetswe
2010	179	Reproductive Risks: Complications, Side-Effects and Infertility in Africa	Suffering Infertility: The Impact of Infertility on Women's Life Experiences in Two Nigerian Communities	The purpose of this paper is to, first, focus on the lives of individual women, represented through their own words as they experience infertility in two Nigerian communities with different institutional settings and meanings attached to infertility. Second, we compare these life experiences to that of their fertile counterparts. In doing this, we distinguish between women who are childless and those with subfertility and compare them to high fertility women. The methodology included ethnographic work, in-depth interviews and quantitative analysis of survey data. The findings indicate that the hardships associated with infertility in its various forms are more severe for childless women compared to women with subfertility and vary across cultural contexts and that different institutional settings influence the meanings and consequences of the condition.	Ulla	 Larsen	Marida	 Hollos	Bruce	 Whitehouse
2010	180	Fathers and Their Children	New Fathers? Residential Fathers’ Time with Children in Four Countries	We examine variation in employed fathers' time with children ages zero to 14, utilizing time use surveys from the United States (2003), Germany (2001), Norway (2000), and the United Kingdom (2000). We examine levels of father involvement and mechanisms associated involvement on both weekdays (N = 4,192) and weekends (N = 3,024). We find some evidence of “new fathers” on weekends in all countries. Fathers spend more time on interactive care and more time alone with children on weekends than on weekdays. Only Norwegian fathers, however, increase both their participation in and time spent on physical care. American and British fathers' time with children, however, is more responsive to partners' employment.	Jennifer	L. Hook	Christina	M. Wolfe
2010	180	Fathers and Their Children	Complicated Families and Men's Involvement with Coresidential Children	Recent research has highlighted multipartnered fertility and coresidential children as negatively related to nonresidential father visitation, but there has been little consideration of the opposite scenario: whether nonresidential father visitation, stepchildren, and multipartnered fertility affect involvement with coresidential children. Using the National Survey of Family Growth and focusing on fathers with biological coresidential children under 5 (n=649) and ages 5-18 (n=658), this research examines whether the frequency of interaction with coresidential children is affected by multipartnered fertility, coresidential stepchildren, and interaction with nonresidential children.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2010	180	Fathers and Their Children	Conflict, Cooperation or Disengagement? Coparenting 
Patterns and Father Involvement in Fragile Families	This paper draws on information from the Fragile Families Survey, and qualitative interviews I conducted with a sub-sample of parents who participated in the study, to gain a more complete understanding of early coparenting patterns and how they are related to unmarried men’s involvement with children. Regression results show that romantically involved fathers were significantly more likely to participate in activities with their three year old children when they had cooperative, disengaged, or mixed coparenting alliances with the mother rather than engaging in conflicted coparenting. However, disengaged, or parallel coparenting, was not associated with increased paternal involvement when parents had ended their romantic relationships. The qualitative analysis provides further insight into these coparenting patterns and both their expected and unexpected associations with paternal involvement.	Maureen	 Waller
2010	180	Fathers and Their Children	Child Support and Child Development	We use the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to explore the association between nonresident fathers’ economic support of their children and child development. Prior research suggests that income from child support may confer greater benefits for children than income from other sources; however, these studies were based mostly on children in previously married families and focused on formal child support receipt. Research on low-income parents (particularly unmarried parents) suggests that while few fathers pay formal child support, the overwhelming majority contribute informally or in-kind to their children. In this paper, we examine associations of multiple types of nonresident father contributions—formal support, informal cash support, and in-kind support—with children’s behavior problems and cognitive skills at five years of age among a sample of unmarried parents in large US cities. We include a rich set of controls, lagged dependent variables, and instrumental variables to address potential endogeneity.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy	Katherine	  Magnuson	Lawrence	M. Berger
2010	181	21st Century Refugee Policy and Refugee Demography	Mental and Physical Health Consequences of Repatriation for Vietnamese Returnees: A Natural Experiment Approach	While there is much speculation about the potential consequences of repatriation, systematic comparisons of health outcomes employing standard measures and population-based samples of migration returnees and non-returnees are virtually non-existent. This study addresses this significant gap in the empirical literature by employing standard measures of mental and physical health outcomes for comparable samples of repatriated international migration returnees living in Ho Chi Minh City; never-leavers living in the same urban wards; and emigrants from Vietnam who successfully settled in the U.S. (total n=709; data were collected between 2003 and 2005). Key outcome measures examined include eight health subscales from the SF-36; depression; affect balance; blood pressure; BMI and waist-hip ratio; and two behavioral indicators of stress (alcohol and cigarette consumption). The results revealed consistent health disadvantages for the returnees on self-reported mental and physical health outcomes and for blood pressure with respect to our comparison groups of never-leavers and immigrants.	Hongyun	 Fu	Mark	 VanLandingham
2010	181	21st Century Refugee Policy and Refugee Demography	Diplomacy’s Darling? Does Formal Government Resettlement Provide a Socioeconomic Advantage to Refugees Compared to Non-Refugee Status Immigrants?	This paper discusses the variation in socioeconomic status and resettlement experience between legally recognized refugees and non-refugee status immigrants in the United States. It uses the New Immigrant Survey to compare socioeconomic outcomes among immigrants who successfully applied for lawful permanent residency in 2003. Specifically, this paper explores resettlement location patterns and the relationships between the mode of reception, gender, household composition, employment, and income. Due to data limitations, few studies have been able to compare different immigrant groups by official visa category. The results of this investigation will help determine if there are significant differences in socioeconomic status and resettlement experience between these two immigrant populations and explore the relationship between these differences and the immigrants’ access to government support services.	Alicia	J. Lee
2010	181	21st Century Refugee Policy and Refugee Demography	Armed Conflict, Mass Media, and Migration: A Micro-Level Social Demographic Approach	Prior research has shown that periods of armed conflict increase migration on an aggregate-level. In this study, I theoretically and empirically address migration during armed conflict from a social-demographic perspective and take a micro-level approach, focusing on the behavioral decisions of individuals and the role of the mass media in moderating the relationship between exposure to armed conflict and migration. Using detailed data on men’s migration during the recent conflict in Nepal, results from event history models show that consumption of news media systematically resulted in higher rates of migration following specific violent events. This evidence suggests that the news media is a powerful macro-level factor that can provide information about and alter perceptions of the salience of violent events during conflict. In addition to migration, these results are broadly relevant to the role of mass media in moderating other behaviors during armed conflict as well as other exogenous shocks.	Nathalie	 Williams
2010	181	21st Century Refugee Policy and Refugee Demography	The Infant Mortality Fraction and Assessment of Mortality Data in Refugee Camps: A Comparative Study Using Data from HMD, DHS and UNHCR	While measuring mortality in refugee crises is vital for program planning, measurement is hampered by many factors: the need for rapid data, limited resources, insecure environments, and volatile population movements. Mortality data gathered in crisis settings present challenges to those who must use them, as it is not often clear whether variations reflect heterogeneity of crisis severity and context or whether they are due more to data problems and other factors. To assess data gathered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in more than 80 camps in 16 countries, we use data from the Human Mortality Database (including data from 37 European countries, spanning a period of four centuries) and from Demographic and Health Surveys (conducted in 61 countries between 1985 and 2007), using the infant mortality fraction (IMF), which is the ratio of two probabilities—infant mortality (1q0) and under-five mortality (5q0)—at a given point in time.	Courtland	 Robinson	Yoonjoung	 Choi	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo
2010	182	Marriage Markets	Whose Will Dominates: Individual, Family and Community Influences on Participation in Spouse Selection	This article examines child autonomy, parental power and social control as evidenced by the influences of individual, parental and community beliefs about the level of participation youth should have in selecting their spouse choice on later spouse choice behavior. The author develops a theoretical framework to explain how the individual, family and local community interact to determine whose desires for spouse choice behavior are fulfilled. This framework pays particular attention to the role of education as an allocator of social status. Analyses show that both the child’s and the father’s attitudes influence spouse choice participation. Finally, for children with higher levels of education or more education than their parents, their attitude toward spouse choice is a significantly stronger predictor of later behavior than for those children with lower levels of education or less education than their parents—suggesting education acts as an allocator of social status.	Colter	 Mitchell
2010	182	Marriage Markets	The Ecological Context of Union Formation and Instability in 
Emerging Adulthood: Do Sex Ratios Matter?	Research has linked the local area sex ratio with the likelihood of marriage and divorce. However, it remains unknown whether the ecological context similarly influences transitions into and out of dating or cohabiting relationships. Utilizing data from the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study (TARS) and the 2000 Census, this study adds to the research on marriage markets by assessing the effect of imbalanced sex ratios on the formation and instability of romantic relationships among young adults. Analyses indicate that females are more likely to form unions and less likely to break up with partners in markets with more alternatives, and males have more dating partners in favorable markets. Both males and females report cheating in imbalanced markets. It appears that the ecological context is not only influential for transitions into and out of marriage, but is also important for the process of searching for and evaluating partners prior to marriage.	Tara	D. Warner	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2010	182	Marriage Markets	The Ecology of Relationships: The Effect of Meeting Patterns on Cohabiting Couples’ Relationship Progression	While much research on union formation emphasizes the importance of marriage ‘markets,’ to date relatively little is known about whether some locales are more or less productive sites for meeting romantic partners. Yet where individuals meet romantic partners may have consequences for subsequent relationship development, shaping not only the likelihood of pursing the relationship, but also its composition, tempo, and the extent of familial/social support for the union. In this paper, we use in-depth qualitative interviews to examine where and how 62 cohabiting couples (124 individuals) report meeting their romantic partners, whether this differentiates relationship progression and respondents’ perceptions of support for their relationship, and how this differs by social class (measured via educational attainment). Important distinctions are observed between tempo to shared living, sentiments regarding perceptions of the suitableness of the meeting sight, and the level of homogamy on important dimensions of relationship stability.	Sharon	 Sassler	Amanda	J. Miller
2010	182	Marriage Markets	How Couples Meet and Stay Together: Preliminary Findings from Wave I	This paper explores ways in which the Internet is changing the market for romantic dating in the US. I utilize a new dataset, How Couples Meet and Stay Together (HCMST) survey, Wave I. HCMST is a nationally representative study of American adults. Findings show a substantial difference between couple types in how couples met, with heterosexual couples relying more on social ties through family and friends, and same-sex couples relying more on the Internet. For all couple types, reliance on the Internet to meet romantic partners has been rising sharply in recent years, displacing neighborhood, family, and the workplace as venues for meeting partners.	Michael	J. Rosenfeld
2010	183	Demography of Race and Ethnicity: Beyond Black and White	Beyond the Looking Glass: Exploring Variation between Racial Self-Identification and Interviewer Classification	Research has demonstrated the fluidity of both racial self-identification and interviewer classification. However, the specific patterns of variation between the two measures – i.e., how they might influence each other over time – have yet to be empirically explored. The prevailing assumption is that people calibrate or edit their self-identification to accord with how they are perceived by others. Yet moving from a discordant classification to a concordant one, as the looking-glass self theory implies, is only one of several possible outcomes when comparing the two measures of race over time. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we categorize racial variation along three dimensions – stability, influence and concordance – and find that many changes are unexplained by existing theories and unaccounted for in most studies. We also investigate patterns of change by other respondent characteristics, such as social position, to identify additional factors driving racial classification dynamics.	Aliya	 Saperstein	Andrew	 Penner
2010	183	Demography of Race and Ethnicity: Beyond Black and White	Geographies of Racially Mixed People and Households: A Focus on American Indians	In this research, we use the public use microdata from Census 2000 to identify variations in residential location of multiracial individuals and mixed race households, focusing specifically on American Indians. Although they are substantively interesting, American Indians and multiracials are both small and dispersed groups who are rarely represented in research on residential location and segregation. We map the race-specific (e.g., American Indian-white multiracials as compared to American Indian-black multiracials) PUMA-level locations of these individuals and households across the United States. Our disaggregation of different types of mixed-race American Indian households extends the work of Wong (1998, 1999) to reflect current sociological knowledge about the varieties of experiences of people in different multiracial situations. This research advances knowledge about the social context of race and identity in the contemporary United States.	Carolyn	A. Liebler	Meghan	 Zacher
2010	183	Demography of Race and Ethnicity: Beyond Black and White	Measuring Race (and Ethnicity): An Overview of Past Practices, Current Concerns and Thoughts for the Future	On the eve of the 2010 census, Census Bureau staff are already beginning to think about how race should be measured in the 2020 census. This paper looks at the history of racial measurement, assesses the performance of the current standard in the context of a 1996 NAS report, and concludes with a set of considerations that must be taken into account for the purposes of assessing race in the census or in any survey instrument. Particular attention is given to a variety of legal definitions that have historically been used to measure race, followed by the first issuance of OMB Directive No. 15 in 1977, and then followed by the latest revision in 1997. Discussion of how various federal agencies have adjusted to the 1997 revision is also included in this discussion.	C.	Matthew  Snipp
2010	183	Demography of Race and Ethnicity: Beyond Black and White	Shifting Demographics: Preparing for a New Race and Ethnicity Classification Scheme in NAEP	On September 24, 2007, the U.S. Department of Education (USDE) issued final guidance for collecting and reporting race/ethnicity information to all its jurisdictions. Final implementation of these guidelines is expected to take place no later than the 2010–2011 school-year. This study will therefore try to anticipate how and to what extent the coming change in racial/ethnic classification schemes might affect NAEP trend reporting, especially in relation to previously established racial/ethnic achievement gaps. By using student-reported race/ethnicity information, as proxy parent reports, this study will explore the possible effects of the coming shift in racial/ethnic classification schemes. Data will come from the 2003, 2005, and 2007 NAEP Reading and Mathematics assessments at Grade 8. This study will also explore the possibility of using other data sources such as the American Community Survey (ACS) to help corroborate and contextualize NAEP findings.	Salvador	 Rivas
2010	184	Family and Intergenerational Aspects of the Transition to Adulthood	Familial Structure, Kinship System and the Transition to Adolescent Sexual Debut in Ghana	The structural-functionalist school argues that adolescents living with both biological parents are better adjusted psychosocially compared with those living in other familial arrangements, and are therefore less likely to become sexually active. The African family, however, is more complex and complicated than the nucleated families in the West. Family structure often intertwines with unique kinship systems which confer asymmetric sexual expectations on adolescent boys and girls. While there are a few studies in sub-Saharan on how family structure affects the transition to first sex, there is a paucity of research on the interplay between family structure and kinship system and how they affect the transition to first. Using data from the 2004 Ghana National Survey of Adolescents, this paper seeks to address are the following: how do differential familial structures impact on first sex timing, and how different are they in matrilineal and patrilineal groups?	Stephen	Obeng  Gyimah
2010	184	Family and Intergenerational Aspects of the Transition to Adulthood	Parental Support during Young Adulthood: Why Does Assistance Decline with Age?	Previous research has found that financial support from parents to young adult children declines with age and that age is one of the strongest predictors of support. We explore the possibility that age is acting as a proxy for other factors that change as offspring grow older, including parental characteristics, offspring’s needs, acquisition of adult social roles, increasing maturity, and geographical and emotional closeness. We find that the age-support pattern cannot be fully explained by any of these factors, though age does work through them to some extent. In particular, status transitions (moving away from home and marrying) are important in determining the frequency of support, while the needs of offspring are important in determining the value of support. We also explore age interactions and find that the negative effect of age is softened for offspring who are parents themselves and for offspring who consider themselves less successful than peers.	Caroline	Sten Hartnett	Frank	F.  Furstenberg	Karen	 Fingerman
2010	184	Family and Intergenerational Aspects of the Transition to Adulthood	Parent-Child Relationships at the Transition to Adulthood: A Comparison of Immigrant and Native-Born Youth	Establishing an independent household is an important part of becoming an adult in the United States. Immigrant families may differ from families of the native-born because of norms about intergenerational obligations, the quality of family relationships, and differences in the economic opportunities of immigrant and native-born youth. This paper investigates the determinants of young adults’ co-residence with parents, and among those living apart, proximity to parents, frequency of contact, and economic transfers for first-generation, second-generation, and third-and-above generation youths. We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 to take account of parents’ economic resources, family composition, and parent-child relationship quality in adolescence on the transition to independent residence and intergenerational relationships in early adulthood. We find that first and second generation immigrant youth are more likely to live with parents than youth from nonimmigrant families, even after economic and family structure differences are taken into account.	Jessica	H. Hardie
2010	184	Family and Intergenerational Aspects of the Transition to Adulthood	Living Arrangements of Young Adults and Inequality in Higher Education: Recent Changes and the Advantages of Being a “Late-Stayer” in Brazil, from 1982 to 2006	This paper investigates the impact of living arrangements of two age cohorts, 18—24 years old and 25—32 years old in Brazil, on their chances of attending higher education, their chances of graduating from a high quality postsecondary program, and the probability that they will enroll in a socially prestigious field of study. It also assesses changes over time in the relation between living arrangements and participation in higher education for these individuals from 1982 to 2006. The literature about living arrangements has demonstrated that living in the parental home as a young adult has implications in several life events including fertility, marriage and divorce. We contribute to this literature by showing that living in the parental home boosts chances of participating in higher education, and reduces gender and SES differences in the chances of attaining high quality postsecondary education programs and choosing high social prestige fields of study.	Ana	Cristina M. Collares	Beatriz	 Novak
2010	185	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Economic Integration of Immigrants from the Former Soviet Union in Four Countries: A Comparative Analysis	The major objective of the present study is to compare the economic integration of immigrants from one source country (the Former Soviet Union) in four destination countries: United States, Canada, Germany, and Israel. Economic integration is examined on the following dimensions: participation in the economically active labor force, unemployment, under-employment, occupational attainment, self-employment and entrepreneurship, and earnings. Our target population is post-1989 immigrants from FSU with an academic degree acquired in their country of origin (compared to non-academics), and that were at the age 25 - 40 upon arrival. The data used in each of the four countries are official censuses. Despite basic similarities in incorporation of immigrants, the analysis reveals meaningful differences across societies that can be attributed both to selectivity processes and the economic system and social policies regarding the absorption of immigrants in each of the countries.	Karin	 Amit	Olena	 Bagno	William	 Bridges	Don	 Devoretz	Yitchak	 Haberfeld	Irena	 Kogan	John	R. Logan	Rebeca	 Raijman	Moshe	 Seyonov
2010	185	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Migrant Remittance as a Transnational Activity within the Context of Exit and Reception: A Comparative Study of Overseas Filipinos in the US, Japan and Saudi Arabia	The paper deals with factors that account for variations in migrant remittance patterns, comparing those of Filipino migrants residing in the US, Japan and Saudi Arabia. Transnationalism theory contends that migrants pursue constant transnational activity across ‘here’ and ‘there’, with the aim of maximising their economic interests beyond national boundaries. In this regard, the quantitative evidence from the Survey on Overseas Filipinos that the Philippines government has provided shows that the more favourable the context of reception is for immigrants’ long term economic activity, or the more hostile the context of exit is for immigrants’ return, the lower is the amount of migrant remittances. Further, the results show that the motive behind migrant remittances may have more to do with migrants’ self-interest than altruism. This research helps to confirm empirically the transnationalism argument by analysing Filipino migrants’ remittances.	Seok	Hyeon  Choi
2010	185	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Examining Pathways Out of Illegality and Vice Versa in the Metropolitan Region of Barcelona	In 2004, a new approach on immigration legislation was implemented in Spain after recording the second highest absolute net migration in the world after the USA. The reform included: a regularisation programme in 2005 and means of expanding regular avenues for economic migration and the settlement of new migrants. In this paper we describe the existing immigration legal framework. We then provide an evaluative case study of the trajectories of new migrants with an illegal experience with information on their main sociodemographic characteristics. Finally, we map the results in the metropolitan region of Barcelona to give a picture of the spatial distribution of illegality locally. Methodologically, we apply a longitudinal framework to analyse the pathway from one state (non-nationals with illegal status) to another state (non-nationals with legal status) and vice versa. The paper uses administrative data with more than 2 million entries recorded between January 2004 and June 2009.	Albert	 Sabater	Andreu	 Domingo	Xavier	 Franch
2010	185	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Destination Choices among Senegalese Migrants in Europe. The Role of Immigration and Labor Market Policies	The main goal of this paper is to analyze the role of labor market and immigration policies in shaping migrants’ destination choices, after controlling for other determinants of migration at the individual and household level.    The MAFE-Senegal dataset we use in this paper is particularly well-suited to address this issue, since it collects retrospective life-course information from Senegalese (both migrants and non-migrants), along with their households, living in Senegal and three destination countries: France, Italy and Spain.    Our three destinations offer a variegated scenario concerning both their approach to manage immigration (type, efficacy and timing of policy measures) and the structure of their labor markets. After collecting detailed information on the extent and frequency of regularizations, changes in family reunification policies, the annual number of expulsions, etc., we will try to find out whether differences along these dimensions provide us with a better understanding of the migrants' destination choices.	Amparo	 Gonzalez-Ferrer	Pau	 Baizán
2010	186	Inequality in Access to College and College Performance	Pathways to College across Two Youth Cohorts	This study compares the educational trajectories of students from two different cohorts born approximately 20 years apart. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997, this paper examines whether and how postsecondary educational trajectories have changed for students who mainly attended college in the 1980's versus those who mostly attended college in 2000's. This project describes how the process of college enrollment, college persistence, and college completion have changed throughout this period and assesses whether, as a result of these different trajectories, socioeconomic inequality has increased, decreased or remained the same.	Carolina	 Milesi
2010	186	Inequality in Access to College and College Performance	Gender Matters: Causal Effects of Single-Sex Schools on College Attendance	Interest has increased in the potentials of single-sex public education. However, there is not consensus on the effects of single-sex education because of student selection of school type. We exploit a unique feature of Korean education, the random assignment of students to single-sex versus coeducational high schools, to assess causal effects of single-sex schools on college attendance. Our estimates show significantly positive effects of both all-boys and all-girls schools on four-year college attendance and negative effects on two-year college attendance. The effect of all-boys schools is largely explained by the larger share of male teachers in all-boys schools than coeducational schools, but the share of female teachers does not explain the effect of all-girls schools.	Hyunjoon	 Park	Jere	 Behrman
2010	186	Inequality in Access to College and College Performance	Testing, Ranking and College Performance: Does High School Matter?	Using administrative data for five Texas universities that differ in selectivity, this study evaluates the predictive power of two key indicators used by college admissions officers to predict college success: high school class rank and standardized test scores. The empirical analyses warrant three conclusions. First, consistent with many other studies, we demonstrate that high school class rank is a better predictor of college performance than standardized test scores. Second, at all universities considered, test score advantages do not insulate low ranked students from underperformance. Third, simulations reveal that, for UT-Austin, capping automatic admits based on high school class rank would have roughly uniform impacts across schools that differ in economic status, but imposing minimum test score threshold would greatly reduce the admission eligibility of the highest performing students from poor high schools with low college going traditions while not jeopardizing that of feeder and affluent high school graduates.	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu	Marta	 Tienda
2010	186	Inequality in Access to College and College Performance	Heterogeneous Effects of Higher Education on Civic Participation	American educational leaders and philosophers have long valued schooling for its role in preparing the nation's youth to be civically engaged citizens. Numerous studies have found a positive relationship between education and subsequent civic participation. However, little is known about possible variation in effects by selection into higher education, a critical omission considering education's expressed role as a key mechanism for integrating disadvantaged individuals into civic life. With data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, I disaggregate effects and examine whether civic returns to higher education are largest for disadvantaged low likelihood or advantaged high likelihood college goers. I find evidence for significant heterogeneity in effects: civic returns to college are greatest among individuals who have a low likelihood for college completion. Returns decrease as the propensity for college increases.	Jennie	E. Brand
2010	187	Hispanic and Black Health and Mortality	The Great Migration and Mortality of African Americans	The impact of the Great Migration on economic outcomes among African Americans has been widely studied, but little is known about its impact on key health outcomes like longevity. With data from the Duke Social Security/Medicare Dataset, we compare mortality rates of blacks born in the South who remained there to mortality rates of those who moved out of the South. Preliminary analysis demonstrates that being born near a North-South railway line had a powerful impact on the probability a black person migrated out of the South. The corresponding figure is substantially lower for those not born on the rail line. The fact that we can distinguish between those born on the railway lines and far from the lines, gives us a chance to further speculate on the effect of selective migration on old-age mortality, with its effect being stronger for those not born on the rail line.	Seth	G. Sanders	Magdalena	 Muszynska
2010	187	Hispanic and Black Health and Mortality	Imprisonment and (Inequality in) Population Health	This article considers the effects of imprisonment on population health using state-level panel data (1980-2005). Results support four conclusions. First, the imprisonment rate is generally negatively associated with population health. Second, the imprisonment rate is negatively associated with life expectancy for both White and Black women but not significantly associated with life expectancy for men. Third, though effects of the imprisonment rate on population health tend to be small, effects on the Black infant mortality rate are not. Based on these estimates, the Black infant mortality rate would be 1.2 per 1,000 lower had the imprisonment rate stayed at the 1980 level. Finally, models considering age-specific effects of the imprisonment rate show that while the imprisonment rate is associated with increases in mortality risk at most ages, increases in the imprisonment rate are associated with decreased mortality risk for men aged 15-24.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2010	187	Hispanic and Black Health and Mortality	Exploring Disparities in the Cognitive Functioning of Older Americans Using Growth Curve Selection Modeling: Do Health Behaviors Play a Role?	Both health behaviors and socioeconomic position (SEP) have been linked to variation in cognitive decline of aging individuals, yet few studies have examined the impact of health behaviors on cognitive decline while controlling for a diverse set of indicators capturing SEP across the lifecourse. Latent growth curve selection modeling was used to examine socioeconomic variation in the relationship between cognitive performance and health behaviors in a nationally representative sample of elderly Americans over a ten year period (AHEAD 1998 - 2008). Select health behaviors were predictive of initial word recall scores for both men and women yet change in word recall over time was not influenced by health behaviors.  Various measures of SES were related to both initial word recall and change in word recall over time, but the impact of health behaviors on word recall did not vary among socioeconomic subgroups.	Nicholas	J. Bishop
2010	187	Hispanic and Black Health and Mortality	Is there a Hispanic American “Epidemiologic Paradox” in Late Life? A Closer Look at Chronic Morbidity	This study examined chronic morbidity patterns in later life by race, ethnicity, and nativity using 7 self-reported physician diagnosed chronic diseases as well as biomarkers. We also assessed the sensitivity of the racial/ethnic/nativity differentials in morbidity to health behaviors and SES. Using the 2006 Health and Retirement Study, we estimated a series of nested logistic models of 7 chronic diseases (hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, cancer, arthritis, chronic lung disease, and stroke) that have public health significance among a nationally representative sample of people born before 1954 (N=15,894). Preliminary results show that foreign-born Hispanic Americans generally report comparable or more favorable health for these chronic conditions (except for diabetes) than native-born non-Hispanic whites, controlling for demographic factors. The health advantages are robust when socioeconomic conditions and health behaviors are controlled. Results from biomarker data are largely consistent with the findings from self-reported physician diagnosed chronic diseases.	Zhenmei	 Zhang	Chuntian	 Lu
2010	188	Immigrants and the Labor Market	More Arms, More Power? The Impact of Immigration on Farming and Technology Choices in US Agriculture in Early 20th Century	How do technological progress and the adoption of new technology respond to the availability of complementary factors or the price of such factors? This paper attempts to answer this question in the context of US agriculture in the first four decades of the twentieth century using immigration as a shock to the labor supply available to agricultural production. Instrumenting for the immigration flow using past stocks as predictors of the location decision of newly arrived farmers, we find that states which receive a larger number of immigrant farmers tend to have specialized in the production of more labor-intensive crops and to have lower levels of capital use, even within the production of a given crop. These results suggest that labor markets were capable of absorbing the inflow of labor through other means than by lowering the wages of agricultural workers that is by changing the way agricultural production is structured.	Jeanne	 Lafortune	Jose	 Tessada	Carolina	 Gonzalez
2010	188	Immigrants and the Labor Market	What Are the Effects of State Level Legislation Against the Hiring of Undocumented Immigrants?	The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 included measures to deter the employment and stem the flow of undocumented immigrants. The growth of this population from about 4 million to 12 million in 2008 is evidence that this interior enforcement legislation largely failed. In the absence of federal immigration reform, states have created their own interior enforcement mechanisms, such as Arizona’s Legal Arizona Workers Act (LAWA), arguably the most comprehensive of state efforts. Our initial analysis of changes in response to LAWA indicates a substantial decrease in employment levels of immigrants. This paper is the first to estimate the individual level impact of state legislation against the hiring of undocumented immigrants. In particular, we assess whether such legislation reduces employment probabilities and wages for foreign-born non-citizens most likely to be undocumented as well as the labor market outcomes of observably documented workers, such as naturalized immigrants or the native-born.	Magnus	 Lofstrom	Sarah	 Bohn	Steven	 Raphael
2010	188	Immigrants and the Labor Market	The Impact of Mexican Immigration on U.S. Natives: Evidence from Migrant Flows Driven by Rainfall Shocks	We estimate the effect of Mexican immigration on native labor market outcomes in the United States by using a plausibly exogenous instrument, based on regional rainfall variation in Mexico and historical migration channels between Mexico and the United States, that isolates “push” factors in source regions to identify exogenous changes in the Mexican presence in the U.S. We find that rainfall shocks at the Mexican state level, operating through established migration channels, are strongly correlated with the Mexican labor force share in a panel of U.S. states. Using our instrument to estimate the effect of the Mexican labor force share on native labor market outcomes, we find that the margin of labor market adjustment in response to changes in the Mexican presence in the U.S. is employment, not wages. We also find that these employment effects are concentrated in the middle of the skill distribution.	Dean	 Yang	Todd	 Pugatch
2010	188	Immigrants and the Labor Market	Effect of Immigrant Nurses on Labor Market Outcomes of U.S. Nurses	We study the effect of immigration of foreign-trained registered nurses (RNs) on the employment and wages of domestic RNs. We use the “area” approach and study effects of immigration in local labor markets defined by county or PMSA. Our analysis suggests that immigration of foreign-trained nurses significantly increases the overall supply of nurses in an area, but these increases in supply have little effect on the wages and employment of domestic nurses.	Robert	 Kaestner	Neeraj	 Kaushal
2010	189	Gender Stratification and Health	Intimate Partner Violence and Women’s Mental Health: A Population-Based Study from Paraguay	This study examines the association between intimate partner violence (IPV) and mental health, using the Self Reporting Questionnaire of 20 questions (SRQ-20) administered to a nationally representative sample of Paraguayan women aged 15–44 years. We show that IPV independently increases the risk for common mental disorders (CMD) and suicidal ideation, controlling for women’s socioeconomic and marital status and history of abuse during childhood and their male partners’ unemployment and alcohol consumption. The introduction of IPV variables more substantially improves the explanatory power of the model, particularly for suicidal ideation than the introduction of control variables. Emotional abuse, regardless of time of the episode, has the strongest adverse effect on the risk for CMD whereas recent physical abuse most substantially increases suicidal ideation. These findings suggest that efforts to identify women with potential mental health problems, particularly suicidal ideation, should include screening for the types and history of IPV victimization.	Kanako	 Ishida	Florina	I. Serbanescu	Mary	M. Goodwin	Mercedes	 Melian
2010	189	Gender Stratification and Health	Network Affiliations and Psychological Well-Being: Comparison between Men and Women in the United States	In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the relation of social network dynamics to mental health. This paper examines gender differences over the life span in the relationship between network affiliations and psychological well-being from a recent national survey in the U.S. The results prove that network size is positively related with men’s psychological well-being, while network density is positively related with women’s psychological well-being. Social inequality predictors such as income, education, full time or part time employment status and education are also significant in affecting the psychological well-being for both genders, but the concrete paths vary. An age effect exists, but life-span effects are more important.	Libin	 Zhang
2010	189	Gender Stratification and Health	The Effect of Grandparents Caring for Grandchildren on Depression Trajectories: The Intersectionality of Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and SES	In the United States, African American and Hispanic grandparents are more likely to care for grandchildren. They are disproportionately disadvantaged in the socioeconomic ladder and often have poor health conditions regardless of their caregiving status. At the same time, they have strong social support networks due to different cultural/familial norms. Grandparent caregiving is also a gendered process, with grandmothers assuming a more extensive role in grandchild care compared to grandfathers. Utilizing data from a nationally representative, longitudinal panel study of older adults in the United States (The Health and Retirement Study), we use growth curve models to examine the effects of grandparent caregiving on depressive symptoms initially and over time for a diverse sample of African American, Hispanic, and white grandparents. We expect that grandparents’ depression trajectories are influenced by grandchildren caregiving, but the effect varies by race/ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status.	Feinian	 Chen	Christine	A Mair
2010	189	Gender Stratification and Health	Sexual Orientation and Adolescent Smoking Trajectories	Cross-sectional research indicates that lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) individuals are at greater risk of smoking. This analysis furthers the examination of smoking behaviors across sexual orientation groups by describing a range of smoking trajectories experienced by adolescents with heterosexual and LGB orientations, as well as how changes in sexual orientation over time are linked to these trajectories. Trajectories are estimated separately for men and women using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Six distinct smoking trajectories are identified (Never Smokers, Steady Lows, Delayed Increasers, Early Increasers, Decreasers, Steady Highs). Sexual orientation effects were found only for women. The transition to LGB orientation was more predictive of higher smoking trajectories than was a consistent LGB orientation, with potentially important differences between the smoking patterns of these two groups.	Michael	S. Pollard	Joan	 Tucker	Harold	 Green	David	P. Kennedy	Myong-Hyun	 Go
2010	190	Population, Politics, and Conflict in the Middle East and Western Asia	Displacement Behavior during The 2006 Israeli-Lebanese War	In the course of 33 days, the Israeli-Lebanese war has resulted in over 1000 deaths, thousands of bodily injuries, large scale destruction of infrastructure and properties and massive population displacements. About a third of Lebanese were displaced during the war. We use population-based survey data collected in early 2007 and logistic regression to examine the effects of some demographic and socioeconomic factors on displacement, stratified by war affected and non-affected areas. Our sample is restricted to adults aged 18 years or older. We find that region of residence was understandably the most important variable in predicting displacement. Younger age, being married, and higher education also had higher odds of displacement compared to others. Interestingly, household composition and size, economic standing and possession of a car were not related to displacement. Findings from the present study may help policy makers and humanitarian agencies in their planning efforts during emergencies, including wars.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Shireen	 Assaf	Rouham	 Yamout
2010	190	Population, Politics, and Conflict in the Middle East and Western Asia	Unpromising Demography in a Promised Land: Yisrael Beytenu and the Escalation of Demographic Politics inside Israel’s Green Line	Yisrael Beytenu’s (‘Israel Our Home’) rising political star befuddles much of the Israeli establishment. The party's platform taps into the fears of the country’s demographically ebbing, secular middle ground, and it feeds off of working Israelis’ frustrations with the country’s two most dissonant minorities: Israeli Arabs, and Ultra-Orthodox (Haredi) Jews, both of whom are on the demographic upswing. This research divides the Israeli population into three general sub-populations: Ultra-Orthodox Jews, Israeli Arabs, and ‘All other Jews and others’. Using Israeli Census data and estimates from the literature, the authors generate both “constant” and “heading-toward-replacement” fertility variants and use each variant, and an average of their two projections, to hypothesize the future age-distributed ethno-religious composition of Israel. The research pays special attention to the projected compositional outcomes of Israel's voting-age population and of its school age population. [The extended abstract appears as a brief paper on the Foreign Policy Magazine Online]	Richard	P. Cincotta	Eric	P. Kaufmann
2010	190	Population, Politics, and Conflict in the Middle East and Western Asia	Toward a Resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict:
Demography, Social Prosperity and the Future of Sovereign Israel	The expanding recognition of the two-state solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict ostensibly removes a demographic threat to Israel that the Arab inhabitants between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River will soon outnumber the Jews. The demographic and social concern of maintaining the character of the state of Israel as the place where the Jewish people can realize its right to self-determination and ensure a solid Jewish majority should be directed inward. Israel also wishes to continue to be a prosperous and developed country. This paper examines the changing proportions and characteristics of population subgroups and their effect on Israel’s future as a Jewish and prosperous state. Further we argue that the demographic composition does not allow Israel to accept the demand for the “right of return” whereas the two-state solution should involve the settlement of the Palestinian refugees in the new Palestinian state. We discuss directions for public policy.	Uzi	 Rebhun	Gilad	 Malach
2010	191	Comparative Perspectives on Gender and Time Use in the Household	Shared Family Leisure and Eating Time in Comparative Perspective	Is the time families spend in shared leisure and eating together higher in countries where mothers do more childcare? Using nationally representative Time Use Surveys we compare four countries with different work-family policy settings and attitudes to maternal care: USA, Australia, Denmark, and France. We exploit information on activities, co-presence and location to create harmonised measures of parents’ total time with children, and shared family leisure both in and out of home. In Australia and the USA, which have fewer policies supporting women’s employment and stronger cultural ideals of intensive parenting, mothers spend the most time  with children in total. However, the time mothers and children, or both parents and children, spend together in shared leisure is remarkably uniform cross-nationally. Indeed, the most focused joint family leisure time is highest in Denmark and France. This suggests higher average maternal employment does not threaten this important aspect of family life and has implications for Anglo mothers’ leisure and child-free time	Lyn	 Craig	Killian	 Mullan
2010	191	Comparative Perspectives on Gender and Time Use in the Household	Educational Differences in Mothers' and Fathers' Time Use in U.S. Two-Parent Families: Differences in Cultural Preferences, Economic Incentives, or Income Constraints?	Using the ATUS, we explore educational differences in how married or cohabiting American mothers and fathers spend their time. We show that more educated men and women spend more time in child care. This is striking given that the well educated have smaller families and spend more time in paid work. More educated women (but not men) spend less time in housework. We use regression analyses to shed light on how much these differences are a result of different cultural preferences, facing different incentives, and/or facing different income constraints. Perhaps surprisingly, we find that the differences in parenting time are not merely a reflection of more income to buy out of housework, but persist under controls for these factors. This suggests a role for cultural preferences in addition to economic incentives (which undoubtedly affect paid work time) and economic constraints (which do not affect housework time).	Paula	S. England	Anjula	 Saraff
2010	191	Comparative Perspectives on Gender and Time Use in the Household	Gender Roles, Household Labor, and Family Satisfaction: A Cross-National Comparison	Data from the 2002 International Social Survey Program: Family and Changing Gender Roles (III) are analyzed for 25,847 married or cohabiting adults from 34 more developed countries in Europe, Asia, Latin America, and the United States. We examine the associations between gender roles, household labor, and family satisfaction, and include couple and individual characteristics, as well as country level measures. Overall, we find that involvement in housework and childcare is positively associated with family satisfaction. Family satisfaction is higher among those in more traditional relationships (man breadwinner, woman homemaker) relative to other family forms; yet interaction terms indicate that men report higher family satisfaction the more involved they are in housework, and the more they agree they ought to share housework and childcare. Multi-level models indicate that only 5 percent of the variation in family satisfaction is between countries, and satisfaction is associated with increased country development.	Renata	 Forste	Kiira	 Fox
2010	191	Comparative Perspectives on Gender and Time Use in the Household	Time for a Change? The Domestic Division of Labor in Comparative Perspective, 1994 and 2002	This paper examines housework over time in comparative perspective. We seek to understand gendered housework in the larger context of social change, testing specifically whether cross-national differences in domestic labor patterns converge over time. Using data from 16 countries from the 1994 and 2002 waves of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP), we find that the division of labor at home became somewhat more egalitarian over this period. Social context matters in shaping housework patterns: While we establish an overall trend towards more equality, we also demonstrate that the shift in the domestic division of labor was greatest among the most traditional countries, and smallest among those who already had a more egalitarian division of labor. Our findings provide support for the thesis of cultural convergence, yet do not imply that converge is directed towards complete equality.	Claudia	 Geist	Philip	N. Cohen
2010	192	Immigrant Assimilation: Comparative Perspectives	Assimilation in a New Context: Second Generation Educational Attainment in Germany	This paper utilizes a new data source, the 2005 and 2006 German Mikrozensus, to model the likelihood of competing secondary school outcomes among both foreign and naturalized children of guest workers, ethnic Germans, EU and third country immigrants. This paper reveals several new patterns. First, after controlling for parental socioeconomic status, the general trend among the children of immigrants is one of advantage relative to native Germans. Second, differences in achievement between immigrant origin groups cannot be explained by differences in legal status or context of reception. By allowing the effect of parental education to differ by ethnic origin, I link these new findings to the fact that the children of low skilled immigrants enjoy an “immigrant advantage” relative to the children of low skilled native Germans, performing better than would be expected from their parental characteristics alone.	Renee	 Luthra
2010	192	Immigrant Assimilation: Comparative Perspectives	Second Generation Immigrants and Age at Motherhood. A Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility Behavior	Using a newly-created multigenerational register, this study examines the fertility integration of the second generation in light of the fertility history of their mothers, their co-ethnics, and the native population. We study the extent that children of immigrants have assimilated to host-country norms in terms of entrance into motherhood, with a focus on the role of labor market status in the process of becoming mothers for groups from varying national backgrounds. Using register data comprising the entire Swedish population, we examine the process of becoming parents for second-generation immigrants while controlling for the entire reproductive and labor-market history of the parental generation. This study takes two approaches: First, the entire Swedish population is observed, controlling for individual characteristics of both the daughter and the mother. Second, families with two daughters are studied, assessing the impact of family norms on fertility using a sibling approach with family fixed-effects.	Kirk	A. Scott	Maria	A. Stanfors
2010	192	Immigrant Assimilation: Comparative Perspectives	The Education of the Second Generation in Canada and Britain: What about Primary and Secondary Effects?	The goal of this paper is to assess a recent attempt to link school performance and the qualifications of the second generation, the primary and secondary effects explanation, by examining the education of the second generation at two different points (performance and overall attainment) in the second generation's schooling career in Canada and Britain and examining whether the explanation holds in light of the state of ethnic educational inequalities in the two countries. The analyses use four different data sources in order to investigate the applicability of PSE to the Canadian and British cases: the Youth in Transition Survey (C), the Longitudinal Study of Young People in England (B), the Ethnic Diversity Survey (C) and the Longitudinal Study (B). The application of primary and secondary effects to second generation outcomes in Canada and Britain does appear to be supported by the results of the analyses, to a limited extent.	Laurence	 Lessard-Phillips	Anthony	 Heath
2010	192	Immigrant Assimilation: Comparative Perspectives	Differences in Fertility Decisions of Canadian Immigrant Households	We explore the fertility decisions of Canadian immigrants using the 20% sample of the Canadian Census of Population for the years 1991 to 2006 among women 16 to 45 years of age. We study the relevance of arrival cohort and age at migration. We find a nonlinear relationship between age of migration and the difference between native and immigrant fertility, with those migrating in their late teens being the farthest from natives. Also we include measures of family composition and find the presence of additional family members to be relevant. Finally we turn to the intergenerational assimilation of immigrants. The 2001 and 2006 census provides information on parental place of birth which allows distinguishing immigrants by first, second, and second and a half generation. We study the relationship between number of children and place of origin of father and/or mother among second generation immigrants as compared to migrants.	Alicia	 Adsera	Ana	 Ferrer
2010	193	The Dynamics of SES and Health	Economic Strain and Well-Being in Late Life: Findings from a 14-Year Population-Based, Longitudinal Study of Older Adults in Taiwan	Using data from the Taiwan Longitudinal Study on Aging, we estimated the effects of economic strain and economic resources such as income and homeownership on the well-being of older Taiwanese adults cross-sectionally and longitudinally. Measures of well-being include life satisfaction, psychological distress, and self rated health. Results from multivariate regression modeling with the estimates of generalized estimating equations show that older adults who experienced economic strain had poorer well-being in comparison to older adults without strain, both cross-sectionally and over time (p's       	Chi	 Chiao	Li-Jen	 Weng	Amanda	 Botticello
2010	193	The Dynamics of SES and Health	The Role of Dynamics in the Health-Education Gradient	It is well known that among elderly Americans, education and health are negatively correlated. We contribute to this literature both methodologically and empirically. First, we show how to use factor analytic methods to summarize several measures of health found in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) in a low dimensional vector representing latent health status. Second, we develop a simulation-based estimator of the dynamic process of health. The dynamic model allows us to explore how endogenous mortality, severe health crises (such as heart attacks or cancers), and more gradual processes affect aging. Third, we estimate both models separately for low and high education groups in the HRS. The results reveal how much inequality in old age is driven by differences in health at age 50 (the beginning of our sample) and how much stems from differences in the aging process.	Fabian	 Lange	Douglas	 McKee
2010	193	The Dynamics of SES and Health	Health Behavior Change among Middle Aged and Older Americans: SES Differences in Changes and Adherence	Research on SES differences in health behaviors and health outcomes has not addressed the role of behavior change. In this analysis, I examine which middle aged and older Americans make changes in health behaviors after reporting new chronic conditions for which lifestyle changes are important for the management of the conditions. I examine patterns of behavior change for smoking, drinking, and exercise as well as adherence to these changes and analyze education differences in behavior change and adherence. I find that education is positively associated with smoking cessation after reporting new chronic conditions, but not adherence to smoking cessation. Education is negatively associated with drinking cessation and adherence to this lifestyle change. I find no differences by education in starting exercise after new reported conditions, but conditional on starting to exercise, the more educated are more likely to make exercise a sustained lifestyle change.	Rachel	 Margolis
2010	193	The Dynamics of SES and Health	The Impact of Work and Family Trajectories on Financial Well-Being at Older Ages	Using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, we examine relationships between trajectories of work and family experiences across the life course and four measures of financial well-being at ages 64-65: (a) total personal income, (b) total household income, (c) health insurance coverage, and (d) household net worth. We construct work and family trajectories using group-based trajectory modeling techniques (finite mixture models) to characterize the trajectories of family circumstances and transitions from birth through age 65 and trajectories of labor force experiences from age 36 through age 65. Preliminary estimates (conducted separately for men and women) indicate that latent work and family trajectories are significantly associated with financial well-being net of more temporally proximate correlates, including work and family circumstances at age 53-54. Trajectories characterized by stable full-time employment and stable marriage across the life course are particularly predictive of more favorable economic circumstances at older ages	John	R. Warren	James	 Raymo
2010	194	Aging in the Developing World	Future Life Expectancy and Healthy Life Expectancy in Latin America and the Caribbean	Older people attaining age 60 after 1990 in Latin America and the Caribbean are survivors scarred by experiences dominated by heavy exposure to infectious diseases early in life. According to some theories these experiences could translate into higher susceptibility to adult chronic conditions and mortality. In this paper we test the conjecture that the improvements in longevity that began more seventy years ago may have also created conditions increasing the susceptibility to adult chronic diseases and mortality of those cohorts affected by the gains in survival. These effects could compromise future gains in life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. To evaluate the conjecture we use data for Mexico and Puerto Rico. We conclude that, even if theories on which the conjecture rest are confirmed, it is unlikely that the passage through older ages of the affected cohorts will contribute significantly to levels of future life expectancy and healthy life expectancy.	Kenya	V. Noronha
2010	194	Aging in the Developing World	Early Life Circumstances and Mortality among Older Adults 
in Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia and Africa	We examine mortality of older adults born during the late 1920s and early 1940s to test the conjecture that countries which most probably produced a larger number of survivors of poor early childhood conditions as a result of public health interventions and medical technology largely in the absence of improvements in standard of living are also countries where older obese adults and/or adults with heart disease or diabetes exhibit a higher excess of relative risk of mortality. Using a cross national diverse sample of adults 60+ years from major studies on aging in Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia, Africa, the US, UK and the Netherlands, we construct several Waaler-type surfaces to estimate expected relative risk of mortality and then excess mortality. We expect to find that in the aforementioned countries older obese adults and/or adults with heart disease or diabetes exhibit a higher excess of relative risk of mortality.	Mary	 McEniry
2010	194	Aging in the Developing World	Centenarians’ Children Have Favorable Health Outcomes in China. Effects of Genetic Inherence and Its Interactions with Environment on Healthy Aging	We present a comparative analysis of the health outcomes and health risk factors between 417 centenarians’ children who are also elderly themselves and their peers with comparable gender, age and other socioeconomic characteristics living in a variety of areas. We test two hypotheses: H1: The children of centenarians are healthier than their peers due to genetic heritability; H2: The interactions between genetic propensity and social, behavioral, and community environmental factors also play important roles in determining health outcomes at old ages. The preliminary results indicate that, controlling for age, gender, ethnicity, childhood conditions, adulthood SES, family/social support and health practice, the children of centenarians have significantly better health outcomes measured by IADL, depression symptom, cognitive ability, number of chronic diseases, self-rated health and self-rated life satisfaction. The paper presents additional findings concerning the genetic-environmental interaction.	Huashuai	 Chen	Xiaoming	 Shi	Liu	 Yuzhi
2010	194	Aging in the Developing World	Mexican Older Adults in a Mixed Epidemiological Regime	Background: Mexico is undergoing an epidemiological transition. Advances in medicine have improved life expectancy like other developing countries. Chronic non-communicable diseases affect a large percentage of older adults, while many of these adults are still exposed to infectious agents that cause communicable diseases. How this mixed disease regime affects the health and well-being of older Mexican adults is not well understood. Methods: Data comes from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) 2001 and 2003, a national representative sample of adults aged 50 and older. A total sample of 12,207 was included for the analysis. Logistic regression analyses were conducted to study the relationship between self-reported health and its covariates under a mixed regime of non-communicable and communicable diseases. Changes in self-reported health between 2001 and 2003 were also analyzed using multinomial analysis by type of disease	Rafael	 Samper-Ternent	Alejandra	 Michaels-Obregon
2011	1	The New Demography of Poverty: Federal, Regional, State, and Local Differences	Improving the Measurement of Poverty	In this paper, we estimate 2007 national poverty rates using an improved approach that was largely conceptualized by a 1995 National Academies of Sciences panel and that is similar to the supplemental poverty measure that will soon be produced by the U.S. Census Bureau. We use poverty thresholds based on actual expenditures on shelter, food, clothing, and utilities and a measure of family income that includes earnings, cash transfers, near-cash benefits, tax credits, and tax payments. We also account for childcare and work expenses, out-of-pocket medical expenses, variation in regional cost of living, and home ownership without a mortgage. Using this methodology, overall poverty increases from 12.4% to 16%. Child poverty increases more than three percentage points, while elderly poverty increases nearly seven percentage points. We highlight a number of important areas for future research.	Nathan	 Hutto	Jane	 Waldfogel	Neeraj	 Kaushal	Irwin	 Garfinkel
2011	1	The New Demography of Poverty: Federal, Regional, State, and Local Differences	The Great Recession's Impact on New York City: What Does the Center for Economic Opportunity's Poverty Measure Tell Us That the Official Measure Does Not?	This paper will examine the change in the New York City poverty rate from 2008 to 2009, comparing results derived from the official measure against one created by the Center for Economic Opportunity. It will explore how differences in the two measures’ definition of family resources affect differences in the measured change in the poverty rate. The official poverty measure only accounts for pre-tax cash income. The CEO poverty measure includes the effect of taxation and the cash-equivalent value of in-kind nutritional and housing subsidies. A more inclusive accounting for resources should provide insight into the extent to which increased participation in the Food Stamp program and the expanded generosity of income tax credits softened the recession’s impact on income and poverty.	Mark	K. Levitan	Christine	 D'Onofrio	John	 Krampner	Daniel	 Scheer	Todd	 Seidel
2011	1	The New Demography of Poverty: Federal, Regional, State, and Local Differences	Creating a New Measure of Poverty for States: The Wisconsin Experience	This paper describes efforts to develop a more accurate, comprehensive, and up-to-date measure of poverty in Wisconsin as a model for other states to follow The new measure targets areas of greatest need and reflects the effects of anti-poverty policies and programs within Wisconsin by encompassing state-specific taxes and transfers as well as federal programs . Based on input from state and national experts, the Wisconsin model uses American Community Survey data to measure the level, depth, and trends in poverty and the effects of such programs as SNAP (food stamps), refundable tax credits, as well as out of pocket health care costs and work related expenses including child care. This paper will also assess the ways in which the Wisconsin measure affects the demographic composition of those living in poverty and how this model compares to efforts in other parts of the country,	Joanna	 Marks	Julia	 Isaacs	Katherine	 Thornton
2011	1	The New Demography of Poverty: Federal, Regional, State, and Local Differences	Alternative Poverty Measures and the Geographic Distribution of Poverty in the United States	Measuring the poverty status of individuals and families is in the policy spotlight on both the national and local levels in the United States. The purpose of this paper is to identify the extent to which a re-ranking of states and regions in terms of poverty status occurs under alternative poverty measures, both in the aggregate and by major demographic groups such as children and the elderly. The primary data for our analysis draws from the 2000-2009 Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey, supplemented by data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. We find that poverty based on the NAS-type measures are higher compared to official rates, but that alternative measures leave poverty rankings across the four Census regions and the 50 states largely unchanged. In addition, state rankings for child, adult, and senior poverty are fairly robust across the seven NAS-type measures we consider.	James	P. Ziliak
2011	2	HIV Prevention and Sexual and Reproductive Health Service Linkages	Prevention of HIV in Women and Girls Depends on Strengthening the Enabling Environment	Women make up 50% of PLWHA. As global attention focuses on their unique vulnerabilities, implementing interventions that work specifically for women and girls is critical. This paper reviews 63 successful interventions to strengthen the enabling environment for women and girls. Environmental factors, including legal rights, employment, income, education, violence, traditional gender norms, and stigma/discrimination, determine whether any HIV intervention will truly help women and girls. Multi-pronged community-based approaches that include the media and religious leaders have been successful.Community-based participatory learning approaches involving men and women have created more gender equitable relationships, decreasing violence against women and HIV risk. Community-based approaches promoting legal rights are stronger when backed up with reform to enforce laws protecting widows’ property. Integration of HIV/AIDS information with community-based women's empowerment and micro-finance programs can reduce GBV and increase protective behavior. Community-based interventions that provide accurate information about HIV transmission, and training providers, can reduce S&D. 	Karen	 Hardee	Jill	 Gay	Melanie	 Croce-Galis
2011	2	HIV Prevention and Sexual and Reproductive Health Service Linkages	The Impact of HIV/AIDS on Fertility Aspirations and Control in Uganda	Little attention has been given to the impact of HIV+ status on women’s fertility aspirations and childbearing intentions, especially in countries with endemic HIV and high fertility norms. We conducted a survey of 1,594 women age 18-49 visiting non-urgent services at Mbarara Regional Hospital in Uganda, a country with a TFR of 6.7. Among these women, 59.6% were HIV+ and 40.4% were HIV-. Among the HIV+ women, 96.4% were on ART. Controlling for age, HIV+ women were less likely to be married (53.6% vs 82.1%), due to dramatically higher probabilities of widowhood (7x) and separation (3x). Among those pregnant when surveyed, 36.6% of HIV+ women reported the pregnancy to be a “big problem” compared to 11.4% of the HIV- women. Based on multiple regression modeling, HIV+ women were significantly less likely to want more children compared to HIV- women, net of marriage, age, parity, education, and HH income. 	Rachel	 Snow	Massy	 Mutumba	Gregory	 Powers	Lindsey	 Evans	Edith	 Rukundo	Lenard	 Abesiga	Joy	 Kabasindi	Tegan	 Ford	Linda	 Okoh	Godfrey	 Mugyenyi
2011	2	HIV Prevention and Sexual and Reproductive Health Service Linkages	The Impact of Antenatal HIV Diagnosis on Postpartum Reproductive Behaviour in Northern Tanzania	With HIV testing increasingly offered as a routine part of antenatal care in Africa, many women will discover they are HIV+ during pregnancy. It is important to examine the impact of HIV diagnosis on postpartum reproductive behavior, and to tailor antenatal counseling to HIV+ women’s needs. This is the first study to provide adjusted measures of the effect of diagnosis on postpartum reproductive behavior. A baseline survey of 5,682 antenatal clients inquired about reproductive behavior before HIV testing/counseling. HIV results were linked to survey answers. Fifteen months later, a follow-up survey collected information on postpartum reproductive behavior, and in-depth interviews explored attitudes to childbearing and HIV. HIV diagnosis caused a downward adjustment in childbearing desires, but did not affect short-term desires, in contrast to findings from previous studies. Qualitative research uncovered major factors discouraging childbearing post-diagnosis, but also factors pushing women to continue childbearing. Implications for antenatal counseling are discussed. 	Sarah	 Keogh	Mark	 Urassa	Maria	 Roura	Yusufu	 Kumogola	Basia	 Zaba
2011	2	HIV Prevention and Sexual and Reproductive Health Service Linkages	Factors Influencing Reproductive Choices of HIV Infected Women in India	There has been growing concern in India about reproductive decisions of women with HIV. In a feasibility study of preventing mother-to-child HIV transmission in Mumbai, 198 HIV-infected women were interviewed to understand how the desire for future children is associated with a range of socio-demographic, HIV-related, and psychological factors. Nearly one-third were pregnant and the majority intended to continue the pregnancy. Logistic regression found that not having a male child, a marriage duration of 1-3 years, lower family income, and migrant status were significant predictors of the desire for an additional child. Prominently, an increase in active-behavioral coping and physical functioning was positively related to the desire for children. Time since knowing the HIV status was inversely related, while husband not being tested for HIV was positively related with the fertility desire. 	Emily	 Das
2011	3	Marriage Change in Developing Countries	Dimensions and Determinants of Marital Quality in Nepal	Drawing on a uniquely large number of items on marital quality, this study explores the dimensions and determinants of marital quality in Chitwan Valley, Nepal. Five dimensions of marital quality are identified using factor analysis. Three positive dimensions comprise satisfaction, communication, and togetherness, while two other dimensions – problems and disagreements – are negative in nature. Gender, education, and spouse choice emerge as the most important determinants of these five dimensions of marital quality. Men, those with more schooling, and people who participated in the choice of their spouse have higher levels of marital quality. By contrast, caste, occupation, age at marriage, and marital duration have little to no association with marital quality. While gender, education, and spouse choice emerge as key determinants of marital quality in this context, the majority of variation in marital quality remains unexplained by these factors.	Keera	 Allendorf	Dirgha	J. Ghimire
2011	3	Marriage Change in Developing Countries	To Buy a Washing Machine or Television Set? Bargaining over Durable Goods in Brazil	In Brazil, wives do most of the household work. About sixty percent of them also work outside the household, working a total of about 10 hours more per week than men. Because of this unequal distribution of household work, husbands and wives might have different priorities regarding the purchase of durable goods, with wives preferring household-production durable goods such as washing machines over entertainment durable goods such as televisions. We examine whether decisions about ownership of entertainment and production durable goods are the outcomes of a bargaining process between husbands and wives. We use several variables to measure bargaining power, including the ratio of women to men in a state. The results indicate that decisions about durable goods ownership are the outcomes of bargaining processes between husbands and wives with wives preferring household-production durable goods over entertainment durable goods.	Ana	 Fava	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning
2011	3	Marriage Change in Developing Countries	Women's Contributions to the Cost of Marriage in Egypt: The Role of Education and Employment	The rising cost of marriage and delayed marriage in the Middle East has recently received a considerable amount of attention in both academic and policy circles. Relatively little is known, however, about how young women’s education and employment affect their contribution to marriage costs or age at marriage. To address this gap, we use recent data from Egypt to examine the relationships between women’s education, labor force participation and other labor market indicators and their and their families’ contributions to total marriage costs. We also examine the association between women’s labor force participation and marriage timing following school exit. We then consider the implications of these relationships for investment in women’s education and women’s commitment to the labor force.	Maia	 Sieverding	Asmaa	 Elbadawy
2011	3	Marriage Change in Developing Countries	Change and Persistence in Marriage Payments in Vietnam, 1963-2000	Among various marriage and family practices, economic exchange at the time of marriage is one of the most multifaceted and complex. Prevalence, direction, magnitude, and property rights of marriage payments can vary considerably over time and across societies. Despite their implications for the wellbeing of family members and the distribution of wealth across generations, trends and determinants of payments have rarely been examined at the population level. Based on representative data from the Vietnam Study of Family Change, we describe temporal trends, cohort patterns, and regional differences in payments among Vietnamese marriages contracted during 1963-2000 to ascertain influences of cultural orientations, socioeconomic conditions, and policies, particularly those banning payments. Given Vietnam’s recent structural change altered gender role ideology and parent-child relationships, we examine whether couple’s socioeconomic background and manner of mate selection determine payments. Findings are interpreted with the aim to understand nature, social meanings, and complex patterns of payments in the context of rapid social change.	Bussarawan	 Teerawichitchainan	John	 Knodel
2011	4	Family Instability: Causes and Consequences I	Maternal Re-Partnering and Non-Resident Father Investments in Children	A considerable body of research suggests that paternal re-partnering is associated with decreased non-resident father investments in children. Fewer studies, however, have examined the influence of maternal re-partnering on non-resident father investments. We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to examine associations of maternal re-partnering (cohabitation or marriage formation with a new partner) with non-resident father visitation and child support payment, paying particular attention to the role of residential moves that may accompany new partnerships. Preliminary results from standard regression models with extensive controls, as well as random effects and fixed effects regressions, reveal consistent evidence that maternal re-partnering is associated with decreased father involvement and increased geographic distance between mothers’ and fathers’ households. We find less consistent evidence of links between maternal re-partnering and formal child support payments. Finally, new partner births are consistently associated with decreased child support payments, but less consistently with father-child contact.	Lawrence	M. Berger	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2011	4	Family Instability: Causes and Consequences I	Maternal Partnership Instability and Coparenting among Fragile Families	Data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study are used to examine associations between mothers’ partnership instability and coparenting behavior over the first five years after a nonmarital birth, differences between coresidential and dating transitions, and variation by race/ethnicity and child gender. Sixty percent of mothers who gave birth outside of marriage report two or more partnership transitions by their child’s fifth birthday. Higher levels of partnership instability are significantly associated with lower quality coparenting among fragile families. Multiple robustness checks suggest that at least part of this association is causal. The effect of coresidential transitions on coparenting is stronger than the effect of dating transitions. The effect of coresidential transitions is also stronger for parents of boys versus girls, suggesting that boys may be at increased risk following family structure changes. The authors find some evidence for the moderating role of race/ethnicity.	Carey	E. Cooper	Audrey	N. Beck	Robin	S. Hognas
2011	4	Family Instability: Causes and Consequences I	Genes, Mothers' Relationship Instability, and Children’s Socioemotional Wellbeing	This study addresses the relationship between family instability and child wellbeing by incorporating genetic information. Based on the biological susceptibility hypothesis, we hypothesize that children with particular genetic characteristics are more reactive to their mother’s partnership transitions in influencing child health and wellbeing than other children with different genetic makeup. We utilize data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study (n=1,687) when the children are between the ages of 0-5. We find that that child’s serotonergic genes interact with mother’s relationship transitions to influence internalizing behaviors, and that the child’s dopaminergic genes interact with the mother’s relationship transitions to influence externalizing behaviors. We also find that both the child’s dopaminergic and serotonergic genes are related to pro-social behaviors. These gene-social environment models can differ for boys and girls. These findings suggest that greater integration of social and biological information improves the family instability, child wellbeing, and gene-environment interactions literatures.	Colter	 Mitchell
2011	4	Family Instability: Causes and Consequences I	Relationship Instability, Multiple-Partner Fertility, and the Complexity of Household Obligations	Recent research has revealed a great deal of relationship instability and multiple-partner fertility among unmarried parents. These processes result in complex social and biological family ties within and across households. In this paper, I document the prevalence of complex family forms that result from relationship instability and multiple-partner fertility for a cohort of nonmarital children born during the late 1990s, using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. I then compare the economic and interpersonal relationships across family types and show how such relationships change after mothers and fathers transition into new partner and parenting roles. Using fixed and random effects regression models, I find that both parental relationship quality and fathers’ economic contributions decline after mothers and fathers enter new romantic relationships and have new children. These findings suggest that at least part of the association between family complexity and household economic and interpersonal relationships is causal.	Laura	M. Tach
