year	session_number	session_title	title	abstract	author1_firstname	author1_name	author2_firstname	author2_name	author3_firstname	author3_name	author4_firstname	author4_name	author5_firstname	author5_name	author6_firstname	author6_name	author7_firstname	author7_name
2002	1	Family and Community in Intergenerational Exchanges	Modernization and Intergenerational Transfers in Indonesia: An Examination of Data from the Indonesian Family Life Survey	In the study of developing nations, a common assumption is that modernization and development erode traditional extended family values.  In the context of intergenerational transfers, this pattern would be evident if more modern individuals were more likely to provide transfers of money, goods or services to elderly parents living alone instead of becoming coresident.      Studies of Indonesian families only examining coresidence patterns provide mixed support for this theory. However, a recent qualitative study (Beard and Kunharibowo, 2001) suggests that other factors complicate the decision to coreside.  Therefore, we examine the patterns and predictors of coresidence and three other types of transfers (money, goods and services) using data from the Indonesian Family Life Survey.      We expected that individuals with more modern characteristics such as higher educational attainment, urban residence and more access to modern media provide more transfers of money, goods and services and are less likely to coreside.	Randi	S. Cartmill	Victoria	A. Beard
2002	1	Family and Community in Intergenerational Exchanges	Intergenerational Transfers, Income Shocks And Human Capital: Evidence From A Natural Experiment	This paper uses the GSOEP to investigate the impact of German reunification on transfers from parents to their children. A difference-in-differences approach is applied to estimate changes in the probability and amount of transfers in East and West Germany. The analysis indicates that overall, in both regions, transfers are negatively correlated with the relative income of children relatively to their parents. However, in both regions, transfers towards college-age children have increased. These results cannot be reconciled with the standard altruism model. I propose a model with altruistic parents and liquidity constrained children making human capital investment that explains the findings.	Enrica	 Croda
2002	1	Family and Community in Intergenerational Exchanges	Altering Work Patterns to Accommodate Help to Elderly Parents: Are Baby-Boomers Juggling Work and Family in New Patterns?	This paper explores ways baby-boom children adapt their labor market allocations to assist their elderly parents and how their patterns of adaptation compare to those of earlier cohorts. This has become an important policy concern, yet little is known about it.      Three birth cohorts from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics - those born 1935-44, 1945-54, 1955-64 - are compared cross-sectionally and over a five-year period.  Unique features include: (1) disaggregating work hours by type (actual hours worked; sick time, vacation time; unemployment time; time out of the labor force) (2) exploring which factors typically distinguish the cohorts (differences in women's labor market commitment; cohort size; marital instability; geographic distance between adult children and parents) best account for cohort differences in labor market responses to parental caregiving.      Preliminary findings show both similarities and differences across the cohorts and hint at a narrowing of gender differences in responses to elder care.	Martha	 Hill	Wei-Jun	Jean Yeung
2002	1	Family and Community in Intergenerational Exchanges	Participating in Transfer Networks: The Family versus the Community	Families and community organizations can play an important role in providing credit, insurance and access to services, particularly where formal markets are less developed.  In this paper, we investigate the determinants of participation in family-based and community networks using data from Indonesia. To our knowledge, this paper represents a first attempt to formally examine this relationship. From our results, community organizations have a weak ability to displace family-based networks.  However, we also uncover important complementarities between the two networks. Particularly interesting are results on family variables: Family network size and the frequency of intra-family interactions have a positive effect on participation and access to credit with the community network. One potential explanation for this finding is that family networks may enhance the benefits (or lower the costs) associated with participating in the community network. In particular,  family networks can provide screening, monitoring and enforcement advantages to community credit institutions.	Una	Okonkwo  Osili	Cagla	 Okten
2002	2	HIV/AIDS Sexual Risk Behavior in Sub-Saharan Africa	Perceived HIV Risk and Coercive Sex: Evidence from Rakai, Uganda	This study presents findings from a community-based survey of 4279 reproductive-aged women in the Rakai District of Uganda on the issue of coercive sexual relations. One in four women reported having ever experienced coercive sex with their current partner. Younger age at first intercourse, alcohol consumption, and perceptions of the male partner's HIV risk emerged as strongly and positively related to the risk of coercive sex. Women who perceived their partner to be at highest risk of HIV experienced risks of coercive sex almost three times higher than women in lower risk partnerships, with supplemental analysis of longitudinal data providing evidence that coercive sex appears to be a direct consequence of shifts in women's perceptions of their male partners' HIV risk. Our findings highlight the possible importance of coercive sex in fueling the continuing HIV epidemic in Uganda, and the need to address this issue within current HIV prevention programs.	Michael	 Koenig	Tom	 Lutalo	Feng	 Zhao	Noah	 Kiwanuka	Fred	 Wabwire-Mangen
2002	2	HIV/AIDS Sexual Risk Behavior in Sub-Saharan Africa	Confronting the Myth of Sugar Daddies: Recent Findings Linking Age Differences, Economic Transaction, and Risky Behavior in Sexual Relations in Urban Kenya	Anecdotal evidence asserts that sugar daddy relationships between adolescent girls and older men are widespread in sub-Saharan Africa and fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS. There is limited empirical evidence, however, on age differences and economic exchange between partners, and more importantly, on the link between these asymmetries and sexual behavior. The Kisumu Survey of Urban Life investigates the prevalence and riskiness of the sugar daddy myth. Preliminary results suggest that sugar daddies are associated with risky behaviors: In partnerships where the age difference between partners is 10 or more years, condom use is less than 30%, compared with almost 60% in partnerships with age differences less than 10 years. Results show that transactional sexual relations are common (over 66% of partnerships), where an expanded definition of exchange includes economic assistance not directly linked to sexual encounters. Examination of the value and type of assistance related to condom use is included.	Nancy	 Luke
2002	2	HIV/AIDS Sexual Risk Behavior in Sub-Saharan Africa	Mobility, Sexual Behavior and the Spread of HIV in Cameroon	An extensive literature on HIV risk factors has documented the relationship between mobility and HIV spread in sub-Saharan Africa. However most studies are based on data from the early 1990s and have focused on the effects of return migrants on the spread of HIV into rural areas.     Using data collected in Yaoundé in 1997 among 896 men and 1017 women, the study assesses the relation between mobility and HIV in an urban area where the epidemic is mature. The study shows that duration of absence is strongly associated with increased risk of HIV infection among men, married ones in particular, who are engaged in different sexual networks. As for mobile women they are not more infected than non-mobile women despite higher risk behaviors. This suggests that a significant part of HIV infection among non-mobile women is caused by the sexual behavior of their regular partners during travel.	Nathalie	 Lydié	Jamie	 Robinson	Benoît	 Ferry	Évina	 Akam
2002	2	HIV/AIDS Sexual Risk Behavior in Sub-Saharan Africa	Sequence, Composition and Geographic Bridging in Concurrent Partnerships: Evidence from Uganda	This paper extends previous research on concurrent partnerships in Uganda to examine how these partnerships are sequenced over the life course, the composition of the triads (index case and two concurrent partners), and the implications for transmission dynamics.    The study is based on a representative sample of 1,428 adults aged 15-49 in 1993-1994 from Rakai District, Uganda.  A local network module was used to elicit information on up to three of the respondents' most recent sexual partners.     The results show younger women are at higher risk due to their network positions.  While not themselves likely to report concurrent or multiple partners, their male partners have concurrent partners, thus putting them at risk.  The results also suggest that persons with concurrent partnerships are embedded in more connected networks, creating local patches where transmission can be sustained, and contributing disproportionately to the geographic spread of HIV.	Wassana	 Im-em	Martina	 Morris
2002	3	Immigration and Health in the U.S.	Immigrants and Smoking: Revealing the Hidden Heterogeneity in Smoking Prevalence Rates	There is acute interest regarding the health risk behaviors of immigrants as they comprise a growing proportion of the U.S. population. Cigarette smoking among immigrants is one of the most richly complex health behaviors because of its strong cultural and gendered dimensions and its role in disease causation. Due in part to the lack of suitable data, previous research has largely ignored the heterogeneity in tobacco use patterns existing within race/ethnic groups, especially by immigrant status and country of origin. Using the CPS Tobacco Use Supplement's 1995-1996 wave and the newly released 1998-1999 wave, this research finds significant differences in smoking prevalence rates when the rates are disaggregated by nativity and country of origin. Immigrant women, in particular, have much lower smoking rates than non-immigrants. Additionally, large variations exist in country of origin-specific smoking rates. These findings may reveal immigrants' adaptation to receiving communities and the effectiveness of smoking regulations.	Kaari	 Baluja	Julie	 Park	Dowell	 Myers
2002	3	Immigration and Health in the U.S.	Health Care Access and Utilization among Hispanic Sub-Groups in the United States	I use the 1993-1996 National Health Interview Survey to examine the effect of race/ethnicity and immigration status on the access to and utilization of health care among Hispanic subgroups. Hispanic sub-populations were less likely to have access to and less likely to use health care in comparison to Non-Hispanic whites even after adjusting for nativity, duration, age, sex, marital status, sociodemographic factors, socioeconomic indicators and health precursors. Mexican-Americans, Cubans and Central Americans were found to have less access to health care than Non-Hispanic whites, while Puerto Ricans were not significantly different.  In the utilization of health care, Mexican-Americans and Central and South American Hispanics were found to utilize health care significantly less often than Non-Hispanic whites, while Cubans and Puerto Ricans were not significantly different. Once all additional risk factors are controlled for, there are also significant differences between U.S. born and foreign-born individuals in regard to access and utilization of medical care.	Elizabeth	 Durden
2002	3	Immigration and Health in the U.S.	The Validity of Self-Rated Health among Latino(a)s: Cultural Artifact or Hidden Risk?	We investigated whether self-rated health had differential mortality risks for Latino(a) adults living in the United States of various acculturation statuses. We employed cumulative National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) data from 1989-1994 (n=37,713) linked with the NHIS Multiple Cause of Death data files (deaths=1,342). We specified survival models to estimate the effect of self-rated health (SRH) on mortality and further stratified our model by nativity and duration in the U.S.      Poor SRH was found to be a weaker predictor of subsequent mortality risk among the less acculturated, although the overall risk among the aggregated sample is similar to the risk reported in previous studies. The relationship between poor self-rated health and mortality risk increases with U.S. acculturation among Latinos. While poor self-rated health was significantly associated with short-term mortality among the least acculturated-this association did not persist beyond two-year mortality risk.	Brian	K. Finch	Maureen	 Reindl	William	A. Vega
2002	3	Immigration and Health in the U.S.	Health Status of Immigrants in the United States	In light of increased immigration to the U.S. over the past thirty years, our objective is to examine the unique patterns of health status among immigrants aged 55 and over, using more detailed racial/ethnic categories than previously done. We explore health disparities within the immigrant population and between immigrants and natives of the same racial/ethnic group. We use logistic regression to analyze data from the 1992-1995 National Health Interview Survey. Immigrants are less likely to report an activity limitation or to be obese, but yet report themselves in worse general health. The differences among immigrants arriving from different countries, and between immigrants and persons born in the U.S. who are of the same race/ethnicity are substantial. For some groups and health measures, a large share of the differences are explained by disparities in socioeconomic status; however, for others, the majority of the differences remain after adjusting for education and income.	Melonie	P. Heron	Robert	 Schoeni	Leo	 Morales
2002	4	Marriage and Child Policy	Falling through the Cracks: Gaps in Child Support among Welfare Recipients	This paper examines gaps in child support among welfare recipients in Wisconsin. I illustrate the extent to which breakdowns at various stages - including paternity establishment, support orders, and payments - contribute to the low rate of child support receipt among the welfare population, and I track children over a two-year period to assess their progress through the child support system over time. I find that few welfare recipients are able to successfully navigate the child support system, with paternity establishment the largest gap. Even when mothers successfully navigate the system on behalf of one child, they are often not able to do so on behalf of all children. The characteristics of children who drop out at the early stages of the process suggest that, with a support order in place, they would be as likely to receive support as are the children who currently have orders.	Judi	 Bartfeld
2002	4	Marriage and Child Policy	The Impact of Welfare Reform Knowledge on the Formation of Two-Parent Families	Despite the objective of welfare reform to encourage two-parent households, very little research has been done to examine how mothers' understanding of welfare policies impacts marital and cohabitation decisions. This paper addresses this gap by analyzing the links between welfare knowledge, policy environments, and household formation decisions. Data comes from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a longitudinal study of 5000 parents. Results indicate that levels of correct knowledge about marital eligibility and time limits are quite low, although mothers who more likely to need public assistance have higher levels of knowledge than the general population. While there was no main effect of welfare knowledge on the creation of two-parent households, women who believed that married or cohabiting women were not welfare eligible were more likely to remain single, particularly in states with stricter welfare regulations.     	Christina	 Gibson
2002	4	Marriage and Child Policy	Social and Demographic Factors Associated with Couples' Choice between Covenant and Standard Marriage in Louisiana	Using new data from newlywed covenant and standard couples married since passage of the 1997 Louisiana covenant marriage law, we examine the desirability of covenant marriage among women and men, the factors associated with couples' choice of a standard versus covenant marriage, and the prevalence and dynamics of couple negotiations and conflict over the choice to have a covenant versus standard marriage. We analyze which partner wanted the covenant marriage option more, the extensiveness of counseling couples engaged in prior to marriage, whether this counseling influenced their choice about options, whether social networks or dynamics in the courtship influenced marriage option choice, and whether covenant-married couples had more marriage preparation training than standard-married couples. We also examine the conflict couples experienced over the choice of options, and which partner was more likely to lose during compromises. Last, we address couples' satisfaction with their marriage option choice.	Laura	 Sanchez	Steven	 Nock	James	D. Wright	Julia	C. Wilson
2002	4	Marriage and Child Policy	Childcare and Fertility in (Western) Germany	This paper analyzes the relationship between children's daycare and fertility in Germany. First, different modes of childcare are discussed with regard to their availability and costs. We then estimate the impact of having access to public day care and care in social networks on first birth probabilities of western German women in the 1980s and 1990s. The empirical analysis does not reveal any statistically significant effect of childcare availability on fertility. We conclude that the overall institutional constraints of day care in (western) Germany prevent the compatibility of childrearing and employment, thereby forcing women to choose between a continuous employment career or motherhood.	Karsten	 Hank	Michaela	 Kreyenfeld
2002	5	How Can Demographers Contribute to a More Sensible Discussion of International Population Dynamics?	Beyond the Headlines		John	 Bongaarts
2002	5	How Can Demographers Contribute to a More Sensible Discussion of International Population Dynamics?	Possibilities and Limits of Demographic Data to Advance Policy		Sara	 Seims
2002	5	How Can Demographers Contribute to a More Sensible Discussion of International Population Dynamics?	The View from the Press		Barbara	 Crossette
2002	5	How Can Demographers Contribute to a More Sensible Discussion of International Population Dynamics?	Communicating Cairo		Alexander	 Marshall
2002	5	How Can Demographers Contribute to a More Sensible Discussion of International Population Dynamics?	The Good, the Bad, and Demography		Joseph	 Chamie
2002	7	Adolescent Social Development	Bodies in Transition: A Demographic Analysis of Body Image Disturbance in Adolescence	Developmental psychologists argue that body image disturbance is a normal part of the transition to adulthood for adolescent girls. However, national prevalence rates are speculative, and little is known about gender and racial differences in the occurrence and correlates of body image disturbance. Using nationally representative data (Add Health), this paper provides a demographic analysis of adolescent body image. I first explore the prevalence of distorted body image among American adolescents.    Twenty percent of adolescent girls think they are overweight when they are not, while eleven percent of boys have a distorted body image in the opposite direction. Racial and ethnic patterns of adolescent body misperception differ by gender. I then model the developmental and social structural correlates of body image disturbance. These correlates also differ by race and gender. This research, which takes a demographic approach to a developmental issue, illustrates that the transition to adulthood is socially patterned.	Jenny	 Godley
2002	7	Adolescent Social Development	Pathways to Romantic Unions: Progression Patterns among Young Men	This paper explores a new construct in life course development: relationship progression in the late adolescence and early adulthood of men.  As young men mature, most move through a series of romantic relationships.  We posit that specific patterns of relationship progression can be observed over time. Using longitudinal data from the National Survey of Adolescent Males (NSAM), we explore what types of relationship progression patterns occur among young men.     The research utilizes cluster analysis to identify relationship patterns and examine progression transitions.  Preliminary analysis of two rounds of data found that 66% of the sample fell into only four progression types. Patterns of relationship progression can be viewed as risk or protection processes, which influence adult developmental outcomes.  They constitute an important, yet poorly understood, process in the life course.	Freya	L. Sonenstein	Gary	J. Gates	Joseph	H. Pleck
2002	7	Adolescent Social Development	Do Hispanic and Asian Adolescents Practice Panethnicity in Friendship Choices?	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), we examine the extent to which Asian and Hispanic ethnics prefer same-ethnic, different-ethnic (but same-race), and different-race friends. Panethnic sentiment is defined as the importance of maintaining racial boundaries, but relaxing ethnic boundaries within one's racial group. We examine descriptive tabulations of friendship choices of whites, blacks, Hispanics (Mexicans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans, and South/Central Americans), Asians (Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, South Asian, Korean, and Vietnamese), and Native Americans. Because we are interested in the choice to cross both racial and ethnic lines, our analyses focus on Asians and Hispanics. We find strong effects of school racial and ethnic composition, immigrant status, and parental education on the likelihood of crossing boundaries in friendship choices. Our results show an overwhelming preference for same-ethnic peers, but no preference for different-ethnic peers, and no evidence of panethnicity  among Asian or Latino youth.	Grace	 Kao	Kara	 Joyner
2002	7	Adolescent Social Development	Emerging Adulthood and Identity in Two American Indian Communities	In the U.S., transition to adulthood is marked by delayed marriage and childbearing, continuation of tertiary education, and entry into the labor force (Arnett, 2000). In American Indian communities, these trends are not as apparent. Early age of childbearing is common and economic relationships take on a different character in the context of extreme poverty. Yet, we know very little about the precursors or consequences to educational, employment, or family building transitions for this community. For example, while early childbearing is common, and education is often disrupted, many young parents continue their education after the birth of a child.        We use data from a 6-year longitudinal study of young American Indians from a tribe in the Northern Plains, and a tribe in the Southwest (n=1292) to model key transition for these populations. We also draw from ethnographic data (n=60) from the Southwest tribe to provide context to the quantitative assessment.	Paul	 Spicer	Carol	E. Kaufman	Christina	 Mitchell	Douglas	 Novins
2002	8	Education and Labor Markets: Transitions and Discrimination	Gender Differences in Employment Outcomes for Academics in the Social Sciences	This study uses data from the 1973-1997 waves of the Survey of Doctorate Recipients to evaluate gender differences in employment outcomes for academic social scientists. Differences in employment outcomes by gender are evaluated using three methods: the Oaxaca decomposition is used to examine salary differentials and binary choice models and duration analysis are used to estimate the probability of promotion to tenure. Over time, gender salary differences can largely be explained by academic rank. Probit and duration model estimates indicate gender differences in the probability of promotion, making it less likely for women to be promoted to tenure. On the basis of this evidence, this paper concludes that gender discrimination for academics in the social sciences tends to operate through differences in promotion, which in turn affects wages.	Donna	K. Ginther
2002	8	Education and Labor Markets: Transitions and Discrimination	Pay Differences among the Highly Trained: Cohort Differences in the Male-Female Earnings Gap in Lawyers' Salaries	Using unique data from two cohorts of University of Michigan Law School graduates, we investigate how sex differences in job settings and pay have evolved as women entered an elite male field - law. By comparing the experiences of male and female law graduates from an early cohort (classes 1972 to 1977) to a later cohort (classes 1978 to 1983), we are able to explore how sex-based wage gaps, within occupational sex segregation, and penalties to part-time work and career interruptions have changed across cohorts. The relative homogeneity of the men and women in our sample and the precision with which their human capital can be measured enhance our ability to isolate any of the sex differences in pay that do exist.	Mary	C. Noonan	Mary	E. Corcoran	Paul	N. Courant
2002	8	Education and Labor Markets: Transitions and Discrimination	Alternative Opportunities in the Female Labor Market and Teacher Supply and Quality: 1940-1990	In this paper, I estimate the effect of changes in teacher earnings relative to professional earnings opportunities on teacher supply and teacher quality. I analyze data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series of 1940-1990, the National Longitudinal Surveys of Young Men, Young Women, and Youth-79, and the CIRP Freshman Surveys from 1971-1995 of college freshmen from more than 1,700 institutions.    I find that teacher performance on standardized exams declines between 1970 and 1990. Prospective education majors are increasingly being drawn from less selective institutions. Ceteris paribus, a 10 percent increase in entry teacher earnings relative to professionals raises the probability that skilled women choose teaching by 32 to 47 percent for blacks and 18 to 40 percent for whites. Raising relative teacher wages also significantly attracts teachers who perform better on standardized tests and prospective education majors from highly selective institutions. Specification checks imply that the results are robust to various identifying assumptions.	Marigee	 Bacolod
2002	8	Education and Labor Markets: Transitions and Discrimination	Institutions in the Youth Labor Market: Changes in High School-Work in Urban Japan	Youth labor markets in postindustrial societies faced difficult times at the end of the 20th century. Some labor economists and sociologists suggest that social institutions can play a significant beneficial role, noting that countries with institutionalized school-work programs have some of the lowest unemployment rates for new school-leavers. These include the apprenticeship countries in Europe and one country with a strikingly different school-work system, Japan.    This paper discusses the Japanese case and argues that the success of its school-work system has been overplayed. I do this by analyzing the performance of the system during the Japanese economic downturn over the past decade, showing in particular that rates of youth idleness increased substantially. Further, I show that the job-matching accomplished through ties between schools and firms does not spread sufficient numbers of job offers to lower-ranked schools. This may be exacerbating the jobless rate of graduates from these schools.	Mary	 Brinton
2002	9	Immigrant Assimilation: Domestic and International Perspectives	Immigrant Educational Achievement Gaps in Industrialized Countries	We examine patterns of educational achievement among immigrant and native-born students in fourteen countries and seek to determine the extent to which theoretical propositions developed to explain achievement differences in the United States are applicable across a range of industrialized nations with large or growing immigrant populations. Using data from the Third International Math and Science Study (TIMSS), we examine mathematics and science achievement scores for immigrant-origin and native students. Multiple regression analysis tests the degree to which achievement differences are due to differences in family background, socioeconomic status, and language proficiency in all countries. To the extent that immigrant/native achievement differences remain, we explore the possibility that differences among receiving countries in terms of immigrant incorporation are related to differences in immigrants' educational achievement. In light of the very limited comparative research on immigrants educational experiences, the paper will help determine the extent to which these experiences are similar or different across Western, industrialized societies.	Claudia	 Buchmann	Emilio	A. Parrado
2002	9	Immigrant Assimilation: Domestic and International Perspectives	Between Family, Job Responsibilities, and School:  Generation Status, Ethnicity, and Differences in the Routes Out of School	In the context of a continuous and diverse flow of immigrants, where immigrants include both the most educated groups and the least educated (Rumbaut, 1994), this paper explores to what extent education can work as a mechanism of integration and as a leveler for recent immigrants and for second generation children. Do immigrants, immigrant's children and third generation students leave school for the same reasons? Does the pattern of immigrants leaving school vary by ethnicity?     Using event history analysis and data from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey 1988-1992, our first results suggest that the reasons for leaving school vary by nativity. While recent immigrants leave school often due to 'family related reasons,' the third generation leaves school due to 'school related problems.' The timing also varies by generation status. Recent migrants leave at earlier stages (mainly in the transition between middle and high school) than other generational groups.	Silvia	Elena  Giorguli Saucedo	Michael	J. White	Jennifer	E. Glick
2002	9	Immigrant Assimilation: Domestic and International Perspectives	Labor Market Conditions and Post-Reform Declines in Welfare Receipt among Immigrants	This paper analyzes the role of local labor market conditions in explaining declines in the welfare participation trends of immigrants and reductions in the nativity participation gap for the period 1994 to 1999.     Data from the March CPS indicate that immigrants' participation in welfare declined more rapidly than natives' during the latter half of the decade. Some analysts have argued that this is due to so-called chilling effects and others have argued that this is true only in California. Our results show that variation in the unemployment and employment rates across MSAs and states explain most of, and possibly all of, the observed relative post-welfare reform decrease among immigrants.      The inclusion of state fixed effects in probability models suggests that the relative decline among immigrants is not due to unobservable heterogeneity across states, but rather to differences in local labor market conditions.  The policy implications of the findings are discussed.	Magnus	 Lofstrom	Frank	D. Bean
2002	9	Immigrant Assimilation: Domestic and International Perspectives	Children of Mixed Nativity: Accounting for the '2.5 Generation'	This study takes issue with the way that second-generation immigrants have been traditionally defined. In most studies, respondents are considered to be “second-generation” if they are born in the United States and if at least one of their parents were born outside the United States. This formulation conflates the experiences and outcomes of those who have no U.S.-born parents (what we term the “2.0 generation”) versus those who have one U.S.-born parent and one foreign-born parent (what we term the “2.5 generation”). We show that 2.5-generation respondents are distinct from those in the 2.0 generation in terms of important demographic characteristics such as age structure and racial composition.  The two populations also differ in socioeconomic outcomes such as educational attainment and earnings. Thus, scholars of immigrant adaptation should avoid lumping together respondents from the 2.5 generation with those who have no native-born parents.	S.	Karthick  Ramakrishnan	Thomas	J. Espenshade
2002	10	Fertility Impact of Mortality Change	Mortality Decline and the Risk of Onset of Fertility Transition	Quests for thresholds of mortality decline triggering the onset of fertility transition have proven elusive. Also, later fertility transitions proceed at lower levels of economic development as measured by a variety of indicators, including mortality. Nonetheless, this paper argues that the relationship between mortality decline and the onset of fertility transition may be tighter than previous cross-national analyses have suggested. First, even if the risk of entering the fertility transition were constant for a given level of economic development, transitions would proceed at lower development levels as countries at higher levels select out of the risk set. This paper employs an event history framework to test whether the probability of transition remains constant over time. Second, completed family size is much more likely to be higher than desired if fertility has increased along with mortality decline. The effect of mortality decline is likely misestimated where fertility increase is not controlled.	Laurie	 DeRose
2002	10	Fertility Impact of Mortality Change	Childhood Mortality and Reproductive Behavior in Sub-Saharan Africa	Many developing countries have undergone remarkable demographic change since the 1950s, experiencing unprecedented declines in childhood mortality, and in most cases, a significant transition to controlled fertility.  In sub-Saharan Africa, however, fertility remains high and there are unanswered questions regarding the persistence of high fertility in the region.  Childhood mortality is regarded as an important determinant of reproductive behavior and it occupies a central place in demographic research.     However, while the theoretical pathways through which infant and child mortality affect fertility are well understood, the empirical evidence has been inconsistent.  Thus, the unsettled nature of the link between childhood mortality and fertility was a major motivation for this study.  Methodologically, the paper examines the usefulness of frailty models in exploring the childhood mortality-fertility relationships using DHS data from Ghana and Kenya.	Stephen	Obeng  Gyimah
2002	10	Fertility Impact of Mortality Change	The Impact of Childhood Mortality Change on Fertility in Two Rural Districts of Bangladesh	Childhood mortality has been shown to covary with fertility levels in several settings.  The causal structure of the relationship between child mortality events and subsequent fertility, however, is often poorly understood.      To address this issue, this paper  uses twelve years of prospective longitudinal event history data on births and deaths occurring to nearly 8,000 women observed in the Bangladesh Maternal and Child Health and Family Planning Project.  Observations span the 1982 to 1992 period, a time in the recent history of Bangladesh in which both childhood mortality and fertility were declining.        Discrete-time event history analysis is employed to assess the effect of infant and childhood deaths on subsequent odds of parity progression, controlling for background characteristics of mothers.  Results show that the effect of  mortality on fertility increases as the overall level of mortality declines.  Implications of this finding for policy are reviewed and discussed.	James	F. Phillips	Mian	B. Hossain
2002	10	Fertility Impact of Mortality Change	The Relationship between Extra-Familial Infant and Child Mortality and the Risk of Childbirth in a Nepalese Mountain Community	Though some debate exists about the effect of extra-familial infant and child mortality on desires and beliefs related to fertility, it is almost universally believed they cannot influence actual fertility in populations where modern fertility control is not practiced because widespread volitional control over family size is impossible. Using pooled birth history data from a small mountain village in Nepal, I test here whether the average network experience of infant mortality, measured through sociometric networks is significantly related to the hazard of birth for women with both fixed-effects and latent class discrete time logit survival models to capture unobserved heterogeneity. Tentative results of fixed effects models indicate that the average network experience of mortality, contrary to all expectations, does have a significant effect on the hazard of birth in some situations.	John	 Sandberg
2002	11	Social and Economic Consequences of the AIDS Epidemic	Poverty, AIDS and Children's Welfare: A Targeting Dilemma	AIDS and conflict are affecting poor countries with low human capital.  Within these countries, children who are orphaned or live in households with adult deaths are believed to have lower schooling and nutritional status, reducing the prospects for future poverty alleviation.  What is less clear is whether orphaned children are worse off than other poor, under-schooled, and malnourished children - requiring targeted interventions - or whether the impact is to swell the population of poor children whose welfare can be addressed through existing anti-poverty programs.      We compare the relation between orphan status, poverty,  enrollment, and stunting, for children in 28 low- and middle-income countries hard-hit by AIDS in three regions, using data from 38 DHS and living standards surveys and wealth indices based on household asset ownership.  The results reveal substantial heterogeneity in the relation between poverty and human capital outcomes for orphans and suggest that strategies targeting poor children often dominate.	Martha	 Ainsworth	Deon	P. Filmer
2002	11	Social and Economic Consequences of the AIDS Epidemic	HIV Status and Union Dissolution in Uganda	Research on AIDS in Africa has documented the HIV epidemic and its demographic and social impact through changes in fertility, mortality and orphanhood. Yet, few studies have explored the extent to which HIV/AIDS contributes to union dissolution. We used longitudinal data from the STD Control for AIDS Prevention Study to examine the effect of HIV status on union dissolution among approximately 6,400 women from Rakai District, Uganda, who were in union at the beginning of the study. Using life tables and multinomial logistic regression, we found a significant association of HIV infection on the likelihood of separation/divorce and widowhood. Other important determinants of union dissolution include religion, sexual behavior, illness, and type of union. To examine the potential endogeneity problem of HIV status, we used an instrumental variable approach, using community-level characteristics as instruments.	Laura	E. Porter	Lingxin	 Hao	David	 Bishai	Ronald	H. Gray	David	 Serwadda	Fred	 Nalugoda	Fred	 Makumbi
2002	11	Social and Economic Consequences of the AIDS Epidemic	Death, Diamonds, and the Botswana Paradox	The Botswana Paradox  is the coexistence in Botswana at the end of the 1990's both of the highest AIDS death rate in the world and one of the world's highest rates of real per capita income growth.      The key to understanding what happened is in the structure of the Botswanan economy. In order to see which  structural features matter the most, I have constructed a small general equilibrium model of the Botswanan economy, which captures its main features and merged it with new projections of the Botswanan population.      The amazing growth of the Botswanan economy in the late 1990's was mainly due to an increase in revenues from mineral exports, and the increase of the number of people with secondary schooling or more in the labor force. HIV has no impact on mineral export revenues, but will reduce the growth rate of the more educated portion of the labor force.	Warren	C. Sanderson
2002	11	Social and Economic Consequences of the AIDS Epidemic	Community Reaction to Persons with HIV/AIDS (PHAs) and Families of PHAs in Thailand	Data collected for a broad study of the impact of AIDS on older persons in Thailand provide an excellent opportunity to systematically explore community reaction to PHAs and their families from a variety of perspectives and data source. Each data source includes a series of questions to assess community reaction, since it is a key objective of the broader study. These sources include a survey of young adult PHAs (n=425); a survey of parents who suffered the death of an adult child to AIDS (n=394 cases and 376 controls); a KAP study of AIDS that includes both older and young adults (n=1174); and quantitative data from local key informants about cases in their area (n=285 cases).  Data were collected from a variety of settings throughout Thailand. Predictors were explored at several levels: the community, the source of information, the older parent, and the PHA.	Mark	 VanLandingham	Chanpen	 Saengtienchai
2002	12	Reflections on Global Initiatives for the Girl Child	The Girl Child Initiatives in the Spell of HIV/AIDS: Some Reflections on the Southern Africa Development Community's Experience	The paper seeks to explore the global girl initiatives in the SADC region. It argues that the initiatives have more urgency in the SADC region if the spread of HIV/AIDS is to be contained and reversed. But the initiatives are meeting considerable challenges in the forms of rigid institutions, rising poverty and the HIV/AIDS scourge.     The paper outlines the various actions taken by different agencies (communities, NGO, governments) in relations to the girl child in the region and gauges any successes. It concludes by identifying areas where further actions are required to meet the challenges head-on.	George	 Kararach
2002	12	Reflections on Global Initiatives for the Girl Child	Advancing Research on the Consequences of Female Genital Cutting	Nearly two million girls and young women around the world undergo female genital cutting (FGC) each year. The past decade has witnessed a proliferation of social movements seeking to eradicate this practice, with threats to women's psychological, reproductive, and sexual health cited among the rationales for this position. While there are plausible mechanisms for a number of these associations, many claims regarding the health risks associated with FGC are unsubstantiated by scientific research. The dearth of practical knowledge about the risks associated with FGC represents an important constraint to the FGC eradication movement. This paper reviews the scientific evidence regarding the consequences of FGC, proposes a research agenda for bridging the salient knowledge gaps regarding the consequences of FGC, and presents findings from in-depth discussions with scientists in this field to identify the methodological and ethical issues that pose the greatest challenges to conducting scientifically sound FGC research.	Gilda	 Sedgh	Nahla	 Abdel-Tawab	Barbara	 Ibrahim
2002	12	Reflections on Global Initiatives for the Girl Child	The Effect of Village-Level Birth Planning Policy Variation on Infant Mortality in China	China's birth planning policy is sometimes cited as a factor explaining discriminatory treatment of girls and elevated mortality of female infants, but there is little direct evidence. A better understanding of this connection would be useful in the re-design of policies in a manner conducive to female welfare. We utilize the one percent clustered sample of the 1990 census, which contains data on 354,697 children born in 8,518 administrative village-level units in the 18-month period prior to the 1990 census. Our analysis is multilevel, with infants, mothers (and families), and villages as observational units. We model infant mortality as a function of the index child's characteristics, maternal and household characteristics, and village level characteristics. We develop two measures of birth planning policy at the village level, based on the propensity to progress from first to higher parities.	William	 Lavely	William	M. Mason
2002	12	Reflections on Global Initiatives for the Girl Child	The Effect of Gender Differences in Primary School Access and Quality on Schooling Outcomes in Rural Pakistan	This paper assesses the role of increased access, greater school choice and improved school quality on the primary school enrollment of girls and boys in Pakistan using data collected especially for this purpose in rural Punjab and NorthWest Frontier Province (NWFP) in 1997.  A unique contribution is the emphasis on gender-specific dimensions of school accessibility and school quality.     Currently married women were interviewed about the schooling history of their children and all primary schools in the communities were visited and assessed through direct observation. This rich data set allows us to explore variations in enrollment as a function of individual, household and community characteristics as well as of school access and school quality.  As public primary schools in Pakistan are single sex, we are able to use sex-specific measures of school access and school quality.	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Cem	 Mete	Zeba	A. Sathar
2002	13	Demographic Dimensions of Conflict	Perceptions of Age-Based Conflict within Different Welfare State Contexts	Using the 1992 International Social Survey Program (ISSP), this study analyzes perceptions of age-based social conflict.  This research utilizes Gosta Esping-Andersen's (1990) typology of welfare states in analyzing conflict perceptions in 10 nations.  This study also considers aspects of the generational inequity and interdependence of generations frameworks in understanding how age influences perceptions of age-based conflict.  The nations studied include Australia, Great Britain, the U.S., Austria, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Poland, and Russia.     ANOVA tests for differences in means and logistic regressions confirm that age group differences in perceptions occur within socialist and formerly communist countries.  Logistic regressions further reveal that individuals in liberal welfare states perceive the most age-based conflict while those in socialist welfare states perceive the least conflict.  Also, countries within each welfare state type differ considerably with the exception of socialist states.  The implications of the main findings are explored within the context of aging societies.	Carla	H. Alphonso
2002	13	Demographic Dimensions of Conflict	Religious Identity, Demography, and Social Tension in India	The purpose of religious classification of population is not always clear. The religious classification as perceived and defined by census could jeopardize the existing social and political equilibrium. Census-taking was secular from its beginning. For example, neither the British nor the American census took interest in the question of religion until very recently. On the other hand, the question of religion was introduced in the colonies at the first instance. This led to new demographic and political consciousness among the ethnic and religious groups. It was an opportunity for colonialists to divide and rule. Later it aided in political mobilization after independence. This article presents the emerging demographic and political consciousness and the resultant conflict in the wake of census taking on religion in India during the colonial period as well as after independence. It also examines its implication for nation building in India.	Ram	B. Bhagat
2002	13	Demographic Dimensions of Conflict	Are Proportions of Young Males and Measures of Institutional Capacity Meaningful Indicators of Vulnerability to Intra-State Conflict?	In 1967, historian Herbert Moller hypothesized that high proportions of young males in a society could lead to violent conflict. Mesquida and Weiner have recently shown that the ratios of young adult males to older males of countries in conflict have been significantly and positively correlated to conflict-related mortality. These findings, however, address the magnitude of conflicts rather than state vulnerability.     This paper uses Uppsala University's Conflict Data Set (1988-2000), 1985 demographic and development indicators, and goodness-of-fit tests to examine hypotheses that intra-state conflict vulnerability is related to high proportions of young males (YM); low institutional capacity (HDI); or a combination thereof. From among these hypotheses, it was most difficult to reject the notion that HDI is a meaningful indicator of vulnerability. YM was less difficult to reject, but only marginally more difficult to reject than a null hypothesis: that location matters most to state vulnerability to conflict.	Richard	 Cincotta
2002	13	Demographic Dimensions of Conflict	Conflict and Population Trends in Religion	Religion sets the context of many global and regional conflicts but it is often poorly understood as a demographic variable. A great deal of the reason for the poor understanding of religion as a demographic variable is the paucity of systematic regional and global data on it. This paper explores both what available demographic data indicate about the religious context of historical and current conflict and proposes a preliminary framework for considering future questions regarding conflict and religious demographics. Accordingly, it reviews (1) the religious demography of some notable conflicts, (2) theoretical issues that these suggest, (3) data needs for examining and extending these preliminary theories, and (4) an agenda for future research.	Clifford	 Grammich
2002	14	Maternal Health and Mortality	Maternal Health Care in South India: Do Adolescents Seek More Care than Older Women?	The 1992-93 NFHS for Karnataka revealed that a higher percentage of women aged 20-34 and primigravidas received antenatal care from a skilled provider compared with other groups. To determine the extent of care-seeking by pregnant adolescents, we analyze data from an in-depth, prospective study of maternal morbidity and care in rural Karnataka (n=500).     Significant differences in health care seeking emerge in both bivariate analysis and logistic regression considering characteristics such as education, SES, morbidity and parity. Younger mothers seem to have significant advantage in terms of timing and number of contacts with health services, and report more contacts with private services rather than government providers. Considering the expected lower autonomy that younger women experience, these results are surprising. Cultural and other factors that might mitigate this presumed disadvantage in this south Indian setting will be explored in further analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data.	Asha	 Kilaru	Martyn	 Brookes	Saraswathy	 Ganapathy	Zoe	 Matthews
2002	14	Maternal Health and Mortality	Risk Factors Associated with Maternal Mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh	A case-control study was undertaken to identify the demographic and socioeconomic risk factors associated with maternal mortality. The analysis is based on data of maternal mortality collected in Matlab, a rural area of Bangladesh during the 1989-2000 period. Both bivariate and multivariate techniques were used for data analysis. Results demonstrate that the major risk factors influencing maternal mortality are women's age, pregnancy order, and the preceding interval of pregnancies. Maternal mortality declines with women's education but it does not vary with socioeconomic status, namely the sine of dwelling space (a proxy of income). A mother having a pregnancy for the first time above age 35 needs special attention and care from family members, relatives, and health professionals for timely intervention towards medically associated pregnancy termination. Moreover, the existing MCH-FP programs must aim to achieve a higher standard of maternal and child health and family planning.	Md.	Kapil  Ahmed
2002	14	Maternal Health and Mortality	What National Programs Should Do to Reduce Maternal Mortality	We describe a model to help in planning national maternal health services in developing countries. The model shows how maternal mortality responds to changes in services, rated by experts on an 81-item questionnaire labeled the Maternal and Neonatal Program Index (MNPI). These service ratings, cross-national regressions show, are related to maternal mortality (as are income and education). The model uses these equations and also assumes interdependence among different services. Such support functions as budget and training, for instance, affect the capacity of health facilities, which relates to the adequacy of care they provide, with consequences for women's access to essential care. Health services are also distinguished by objective: treatment, risk identification, prevention, and avoidance of risky pregnancies or births. The model calculates the impact on maternal mortality of changes in service ratings and indicates how the major causes of maternal mortality may be affected.	John	 Ross	Rodolfo	A. Bulatao	John	 Stover
2002	14	Maternal Health and Mortality	Generating Political Will for Safe Motherhood: A Case Study from Indonesia	Safe motherhood activists are disturbed that despite over a decade of serious attention the world continues to face a maternal mortality crisis. They widely agree about the medical causes and interventions needed, and argue that the key to surmounting the crisis is the generation of political will. What 'political will' means, however, has been left as an unopened black box in the maternal mortality literature. What causes governments to give priority to the issue of safe motherhood, given that national political systems are burdened with thousands of issues to sort through each year? This paper identifies four factors that heighten the likelihood that an issue will rise to national-level attention. Drawing on agenda-setting theory and extensive fieldwork in the country, the paper presents a case study of safe motherhood in Indonesia from 1987-1997 to highlight how developing countries facing safe motherhood crises may systematically generate political will for the cause.	Jeremy	 Shiffman
2002	15	Psychological Causes and Consequences of Marital Transitions	The Effect of Union Type on Relationship Quality and Psychological Well-Being	Although the psychological benefits of marriage are well established, very little is known about the relationship between cohabitation and mental health outcomes. The effect of cohabitation on psychological well-being is of particular interest given current trends. Of course, the relationship between union type (marriage or cohabitation) and psychological well-being may be mitigated by relationship quality. Among married couples, relationship quality is arguably the most important predictor of well-being (Glenn 1990; Gove, Hughes, and Style 1983; Ross et al. 1991), but the association between relationship quality and psychological well-being among cohabitors remains unclear.    This paper analyzes longitudinal data from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) in order to: (1) examine the effect of union type on relationship quality; (2) examine the interaction of union type with relationship quality in predicting psychological well-being; and (3) evaluate the role of selection in the relationship between union type and psychological well-being.	Anna	M. Campbell	Debra	J. Umberson
2002	15	Psychological Causes and Consequences of Marital Transitions	Union Transitions and Mental Health: Selection or Beneficial Effects?	Prior literature on marital statuses and mental health supports that the married have a mental health advantage over the unmarried, known as the relationship hypothesis.  An opposing explanation purports that those with better mental health are more attractive potential mates, termed the selection hypothesis. We improve on previous studies by testing both hypotheses using longitudinal data, and by including cohabitors. Implementing the National Survey of Families and Households, we hypothesize that marriage between waves causes decreases in depression greater than cohabitation. We likewise hypothesize that Wave I depression negatively predicts selection into both cohabitation and marriage, and the relationship will be stronger for marriage. We find that transitioning into marriage but not cohabitation decreases Wave II depression. We also find limited selection effects, as Wave I depression decreases hazard of selection into marriage but does not affect cohabitation. These findings suggest that marriage and cohabitation are qualitatively different phenomena.	Kathleen	A. Lamb	Gary	R. Lee
2002	15	Psychological Causes and Consequences of Marital Transitions	The Role of Religion in Union Formation	Previous research has shown that the faith in which a young woman is brought up has important effects on various dimensions of economic and demographic behavior, including educational attainment, fertility, employment, and the perceived costs of pre-marital sex and divorce. Based on this evidence, the present paper develops hypotheses regarding patterns of entry into marriage and cohabitation for the main religious groups in the United States: ecumenical Protestants, exclusivist Protestants, Catholics, Mormons, Jews, and the unaffiliated. The hypotheses are tested using data from the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth. The paper also examines how religious participation during the formative years affects the linkage between religious affiliation and entry into first union.	Evelyn	 Lehrer
2002	15	Psychological Causes and Consequences of Marital Transitions	Whose Plans Matter? The Transition from Cohabitation to Marriage in the United States	Much has been written about how socioeconomic characteristics, behaviors, attitudes, and values affect the desirability of a person as a marriage partner. Most studies assume that the transition to marriage is equivalent to marriage desires and intentions. Using data for cohabiting couples from the National Survey of Families and Households Waves 1 (1987-1988) and 2 (1992-1994), this paper attempts to disentangle the formation of individual cohabitors' marriage preferences from the couple's joint decision to marry.    First, this analysis examines the effect of both partners' income, income share, work status, housework hours, and gender ideology on cohabitors' marriage intentions and how this process varies by gender. Second, this analysis examines how these individual marriage plans affect the couples' transition to marriage in the framework of couple decision-making. Since each partner may have different amounts of influence in the decision-making process, the roles of bargaining and gender in this process are examined.	Berna	S. Miller
2002	16	Population Dynamics and Land Use in Rural Settings	Population and Environment: The Impact of Fertility on Land Use in an Agricultural Society	We examine the population-environment relationship at the local community level by focusing on the impact of population changes on changes in land use. We develop a theoretical framework for the study of micro-level population-environment relationships that emphasizes the importance of local community context in shaping the reciprocal relationship between population and environment. We use longitudinal measures of land use changes, population dynamics, and community context from Nepal to provide empirical estimates of our theoretical model. This empirical investigation reveals that community context shapes land use changes over time in important ways. Furthermore, local birth rates have a large effect on land use changes that is not explained by changes in population size or structure. This intriguing finding is consistent with the hypothesis that fertility influences household consumption patterns which in turn impact land use changes.	William	G. Axinn	Dirgha	J. Ghimire
2002	16	Population Dynamics and Land Use in Rural Settings	Fertility and Farm Size: Longitudinal Evidence from the Ecuadorian Amazon	Studies worldwide have suggested that, among peasant farm households, as access to land is enhanced, fertility ascends and vice versa (Chayanov, 1986; Hawley, 1955; Stokes, Schutjer, and Bulatao, 1986; Cain, 1984; Pichon, 1997). The relationship is at the center of the population-environment interface in frontier environments where poverty, fertility, and forest conversion rates are unusually high. Yet to our knowledge no study has documented this relationship using longitudinal data in an agricultural frontier.  This paper will use a subset of longitudinal data collected in 1990 and 1999 in the Ecuadorian Amazon to examine change in household landholdings and fertility. Preliminary comparisons have shown a decrease in average plot size and fertility from 43.6 to 23.3 Ha and 8.0 to 5.0 respectively, suggesting that landholdings might be a factor in decreasing fertility rates. Descriptive statistics and models will be used to explore the underlying causal mechanisms of this relationship.	David	 Carr	William	 Pan
2002	16	Population Dynamics and Land Use in Rural Settings	The Relationship between Household Structure and Land Use: A Case Study at Rai Khok Village, Nang Rong District, Buriram Province, Thailand	This case study focuses on the relationship between household structure and land use in rural Thailand where most people live on agriculture. The theory of Demographic Change and Response is used to explain population and social change. The objectives of this study are to investigate the changes of household structure and land use and to examine the relationship between household structure and land use. The unit of analysis is a household. This paper explores land use in size, ownership and activities on land. Longitudinal data and in-depth interviews are employed.    The summary provided that population pressure leads to the change of household structure and inevitably affects land use change. Change in size of land indicates that fragmentation of land occurred through inheritance. The likelihood of agricultural work decreased with an increased number of children with higher education. Agricultural work was reduced due to non-farm income.  Migration contributes indirect to land use change.  	Wannarat	 Rattanawarang
2002	16	Population Dynamics and Land Use in Rural Settings	Land Cover Change in the Amazon: Bringing Farmers into the Map	This paper assesses land cover/use change in Machadinho D'Oeste, Rondonia, Brazil. Landsat MSS, TM, and ETM data were used to create maps of land cover for 1986-99. Data collection included meetings with small farmers and household surveys. Overall accuracy of maps for each year and two levels of taxonomic resolution ranged between 85-95% (Kappa 0.51-0.89). Land use change matrices (1986-99) are consistent with the trends observed in the study area.    The participatory data collection process provides important contributions. The specific protocol is applicable for broader contexts; building trust among stakeholders is required when working with contested issues such as deforestation; systematic data collection among farmers provided alternative sources of information not directly available through other sources; the procedure provided greater confidence for interpreting and understanding classification errors. Finally, the data collection and reporting processes empowered local farmers and provided a forum for discussing land cover/use changes, current challenges, and alternatives.	John	 Sydenstricker-Neto
2002	18	Fragile Families	The Effects of Welfare and Child Support Policies on Union Formation	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families survey to examine the relationship status of unwed parents at birth of their child and when their child is approximately 12 months old. The analyses examine the economic, social and psychological determinants of relationship status and changes in relationship status for white, black, and Hispanic families. We pay special attention to the effects of welfare and child support policies; labor market conditions; union stability; and instability.	Marcia	 Carlson	Irwin	 Garfinkel
2002	18	Fragile Families	Does Parental Religious Involvement Impact the Birth Outcomes and Health Status of Young Children?		Robert	A. Hummer	Yolanda	C. Padilla	Samuel	 Echevarria	Eunjeong	 Kim
2002	18	Fragile Families	Unwed Fathers' Work in Legitimate Underground Economies		Lauren	 Rich
2002	18	Fragile Families	The Fragile Families Baseline Survey: Final Report		Julien	O. Teitler	Nancy	 Reichman
2002	19	Demography of Schooling	Who Graduates from College and When? Understanding Racial and Ethnic Disparities in College Completion Patterns	This paper examines racial and ethnic differences in graduation patterns from academically selective colleges and universities in the United States.  Although prior research has identified a myriad of individual, familial, social, and institutional factors that determine college persistence and graduation rates, these factors do not fully explain the enduring racial/ethnic graduation gap.  In this study we examine the likelihood (as well as the timing) of college completion of blacks, Hispanics, and Asians relative to whites for a cohort of roughly 30,000 students who entered college in the fall of 1989 (based on the College and Beyond database).  Our primary goal is to identify institutional practices that may help to ameliorate the low graduation rates of blacks and Hispanics.  Specifically, we assess the degree to which varying levels of financial and social/academic supports promote success in college for students of different racial/ethnic backgrounds.  Our results suggest that support mechanisms can facilitate prompt and overall graduation rates and that minority students in selective institutions benefit from social/academic and financial support more than their white and Asian classmates.	Sigal	 Alon	Lauren	A. Meserve
2002	19	Demography of Schooling	Neighborhood Distress and School Dropout: The Variable Significance of Community Context	Drawing on theories of collective socialization, social capital, and social control, we develop hypotheses regarding the conditional nature of neighborhood effects on the risk of dropping out of school, and then test these hypotheses with event history models based on data from the 1968-1993 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We find that, among African Americans, the detrimental impact of neighborhood distress has increased significantly over time, a probable repercussion of the increasing geographic concentration of poverty. The negative effect of neighborhood distress on school completion is particularly pronounced among black adolescents from single-parent families and among white adolescents from low-income families, results broadly consistent with Wilson's claim that exposure to neighborhood poverty reinforces the damaging consequences of individual disadvantage. Among whites, the deleterious impact of neighborhood distress on school dropout is stronger for young women than for young men and for recent in-movers than for long-term residents.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Scott	J. South
2002	19	Demography of Schooling	Pathways to High School Graduation: Dynamic Modeling-Based Microsimulation of School Enrollment and Youth Employment	This paper proposes a new approach to examining the pathways through school enrollment and youth employment to high school graduation, with a substantive focus on the effects of state welfare policies. Our approach represents an advancement in the demography of schooling. Based on dynamic models of multiple discrete states, multi-state life tables, and microsimulation, our approach makes several extensions. First, it produces microdata-based prediction rather than aggregate-based prediction. Second, it provides the size of the effect of key explanatory variables on the population patterns, net of other covariates, with inferential statistics such as confidence intervals. Third, it predicts the differential timing effects of key explanatory variables. Drawing on three waves of the most recent longitudinal data on adolescents, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97), the study models and simulates the pathways to high school graduation from age 14 to age 19.  It also simulates these pathways using CPS 1994-2000 data.	Lingxin	 Hao	Guihua	 Xie
2002	19	Demography of Schooling	The Causal Effect of Family Income on College Entry and College Completion: A Feasible Semiparametric Approach for Isolating the Margin	Through an analysis of NLSY data, this paper examines whether or not family income shortfalls have long-run deprivation effects and/or short-run credit constraint effects on college entry and college completion patterns.      Based on the logic of propensity score analysis, the favorite status attainment variable of educational expectations is used to develop a latent variable model of the propensity to enter and complete college.  Using this estimated single dimension as a ranking of individuals, the conditional association between family income and educational transition rates is then analyzed for different strata of that population, some of which can be narrowly represented as students on the margin of college entry.  This approach enables an inside-out approach to modeling the causal effect for those students most likely to be subject to the influence of short-run fluctuations in available credit.	Stephen	L. Morgan
2002	20	Child and Youth Risk Behavior	Explaining Trends in Nonmarital Teen Birth Rates: 1981-1996	National Center for Health Statistics data show a dramatic decline in nonmarital teenage birth rates, particularly for African Americans, during the 1990s. This decline followed a decade when nonmarital teenage birth rates rose rapidly. The cause of this unusual trend is not widely understood. Using longitudinal data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we model the trend in nonmarital births among both African American and non-African American teenagers from 1981 to 1996. Using a discrete-time event history model allows me to compare the influence of four potential explanations: changes in the age distribution of teenagers, changes in the opportunity cost of births, changes in Child Support Enforcement and welfare policies, and fear of AIDS transmission.	Leonard	M. Lopoo
2002	20	Child and Youth Risk Behavior	Education Effects on Adolescent Childbearing in South Africa: Community Norms on Individual Behavior	The goal of this paper was to determine the effects of community norms regarding education and teen childbearing on individual teen childbearing decisions among South African adolescent girls. Primary school completion has increased steadily among African women-20% among 60 year-olds rose to 82% among 20 year-olds in 1996. Teen childbearing remains high - one fourth of African 19 year-olds haveat least had one birth.     Little research has considered group normative influences on teen childbearing in the South African context. Using data on African adolescent girls from the 1996 South African Census (n=279,796), we test whether community levels of teen childbearing and educational attainment among adults are associated with individual teen childbearing. We expected individual teen childbearing to be directly related to community levels of teen childbearing and inversely related to community education. Conflicts between education and childbearing have important policy implications for reducing teen childbearing rates in South Africa.	Heather	J. Branton
2002	20	Child and Youth Risk Behavior	Do Older Peers Affect Adolescent Behavior?	Parents, educators, and policymakers expend a great deal of effort trying to provide an environment for adolescents that increases the likelihood of success in school and work, and decreases the likelihood of substance use, criminal behaviors and early parenthood. Factors such as family background and income have been shown to be important determinants of child attainments but increasing attention is being paid to the role played by peers (schools, neighborhoods, friends and roommates) in the determination of adolescent successes and failures. Examinations of peer effects face potential endogeneity problems: neighborhoods and schools are selected by parents; peers and roommates are typically self-selected.  In our paper, we take a different approach to measuring peer-effects exogenously. Using data from nationally representative samples of teens, we estimate whether adolescent risk-taking is more prevalent, or occurs at an earlier age, for those who would have more contact with older peers: children with older siblings.	Laura	M. Argys	Daniel	I. Rees
2002	20	Child and Youth Risk Behavior	Social and Behavioral Correlates of STD Acquisition and Condom Use in a National Sample of Adolescents	The contextual and behavioral influences of STD risk and condom use are investigated using data from the National Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health).      First, results for STD risk from the Add Health sample are compared with those obtained from CDC Surveillance data.  Second, the extent to which STD history and condom use are jointly determined is tested.  Lastly, the contributions of school characteristics, neighborhood and family background factors, and individual sociodemographic and behavioral attributes on STD risk and condom use are examined.  School, neighborhood, and family effects for both STD and condom use are modest: teens living in neighborhoods with higher levels of youth idleness or who attend junior high school are significantly less likely to use condoms.	Dawn	 Upchurch	William	M. Mason
2002	21	Public Policy and the Family	How Will Welfare Reform Affect Childbearing and Family Structure Decisions?	Our analysis summarizes changes in key elements of welfare policy as well as changes in closely related policies on child support enforcement and sex education and family planning programs. We conclude that, as Congress intended, reform has shifted welfare's incentives in directions that encourage marriage and discourage nonmarital childbearing, childbearing while on welfare, divorce, living independently from relatives, and avoiding child support responsibilities.    To assess whether the changed incentives will make much difference in behavior, we review empirical evidence about welfare's demographic effects. The general tenor of the evidence is that behavioral effects consistent with theoretical expectations and policy makers' intentions do exist. Their magnitudes are small or uncertain. A tentative bottom line is that one should not expect welfare reform to dramatically alter low income Americans' demographic behavior, but can expect it to have modest effects in the directions desired by policymakers.	Robert	D. Plotnick	Elizabeth	 Peters	Se-Ook	 Jeong
2002	21	Public Policy and the Family	Kids for Credit: The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility	Government programs designed to provide income safety nets or to encourage work often restrict eligibility to families with children, in an attempt to keep the programs well targeted. One potentially unintended consequence of the design of these programs is that if they lower the costs associated with having children, economic theory suggests that they might encourage childbearing.     This paper is the first to consider whether changing incentives in the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) affect fertility rates in the United States. We use birth certificate data from the National Center for Health Statistics spanning the period 1989 to 1999 to test whether expansions in the credit led to increases in the birthrate among targeted low-skill families.      Our preliminary results suggest that EITC expansions over the course of the 1990s did not have a significant overall effect on fertility behavior in the United States.	Reagan	 Baughman	Stacy	 Dickert-Conlin
2002	21	Public Policy and the Family	The Effect of Tax-Benefit Policies on Fertility and Female Labor Force Participation in the United States	This paper presents an investigation of the effects of the tax exemption for dependents and the child care tax credit on age-specific fertility rates for the U.S. 1948-1997. Effects of alternative tax and benefit programs on fertility and investments in child quality are analyzed in a theoretical model. Implications of the model are tested within a co-integration framework. Statistical evidence supports the existence of two co-integrating relations for each age group. One relation is identified as a fertility equation, with theoretically appropriate signs and significance of all coefficients, and the second is identified as a female labor supply equation. The two tax variables show positive effects on fertility, with the tax exemption accounting for a large portion of the short run variation in fertility for 20-24 year old women.	Robert	 McNown	Cristobal	 Ridao-Cano
2002	21	Public Policy and the Family	Effects of the One-Child Policy on the Number and Sex Composition of Chinese Children	There is a debate in literature on whether the fertility decline in China is mainly attributable to the One-Child policy or to socioeconomic development after the economic reform. This paper addresses this debate by presenting evidence from China Health and Nutrition Survey. CHNS is a three-year panel data with detailed information on the One-Child policy variations in 190 communities as well as individual household characteristics from 1989 to 1993. This paper utilizes the local variations in the policy variables to access the impact of the One-Child policy on the number and sex composition of Chinese children. Analysis based on the cross-sectional count model indicates that the policy successfully reduced the fertility level despite the significant influence from socioeconomic variables. Fixed effect model analysis confirms the influence. In addition, the results show that the strength of the One-Child policy and the sex composition of children in each community are highly correlated.	Guanghui	 Li
2002	22	Economic Demography Issues of Disability and Disability Policy	The Poverty Status of Different Types of Multirecipient Households: Is SSI Fair to Married Couples?	Research demonstrates that Supplemental Security Income provides less poverty protection for widows and other single-recipient individuals than for couple recipients, but ignores multirecipiency status in assessing the relationship between SSI participation, household structure, and poverty. We consider multirecipiency status and ask whether couple beneficiaries are treated fairly relative to others in multirecipient households. Specific concerns focus on the relatively favorable treatment of children and cohabitors.      The goals include: (1) estimating the prevalence and characteristics of  SSI recipients who share a household with other recipients and (2) analyzing the effect of SSI program rules on the poverty status of different types of multirecipient households. We simulate the poverty effects of alternative program rules incorporating different equivalency scales and countable income rules. The analysis data set is the Survey of Income and Program Participation, which provides accurate information on household and family relationships, matched to administrative data including accurate monthly SSI payments.	Melissa	L. Koenig	Kalman	 Rupp
2002	22	Economic Demography Issues of Disability and Disability Policy	Nonstandard Work Hours and Disability: A National View	Americans are moving toward a 24-hour economy, driven by economic, technological, and demographic changes.  As of 1997, one out of five employed Americans worked nonstandard hours - that is, an evening, night, or rotating shift. This study explores for the first time the participation of persons with disabilities in the 24-hour economy. We find that employed persons with disabilities are working nonstandard hours to a similar extent as those without disabilities. However, persons with disabilities work fewer hours and are paid lower hourly wages regardless of their work schedules.    This assessment is based on data from the 1996 Household Component of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The sample is limited to employed individuals aged 18 and over, and to those respondents for whom there are values on all the variables of interest. The resulting sample size is 9,226: 4,800 men and 4,426 women. Both descriptive data and regression analyses are presented.	Harriet	B. Presser	Barbara	 Altman
2002	22	Economic Demography Issues of Disability and Disability Policy	A Long-Term View of Health Status, Disabilities, Mortality, and Participation in the Social Security Administration's Disability Programs	Past research on the effect of health and disabilities on disability program participation is predominantly cross-sectional and ignores mortality risk. We track Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) participation over a 16 year period using the 1984 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) matched to Social Security records. The Social Security records include death information, monthly receipt of DI and SSI, and disability diagnosis. We follow individuals that did not receive disability benefits during or before 1984, and observe disability program entry/exit and death events for 16 years. We observe how long current (1984) participants stay on the disability rolls, exit and reentry events, and reasons for leaving the rolls, including death. We develop probit models predicting disability entry and exit over various time-horizons that allow us to assess the predictive power of health and other variables in the longer term versus the short term.	Kalman	 Rupp	Paul	 Davies
2002	22	Economic Demography Issues of Disability and Disability Policy	Social Security Reform: Effects on Disabled Beneficiaries	Disabled beneficiaries and their families account for 17 percent of all Social Security beneficiaries. Yet policymakers have overlooked this group when considering the effects of reform on Social Security beneficiaries, focusing instead on retired workers. I analyze the impacts on disabled beneficiaries of three proposals discussed in the 106th Congress. I use a policy simulation model designed to estimate the effects on benefits of a variety of policy reforms to Social Security.    I find that these three proposals result in reduced benefit income for most of the disabled beneficiaries I simulated when compared with a solvency scenario that maintains current-law benefits while increasing payroll taxes. The income from the individual account was not sufficient to compensate for the decline in the insurance benefits received by disabled beneficiaries. I then discuss the implications of my results in light of the changing economic and demographic characteristics of disabled beneficiaries.	Barbara	 Smith
2002	23	Health, Well-being and Aging	Perceived Support and Social Ties: Two Dimensions of Social Support and Health among the Elderly in Taiwan	This study investigates whether social ties and perceived support have the same influence on both physical and mental health among the elderly in Taiwan, a setting where these relationships have not been extensively examined. Using data from four waves (1989, 1993, 1996 and 1999) of the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly, analyses examine the relationship between social ties and perceived support and four measures of health - mortality, functional status, self-assessed health, and depression. Measures of social ties and perceived support that capture respondents' experiences from 1989-1996 are used to predict health status in 1999. More positive perceptions about the availability of and satisfaction with social support are associated with lower levels of depression at follow-up, but are unrelated to other measures of health. Although there are some significant associations between social ties and the health outcomes, many are insignificant, weak or non-systematic.	Jennifer	C. Cornman	Noreen	 Goldman	Ming-Cheng	 Chang
2002	23	Health, Well-being and Aging	Suicide among Elderly: The Influence of Loss of Partner and Psychiatric Illness	The highest suicide rates are found among the elderly in many countries. An increasing number of elderly means a future rise of suicides is expected. Danish register data provide unique possibilities to study risk factors using the entire population as reference group.     This paper analyzes how loss of partner and psychiatric illness affect the risk of committing suicide among elderly. Data come from the entire Danish population aged 50 or above is analyzed during 1994-97 (N=1,894,810: 876,005 males and 1,018,805 females). Individual-level data containing demographic and psychiatric variables are used. The effect of  loss of partner and onset of psychiatric illness as well as interaction effects are analyzed.     Preliminary results show an increased suicide risk for widowed especially during the first year of widowhood. Finally, we consider prior evidence - that suggests that psychiatric disease influences the risk of committing suicide - in light of our data.	Annette	 Erlangsen
2002	23	Health, Well-being and Aging	Gender Differences in the Association between Marriage and Self-Rated Health for Older Adults across Eight Asian Countries	While a large literature from developed societies finds significant gender differences in the effect of marriage on health, little is known about this relationship in less developed countries. Evidence from developed countries suggests that marriage benefits women's health mainly through increased socioeconomic status, and men's health through increased social support. It is not clear that such gender patterns exist in Asian countries, however, due to differences in the link between marriage and SES in Asia and the stronger emphasis on the extended family and filial obligations of children to parents. In this paper we use cross-sectional survey data from eight Asian countries and logistic regression analysis to explore the level and nature of gender differences in the effect of marriage on self-rated health. Preliminary analyses suggest wide variation across countries in the presence of gender differences and the roles of socioeconomic status and social support in accounting for these differences.	Erin	B. Reidy	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal
2002	23	Health, Well-being and Aging	Physical Function and Depression in Late Life: A Longitudinal Analysis	This paper tries to address how physical functions are related to depression in the rapidly aging population in the U.S. by examining the dynamic relationship between functional disabilities and depressive symptoms using two waves of longitudinal data, 1986 and 1992, from the Duke University site of the Established Populations for Epidemiological Studies of the Elderly. The results of zero-inflated negative binomial regressions show that (1) both baseline disability status and change in disability are significantly related to change in depressive symptoms over time, with the deteriorated functions having the strongest effect; and (2) the effects of functional disability on depressive symptoms vary by different types and/or severity of functional declines. Transitions into major disabilities as represented by ADLs and minor disabilities as indicated by Nagi and Rosow-Breslau scales have significantly more harmful effects on depression than changes into IADLs and no changes in functions. Only improvement in ADL functions significantly decreases depression in the elderly.	Yang	 Yang
2002	24	Health Status and Adult Mortality in Developing Countries	Mortality and Health Status among the Elderly in Latin America	Contribution of changes in mortality to aging is discussed by 'variable r' procedures applied to cohort-like mortality for the period 1940-2050. For most countries of the region the bulk of population growth at ages above 60 during the period 1980-2025 is attributable to the decline of mortality that took place starting in 1940. This fact influence levels and patterns of mortality, health status and functional limitations among the elderly.     First, we estimate patterns of adult and old age mortality for 1950-2000, identifying  changes in mortality above ages 40 and 60 for twenty countries. Life tables  are adjusted for completeness of death registration and using model patterns. Patterns and levels of mortality at old ages are related to contribution of changes in mortality at younger ages to the speed of growth of the older population. We provide estimations on Active Life Expectancy for seven countries, adult mortality differentials between-countries and inequalities.	Roberto	 Ham-Chande
2002	24	Health Status and Adult Mortality in Developing Countries	Health Status of the Elderly in China	With the expected rapid aging of the society in China, the health status of the elderly becomes increasingly important for its health care policy. This study investigates the health status of the Chinese elderly in terms of morbidity, disability and mortality, using China 1992 Sampling Survey of Supporting System for the Elderly and two waves of China Health and Nutrition Survey (1993 and 1997).     Methodologically, this paper adopts the Grade of Membership techniques to develop a limited number of health indices from a rich set of health indicators, which recognizes the multidimensionality of health and allows for the heterogeneity of the health among elderly. These health indices are used in the subsequent analysis of the health and socioeconomic status (SES).     Theoretically, this paper intends to provide new insights into the relationship between SES and health by expanding the research scope to a developing country, China.	Jie	 Huang
2002	24	Health Status and Adult Mortality in Developing Countries	Pathways between Socioeconomic Status and Health in Korea: Observed and Unobserved Family Effects	Many studies document strong associations between socioeconomic status (SES) and health, but the research has been thus far heavily concentrated on European and North American countries (Adler et al. 1999; NRC 2001; Schaie, Blazer, and House 1992). This study expands the current research to examine the case of a developing country in East Asia: Korea. Using rich household data that contain the same information about all family members, this paper explores the observed and unobserved family effects on adult health.	Yean-Ju	 Lee	Mee-Kyung	 Suh
2002	24	Health Status and Adult Mortality in Developing Countries	Levels, Trends and Socioeconomic Differentials of Adult Mortality in Matlab, Bangladesh	This study examined levels, trends and socioeconomic differentials of adult mortality using data from the Matlab area, where the International Center for Diarrhoeal Disease Research in Bangladesh has maintained a Demographic Surveillance System since 1966. Two cohorts were followed for three years to ascertain subsequent status. After controlling for all variables in the regression model, mortality of young and elderly adults declined significantly over the period. Mortality was higher for the poor and illiterate compared to wealthier and some educated respectively; such relationships did not change over time. Male-female mortality was similar for young but for elderly adult, male had higher mortality than female in both cohorts. Mortality was lower in treatment than comparison area, and such differences disappeared over time for both age categories. Muslims had lower mortality than Hindus in earlier cohort for both age categories, but in recent cohort Muslims had lower only for the elderly adults.	Abdur	 Razzaque	Peter	K. Streatfield	Mamunur	 Rashid
2002	25	AIDS Risk-taking Behavior	The Uneven Spread of HIV within Africa: A Comparative Study of Biological, Behavioral and Contextual Factors in Rural Populations in Tanzania and Zimbabwe	Available data on HIV prevalence in sub-Saharan Africa indicate large heterogeneity in the spread of HIV across the continent. This analysis focuses on the comparison of two populations in rural Africa for which extensive data are available: rural Kisesa in northwest Tanzania and rural Manicaland in eastern Zimbabwe. HIV prevalence levels among the adult population are three times higher in Zimbabwe. The comparative analysis of a wide range of biological, behavioral and contextual indicators resulted in a few possible reasons for the much higher HIV transmission in Zimbabwe. Later marriage, lower levels of cohabitation of marital partners and higher levels of mobility, lack of male circumcision, and possibly higher incidence of HSV-2 are possible reasons. On the other hand, there were at least as many results that suggested that HIV transmission should be lower in Manicaland compared to Kisesa, especially in association with reported sexual behavior.	Ties	 Boerma	Constance	 Nyamukapa	Mark	 Urassa	Simon	 Gregson
2002	25	AIDS Risk-taking Behavior	Moving and Marrying: HIV Infection among Newlyweds in Malawi	The HIV pandemic is now well-established in eastern and southern Africa in general, and Malawi in particular. Malawians perceive marriage as a strategy to prevent AIDS: parents urge their daughters and sons to marry rather than move around, the common phrase for promiscuity. But what if they are already infected?    We employ a microsimulation model to estimate the proportions of new marriages in which the bride, the groom, or both are already infected with HIV/AIDS. The model incorporates biological processes such as those of the transmission and natural histories of HIV and other STDs, and behavioral processes such as sexual initiation and marriage. Behavioral data are drawn from a household survey and ethnographic interviews conducted in rural Malawi. We find that only a minority of newly-weds are HIV-positive. However, since such couples are overwhelmingly sero-discordant, further HIV transmission may occur subsequently even if partners are sexually faithful after marriage.	Michael	D. Bracher	Gigi	 Santow	Susan	 Watkins
2002	25	AIDS Risk-taking Behavior	Social Networks, AIDS/STD Knowledge, and Risk Behaviors among Male Clients of Female Sex Workers in Bali, Indonesia	The objective of this paper is to examine the association of AIDS and STD knowledge, demographic variables, and peer influence on the condom use of clients of Indonesian sex workers. Data for the study were drawn from the Bali STD/AIDS study conducted from 1997-1999 in Bali, Indonesia. During the project 2,120 men were selected for interviews in low price brothels. Statistical methods included logistic and multivariate regression models. Results of the study showed that younger, more educated men, and men with better knowledge of AIDS and STDs were more likely to use condoms. Men whose friends knew that they visited sex workers were less likely to use condoms, while men who reported that their friends used condoms with sex workers and that their friends encouraged them to use condoms with sex workers were more likely to use condoms with sex workers.	Kathy	 Ford	Dewa	 Wirawan	Partha	 Muliawan
2002	25	AIDS Risk-taking Behavior	Understanding Perceptions of HIV Risk among Adolescents in Kwa Zulu-Natal	The study, Transitions to Adulthood in the Context of AIDS in South Africa, shows differing perceptions of risk - both accurate and inaccurate - among adolescents in Kwa Zulu-Natal. An array of behaviors and environmental factors influence adolescents' self-perception of risk, including abstinence, unprotected sexual intercourse, accidents, the extent of disclosure and discussion of HIV/AIDS in a community, and community perceptions of risk. In our paper, we use data from the Transitions study to first report how adolescents in Kwa Zulu-Natal in South Africa describe their level of risk, the rationale for their perceptions, and the consistency between their risk perceptions and their behavior. We then explore how individual and household characteristics and their community and school environments are associated with accurate and inaccurate risk perception. We conclude with a discussion of how these results can guide HIV/AIDS behavior change programs.	Naomi	 Rutenberg	Kate	 MacIntyre	Lisanne	 Brown	Ali	 Karim
2002	26	Urbanization and Development	Urbanization in the Amazon: Overview and the Beginnings in a New Country	Urbanization is sweeping the developing world.  Even the world's last untouched and inhospitable environments are beginning to urbanize.  This paper will examine urbanization in the Amazon basin, site of the world's largest rainforest, isolated from economic centers.  Yet large cities (exceeding 100,000) already exist in Brazil and Peru.      This paper will briefly review this evolution, then examine the beginnings of urbanization in the Ecuadorian Amazon, where a few frontier-missionary towns as recently as 1970 have grown to small cities up to 30,000, following the discovery of oil and construction of road networks.  Although the sizes of these urban centers are small, their growth rates are extraordinary.      A specialized community-level survey carried out in 60 communities in 2000 provides data on how these areas have evolved and how they differ in infrastructure, economy and population. These data will be analyzed to provide a unique perspective on the early process of urbanization.	Richard	 Bilsborrow	Luis	 Vallejo
2002	26	Urbanization and Development	Spatial Inequality and Health in Metropolitan Seoul	Recently the pattern of urbanization in Metropolitan Seoul appears to have shifted from one reminiscent of developing countries to one more similar to that of developed countries. That is, intra-city population movement has greatly increased since the early 1990s, instead of influx of incoming migrants from the rural, which is accompanied by the redistribution of capital. Given the relationship of neighborhood SES with individual health status, it is considerable interest to explore if and how the ecological changes in Metropolitan Seoul in the past decade are related to inequalities in individual health. This study examines the impact of spatial inequality on the health of individuals in Metropolitan Seoul, utilizing multilevel analysis techniques.	Youngtae	 Cho	Parker	 Frisbie
2002	26	Urbanization and Development	Intra-Metropolitan Linkages in a Polycentric Metropolis	This study focuses on the intra-metropolitan linkages that exist with respect to demographic and socioeconomic change in the Boston CMSA. The analysis is motivated by the suburban dependency hypothesis. Commuting flow data at the minor civil division level are used to measure intra-metropolitan linkages. Our measurement of intra-metropolitan linkages goes beyond the traditional city-suburb dichotomy. Following prior research, we use correlation models to examine the intra-metropolitan linkages. However, we expand on these conventional approaches by attempting to determine the directionality of the interactions within the metropolitan region. We find that the results depend to a significant extent on the allocation scheme used to link places in the metropolitan area. The results are also sensitive to the choice of the unit of analysis. The decentralized nature of metropolitan employment and the increased prevalence of intra-metropolitan commuting have made the measurement of intra-metropolitan linkages more difficult. Model specification choices, therefore, have become even more critical.	Stefan	 Rayer	David	L. Brown
2002	26	Urbanization and Development	Migration and Reproductive Behavior among Young Women in Kumasi, Ghana	Persistent high fertility and the receptivity of migrants to altering fertility behavior remain salient issues in Sub-Saharan Africa. Analysis of a small probability sample (n=150) of young women in two low income migrant receiving zones on the outskirts of Ghana's second largest city reveals that both rural-urban migrants and native urbanites exhibit awareness and approval of family planning. When socioeconomic controls are introduced in multivariate analysis, migrants are more likely to express approval of family planning. Moreover, a larger proportion of migrants than non-migrants report ever use of family planning, although migrants may tend to rely more on traditional methods of fertility control. Finally, migrants are no less prone to expressing an ideal family size, nor do they want more children than their urbanite peers. Such findings suggest that rural-urban migrants are receptive to family planning and may serve as conduits of fertility control back to rural areas.	Catherine	N. Stiff	Michael	J. White
2002	27	Female Sterilization in Latin America and India	Female Sterilization in Latin America: Cross-National Perspectives	Fertility levels have dropped substantially in Latin America in recent decades, fuelled by increased contraceptive use and notably a method mix skewed towards female sterilization. This study examines choice of female sterilization in four Latin American countries: Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic and Peru. Data are drawn from four national Demographic and Health Surveys conducted around the same period (1995-1996). Discrete-time hazard models are used on the five-year calendar modules of women's reproductive histories to consider the effects of a number of socio-demographic and contextual determinants as they pertain to status at the moment of the event. In addition, a multilevel approach is used to compensate for intra-cluster correlation given the DHS two-stage sampling scheme. The multivariate, multilevel analyses allow us to evaluate whether observed differentials in levels of female sterilization across societies are primarily the result of cultural or structural differences favoring adoption of this method.	Iuri	da Costa Leite	Neeru	 Gupta	Roberto	do Nascimento Rodrigues
2002	27	Female Sterilization in Latin America and India	Frustrated Demand for Postpartum Female Sterilization in Brazil	Fertility has declined in Brazil without large-scale organized family planning programs. During the last three decades, Brazilians have relied on the pill and female sterilization, with sterilization increasing over time.  Until a new law was passed, sterilization was illegal and not covered by public nor private health insurance.  It was frequently provided in public and private hospitals in conjunction with a cesarean.    The new law regulating sterilization provided for reimbursement by public health insurance, but placed restrictions on availability intended to reduce the use of cesareans.     This paper focuses on women's sterilization intentions during pregnancy and their experiences postpartum.  In a prospective study of pregnant women, there was substantial demand for postpartum sterilization in both the private and public sectors.  Public patients were less likely to be sterilized than private patients.  Thus, the new law may not have reduced inequities in access or, paradoxically, the incentive for unnecessary cesarean sections.	Ignez	H.O. Perpétuo	Elza	 Berquo	Kristine	 Hopkins	Ondina	Fachel  Leal	Maria	Celia de Carvalho  Formiga	Marta	Rovery  Souza
2002	27	Female Sterilization in Latin America and India	The Impacts of the Voluntary Sterilization Law on Reproductive Rights of Men and Women	This paper has the objective of analyzing the impacts and possible changes that the implementation of a new law on family planning has had on reproductive practices, especially sterilization, and to perceive if men's and women's reproductive rights are being fulfilled. The methodological approach is based on a six-month follow up survey taken monthly, applied to a sample of 238 individuals in six contextually different state capitals.     Besides verifying if the criteria set by the law are being followed by the health sector, we analyze the waiting time between the request for sterilization and the surgery itself utilizing survival analysis.  Moreover, interviews with the health professionals, which are very elucidative of the procedures adopted in the practice of sterilization, are carried out.  The results have shown that, for several different reasons, the law has changed little the usual practice of sterilization and yet not satisfying individual's reproductive rights in Brazil.	Elza	 Berquo	Suzana	M Cavenaghi
2002	27	Female Sterilization in Latin America and India	Pathways to Caesarian Section and Sterilization in Kerala, India: Associations and Attributes	Little is known about the associations between caesarean section and sterilization. Evidence from few countries, for example in India and Brazil, indicates a high prevalence of both caesarean section and sterilization. This paper examines the association between timing of caesarean section and that of female sterilization in Kerala and correlate these with demographic, health care, spatial and social variables. We used the cross-sectional data from the National Family Health Survey conducted in Kerala during 1992-93. The study was limited to 1550 women who had a birth since January 1988. Women who had a last birth delivered through caesarean are considerably more likely to have sterilization within the same month of the last birth (OR: 1.90, p      	Sabu	S. Padmadas	Inge	 Hutter	Albert	 Mantingh
2002	28	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developed Countries	To Use or Not to Use: Young Adult Men and the Contraceptive Decision	Using data from the three waves of the National Survey of Adolescent Males we model the effects of background factors, attitudes, past sexual experiences, and relationship type (marriage, cohabitation, or dating) on contraceptive use within current sexual unions. Based on the reports of young adult men, we examine whether the couple used no method, a male method, a female method, or both a male and female method at last intercourse.  Preliminary results indicate large differences in the likelihood of contraception being used as well as the type of contraception used depending on the relationship context.  Married men report the lowest use of contraceptives, particularly male methods, whereas men in dating relationships report the highest likelihood of using a male method.  Additional analyses also examine the effect of relationship type and background factors on the likelihood of the couple discussing contraception prior to engaging in sexual activity.	Renata	 Forste	David	W. Haas
2002	28	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developed Countries	Paternal Relationship History and Male Fertility: Evidence from the NLSY	This paper uses unique longitudinal data for a national sample of over 4,000 men and their children in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth who were repeatedly interviewed between 1979 and 1998 to examine cumulative and parity-specific fertility trajectories, and their linkages with the patterning of relationships over time. A particular focus will be on exploring the extent that black, white, and possibly non-black Hispanic, respondents differ in these linkages. In addition to describing trajectories for these men as they age from middle/late adolescence to their late thirties, we use event history methodology to explore the determinants of progression to a first birth, and from a first to second birth sorting out the extent to which marriage, cohabitation histories, as well as the number of different reported partners in these relationships impact on parity progression independent of a number of socio-economic and demographic antecedents, and how this varies by race/ethnicity.	Thomas	 Gryn	Frank	 Mott
2002	28	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developed Countries	How Do Men Matter? Previous Relationships, Childbearing Histories, and Current Marital Fertility	How do married couples' relationship and fertility histories affect their likelihood of having a shared biological child? I use a sample of 4500 married women aged 19 to 45 from the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth, which provides childbearing and relationship histories as well as detailed characteristics of their husbands. I treat fertility as a product of husbands' and wives' marital and childbearing histories and assess two theories previously used to understand men's role in fertility. When modeled as part of a couple rather than additively, I find significant evidence that men's previous childbearing reduces the likelihood of a shared birth. There is also evidence that women marry men (and vice versa) with certain characteristics to achieve a desired fertility outcome. This research suggests that a theoretical model specifying the direct and indirect effects of wives' and husbands' experiences is needed to better understand marital fertility.	J.	Brian  Brown
2002	28	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developed Countries	Fatherhood - Is It My Decision? 30-Year-Old Childless Men Talk about Their Desire for Children in Eastern Germany's Extremely Low Fertility Conditions	Recent demands for including psychological theories on decision-making in research on family formation coincide with calls for improving research on male fertility and fatherhood. In this paper, we address these notions and present findings from in-depth interviews with 30-year-old childless men in eastern Germany on conceptions and subjective determinants of fertility decisions.      The subjects of our study are participants in an extensive longitudinal survey, and we use both qualitative and quantitative data in our analysis in order to link the results of the interviews to the life course development of the participants.    Our results indicate wide differences among men in their narratives. For those who attach great significance to family formation, the theory of symbolic self-completion seems to capture best the motives behind fertility behavior. For others, however, attitudes toward a partner's desire for children prove to be the qualifying factor in their fertility decision.	Holger	R. von der Lippe	Urs	 Fuhrer	Bernhard	 Meyer-Probst
2002	29	Statistical Modeling with Clustering and Heterogeneity	Improving Modeling Behavioral Responses to Policy Change: Microsimulations in the Presence of Heterogeneity	This paper develops a method that improves researchers' ability to account for behavioral responses to policy change in microsimulation models. Current microsimulation models are relatively simple, in part because of the technical difficulty of accounting for unobserved heterogeneity. This is all the more problematic because data constraints typically force researchers to limit their models to a relatively small set of explanatory covariates, so that much of the variation across individuals is unobserved. Furthermore, failure to account for unobservables often leads to biased estimates of structural parameters, which are critically important for measuring behavioral responses. This paper develops a theoretical approach to incorporate (univariate or multivariate) unobserved heterogeneity into microsimulation models; illustrates computer algorithms to efficiently implement heterogeneity in continuous and limited dependent models; and evaluates the importance of unobserved heterogeneity by conducting Monte Carlo simulations.	Constantijn	(Stan)  Panis
2002	29	Statistical Modeling with Clustering and Heterogeneity	Accounting for Survey Design in Multilevel Models	Secondary data analysts are becoming more aware of the impact a complex survey design can have on model estimation of parameters and their associated standard errors in linear models. Using STATA allows the analyst to account for weighting, clustering, and stratification in model estimation with correctly estimated standard errors.    The problem with this approach occurs when the impact of clustering is of substantive interest to the data analyst and the preferred method of analysis is multilevel modeling. Pfeffermann et al. (1998) propose a weighting approach that has been implemented in MLwiN. We investigate this approach through a small simulation study. Comparisons of the results with simple unweighted analysis, and a model-based approach to account for the design, demonstrate the importance of not ignoring the sample design when it is informative. Data from the Tanzania DHS and Ghana DHS are then analyzed to illustrate the above approaches.	James	 Brown	Nyovani	 Madise	David	 Steel
2002	29	Statistical Modeling with Clustering and Heterogeneity	Childhood Mortality in Egypt, Eritrea, and Uganda: A Multilevel, Multiprocess Model with Unobserved Heterogeneity	This paper addresses the relationship between childhood mortality on one hand, and use of health care and other socioeconomic variables on the other, in three African countries - Egypt, Eritrea, and Uganda - based on data from the 1995 Demographic and Health Surveys in respective countries. Children of the same mother are treated as correlated cases (levels) of the same observation (mother) and we allow for unobserved heterogeneity between mothers. Multilevel, multiprocess approaches are then used to simultaneously model mortality risks and the propensity to use health care. In some of the countries studied it is shown that while use of health care reduces mortality risks such beneficial effect may be underestimated if selection effects (due to more frail users of health care) is not accounted for. In others, the effect of health care is overestimated when selection effects (due to less frail users of health care) is not accounted for.	Gebrenegus	 Ghilagaber
2002	29	Statistical Modeling with Clustering and Heterogeneity	A Fixed-Effects Proportional Hazards Model for Clustered Data, Designed to Yield Non-Parametric Estimates of Regional Fertility Patterns	We examine the evolution of fertility patterns in Turkey, using a flexible fixed-effects proportional hazards model of waiting times.  The model is designed to exploit the clustering features of survey data. It permits correlation between observed (household level) and unobserved (regional) factors.  The latter are absorbed in a cluster-specific baseline hazard, which is treated as an incidental function of time.      We use stratified partial likelihood estimation on spell data for the first through the fourth births recorded in the 1993 and 1998 DHS, and find statistically significant cluster effects.  We back out the integrated baseline hazard and use it to isolate the differences in the tempo of fertility across clusters.  The patterns are consistent with the interpretation that the war like conditions that existed in the Eastern part of the country in the late 80s and early 90s depressed fertility.  We also find evidence of replacement behavior and gender preference.	Ali	Cevat  Tasiran	Insan	 Tunali
2002	30	Internal Migration	Migration Intentions in Urban Vietnam: A Multivariate Analysis	This paper explores migration intentions of temporary, permanent migrants, and non-migrants using data from the 1997 Vietnam Migration and Health Survey. Determinants of migration intentions of temporary migrants are also examined using a multinominal logit regression model.     The results show the majority of urban residents intends to stay in urban areas. Being familiar with current place of residence, family ties and income are the most important reasons to stay. These factors, however, work differently for different types of migrants. Interestingly, results of multivariate analysis show that while kinship at origin is a strong determinant of migration intention, kinship at destination and household size do not play as important role as expected. The findings also suggest that while temporary migrants might have more opportunities in bigger and more developed cities, they have better chances to stay in smaller and less developed cities. Questions for further studies and policy implications are discussed.	Liem	T. Nguyen
2002	30	Internal Migration	Land Ownership as a Determinant of International and Internal Migration in Mexico and Internal Migration in Thailand	This study focuses on the effect of land ownership on internal and international out-migration in Mexico and on internal out-migration and return migration in Thailand. I consider land to impact migration in four ways: as wealth; as employment; as an investment opportunity; and through inequality in ownership. I estimate discrete time event history models of individual migration with land owned by a household as the key predictor. Land has a significant curvilinear effect. The effect on out-migration is negative for the majority of households. For large landholders, the effect on out-migration is positive. Thus, land is a form of employment for members, and smallholders migrate in order to purchase more land. For large landholders, land is an investment opportunity.	Leah	K. VanWey
2002	30	Internal Migration	Bringing Black Neighbors Back into the Neighborhood Context in the Study of Whites' Mobility	It has been argued that black neighbors are critical in shaping whites' mobility. Little research, however, has directly tested the white flight hypothesis using individual- and neighbor-level data. This paper examines this issue using non-publicly-available data from the neighbor cluster sample collected within the 1985, 1989, and 1993 panels of the American Housing Survey. The neighbor sample consists of 680 housing units and their 10 neighboring housing units. These data are well suited to examine white flight because they are longitudinal and the race of whites' actual neighbors is available. Geographic identifiers for the housing units are also available, allowing census-tract level data to be appended. Hierarchical nonlinear modeling is used to assess the impact that black neighbors have on whites' mobility, controlling for tract-level racial composition and changes in such composition, individual-, and metropolitan-level characteristics.	Samantha	 Friedman
2002	30	Internal Migration	Migration Consequences of Welfare Reform	In this paper, we investigate whether recent state and federal changes in welfare policy have affected the migration of low-educated unmarried women. We find that welfare reform has motivated low-educated women to move greater distances more frequently, and a large number of these moves are associated with employment. Our analysis also indicates that welfare reform has led to more local (i.e., within county) migration that is associated with employment, although these estimates are not robust to estimation method. The close link between residential moves and employment in the post-reform period is consistent with the idea that welfare reform has motivated people to move for economic reasons. This suggests that the traditional way of thinking about the effect of welfare on migration - as a strategic move to obtain higher benefits - is inadequate. Welfare appears to have a much larger effect on residential location because of its relationship to employment.	Neeraj	 Kaushal	Gregg	 VanRyzin
2002	31	Race and Ethnic Economic Inequality	Long-Term Effects of a Residential Mobility Program on Family Economic Status	We examine the conditions under which a residential mobility program is an effective policy for reducing concentrated urban poverty. We find that the Gautreaux residential mobility program, which relocated low-income African-American families into integrated neighborhoods within and beyond the Chicago city limits, has had a differential impact on promoting socioeconomic well-being, with participants best off if they are placed in communities with higher incomes and in suburban as opposed to city communities. We use the Census tract mean income of current address, measured up to 25 years after entry into the program, as a measure of permanent income. Dispersing low-income families beyond the central-city boundary significantly increases eventual neighborhood income. The socioeconomic characteristics of the initial placement community are important in influencing the mean income of current address. Finally, a family's mobility decisions after moving to their initial placement address has a significant influence on neighborhood income of current address.	Micere	 Keels	Greg	J. Duncan	James	 Rosenbaum
2002	31	Race and Ethnic Economic Inequality	Can Prejudice Explain the Racial Wage Gap?	Using 1990 census data, human capital regressions and Blinder-Oaxaca decompositions show a distinctive regional pattern of racial wage gaps, with Northern divisions showing small or even negative wage gaps, and Southern divisions showing large wage gaps between white and black full-time year-round employed women. Regional data from NORC survey questions measuring racial prejudice show high correlations (0.7-0.85) with these patterns of wage gaps, leading to the conclusion that discrimination does play a key role in wage differences by race.	Daniel	 Seiver
2002	31	Race and Ethnic Economic Inequality	The Interaction between Place and Power: Residential Segregation and African American Status Attainment	This analysis examines the impact of racial residential segregation on African American status attainment and how that relationship varies by regional context. Using tract-level data from the 1990 U.S. Census Bureau, I examine two multiple regression models of status attainment for the metropolitan areas of Detroit, Boston, and Atlanta. Three neighborhood characteristics are used: percent black, class composition, and location in the central city or the suburbs. Racial segregation is found to affect black status attainment differently across the metropolitan regions of Detroit, Boston, and Atlanta. The interaction models reveal that racial segregation is almost always dependent upon the class composition of the neighborhood and the location of the neighborhood in the central city or the suburbs. Racial segregation is in some cases inconsequential for black status attainment. The importance of considering regional and neighborhood context when examining the impact of racial segregation on black status attainment is confirmed.	Cicely	 Sharpe
2002	31	Race and Ethnic Economic Inequality	Race, Wages, and Assimilation among Cuban Immigrants	This study uses data from the 1980 and 1990 Census and the 1994-2000 Current Population Survey to examine the determinants of earnings among male Cuban immigrants by race. Nonwhite immigrants earn significantly less than whites, on average. Much of the racial wage gap is due to differences in educational attainment, age at migration, and years in the U.S., but such factors cannot fully explain the gap. Nonwhite Cuban immigrants also have lower returns to education than whites. A comparison to white, non-Hispanic U.S. natives indicates that nonwhite Cubans not only earn less initially than white Cubans on arrival in the U.S. but do not significantly close the racial earnings gap over time.	Madeline	 Zavodny
2002	32	Contraceptive Technology	Modifications of the Yuzpe Regimen of Emergency Contraception: Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial in Five Centers	Emergency contraceptives can prevent unintended pregnancy after unprotected intercourse. The most popular regimen (Yuzpe) consists of ordinary combined oral contraceptives containing levonoregestrel/ethinyl-estradiol. Women traditionally take one dose within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, and a second dose 12 hours later. We tested three simplifications of the standard regimen to explore its flexibility. Women presenting up to 72 hours after unprotected intercourse were randomized to receive: 1) standard two-dose Yuzpe, 2) a variant of Yuzpe that substituted norethindrone for levonorgestrel, or 3) the first dose of Yuzpe, followed 12 hours later by placebo. In a simultaneous observational study, we offered Yuzpe to women presenting 72-120 hours after unprotected intercourse, but declining copper IUDs. We found that oral contraceptive formulations containing norethindrone/ethinyl-estradiol work approximately as well as the standard combined regimen. Eliminating the second dose halves vomiting; it lowers efficacy somewhat, but not significantly.  The regimen's 72-hour treatment cut-off appears needlessly restrictive.	Anne	 Webb	Kelly	 Blanchard	Alison	 Bigrigg	Sue	 Haskell	Margaret	 Evans	Sue	 Fernden	Claire	 Leadbetter	Aileen	 Spears	Karen	 Johnstone	Tara	 Shochet
2002	32	Contraceptive Technology	Men's and Women's Preferences for Male- or Female-Controlled Barrier Methods: Results from a Couple-Level Research Design	Much of what we know about people's experiences with the female condom have been based upon the results of focus groups of women shown the device as well as from a few longitudinal studies of women who have tried it.  In some of these studies women have been asked to discuss or report their partner's reactions to it.  However, direct reports of male reactions with the method have been lacking.      Using couple-data from a large randomized trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of an HIV/STI risk reduction intervention for high-risk main sex partners, we are interested in finding out what factors are most influential with respect to men's and women's preferences for either the male or female condom.   We contrast men's and women's self-reports and their perceptions of their partners' reactions these techniques and analyze which sociodemographic characteristics and beliefs are more influential in determining men's and women's preferences.	Trent	W. Moore	David	F. Sly	Dianne	H. Montgomery
2002	32	Contraceptive Technology	Cross-Border Procurement of Contraception: Estimates from a Postpartum Survey in El Paso, Texas	Along the U.S.-Mexico border, U.S. residents have the option of crossing to Mexico to obtain hormonal contraception sold over-the-counter at very low prices in pharmacies. Our data come from a postpartum survey that was carried out with 3,134 women in a public hospital in El Paso, Texas during 1996-1997.     Overall, 51% of pills and 60% of injectables were obtained in Mexico. After further screening, among multiparous women these rates fell to 41% and 54%, respectively. Reasons for discontinuation of these methods did not vary according to where the method was obtained. In this Hispanic population, the prevalence of cross-border procurement was highest among women who were born and educated in Mexico.      Lower-income mothers in El Paso make substantial use of Mexican pharmacies to procure hormonal contraception. This finding supports the proposition that reducing the medical requirements to acquire pills and injectables and making them available at low cost would augment their use in low-income populations.	Joseph	E. Potter	Ann	M. Moore	Theresa	L. Byrd
2002	32	Contraceptive Technology	Male Hormonal Contraception: Shifting Infertility and the Acceptability of a New Contraceptive Technology in Indonesia	With clinical trials underway in industrialized and developing countries, the introduction of a hormonal contraceptive method for men is reasonably predicted within the near future. Male hormonal contraception (MHC) has been shown to confer reversible infertility for at least one year in men with normal gonadal function. However, while clinical trials refine hormonal regimens, their acceptability, cultural meanings, and implications for sexual relationships remain underexplored. This paper presents findings from semi-structured interviews conducted with men and their female partners in an on-going MHC clinical trial in Jakarta and Palembang, Indonesia. Fourteen men and their partners were interviewed in Jakarta, and ten men and their partners in Palembang. We examine men's and women's motivations to participate in the trial and their perceptions of the injection's physical, psychological, and social effects. We situate this analysis within cultural, historical, economic, and interpersonal influences on use and reactions to a new contraceptive technology.	Harris	S. Solomon	Kathryn	M. Yount	Michael	 Mbizvo
2002	33	Cultural and Social Consequences of AIDS	The Economic Consequences for Parents of Losing an Adult Child to AIDS: Evidence from Thailand	Despite considerable attention to AIDS orphans, older age parents of those who die from AIDS have been ignored in the research and rhetoric associated with the epidemic. We examine the economic consequences for Thai parents of losing an adult child to AIDS with emphasis on the effects of parental caregiving. The analysis incorporates data derived from three different but coordinated methodological approaches: interviews with local key informants to obtain individual case information; a direct interview survey of AIDS parents (and a control group) using a structured questionnaire; and open-ended interviews with AIDS parents. The first two yield quantitative data while transcripts of the open-ended interviews provide qualitative data. Our analysis has both a substantive and a methodological focus, with the latter consisting of comparisons between key informant and direct interview approaches. The results indicate that the economic impact varies considerably but is systematically related to the parents' economic status.	John	 Knodel	Wassana	 Im-em
2002	33	Cultural and Social Consequences of AIDS	Multiple Sex Partner and Child Survival: Social Consequences of the AIDS Epidemic in Rakai, Uganda	This paper assesses the extent to which HIV/AIDS and other STDs mediate the association between maternal sexual behavior on child mortality. Prospective data from (N=4,351) households in the Maternal Infant Supplement study from Rakai, Uganda were used.     Multivariate analyses showed an increased child mortality if the mother reported multiple sexual partners (OR=1.90, p=0.02), or was HIV positive (OR=1.8, p=0.003). In the HIV negative mothers, the odds of child mortality increased if the mother reported multiple sex partners (OR=2.2, p=0.01). This finding was not sustained in the HIV positive mothers.    Children of women with multiple sexual partners experience higher mortality in part due to vertically transmitted infectious diseases, and in part due to unidentified processes which may be related to parental social status and behavior.	Heena	 Brahmbhatt	David	 Bishai	Fred	 Wabwire-Mangen	Godfrey	 Kigozi
2002	33	Cultural and Social Consequences of AIDS	Changing Marriage and Cohabitation Patterns in Rural Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa	The Africa Centre Demographic Information System (ACDIS) collects thrice yearly demographic and health data from 85,000 members in 11,033 households in a rural area of KwaZulu Natal, South Africa. Using data from the year 2000, 75% of adults 18 years and older were currently not married. Younger cohorts report a significant decline in marriage, 46% have never been married by age 40-44. Cohabitation of non-marital couples in this area is low, of currently not married women (9%) and men (8%) were cohabiting.     Marriage is an important determinant of sexual relationships (and by inference HIV prevalence - currently 42% in antenatal clinics in our survey area), fertility, parenting, social networks and economic resources. Interviews with adults aged 18-40 found that the changing marital patterns most likely reflect changing attitudes to lobola, marriage and parenting, altered life course expectations, labor migration, and women's fears about marriage.   	Victoria	 Hosegood	Eleanor	 Preston-Whyte
2002	33	Cultural and Social Consequences of AIDS	Adolescent Sexuality and the HIV Epidemic in Yaoundé	Adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa are the focus of many interventions that aim to prevent HIV transmission. In order for these interventions to be effective, it is essential to understand adolescents' sexual behaviors.     Using data collected in Yaoundé in 1997, the study analyzed risk exposure and HIV prevalence among 426 men and 510 women aged 15-24. Although risky behaviors seem more prevalent among young men, their HIV prevalence is remaining under 1%. In contrast, HIV prevalence is high among young women (7.5%), even those who report having had few sexual partners.     Mixing patterns among sexual partners, and especially the age difference between men and women, do not seem to be sufficient to explain the large male-female discrepancy in HIV prevalence evident in our data. These results are therefore likely due to a greater susceptibility to infection of young women than men, as found by other recent studies conducted in African cities.	Nathalie	 Lydié	Jamie	 Robinson	Benoît	 Ferry	Évina	 Akam
2002	34	New International Data Collections on Aging	Social Environment and Biomarkers of Aging Study (SEBAS) in Taiwan		Noreen	 Goldman
2002	34	New International Data Collections on Aging	The Human Mortality Database		John	R. Wilmoth
2002	34	New International Data Collections on Aging	Share: Study of Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe		Axel	 Boersch-Supan
2002	34	New International Data Collections on Aging	European Biodemographic Data on Aging		James	W. Vaupel
2002	35	Adolescent Sexuality and Health Risks	Measuring Ages at Reproductive Health Transitions	Key reproductive health events, such as first intercourse, typically mark different life stages with varying service needs. Thus, it is useful to know the ages at which individuals typically experience such events. We use National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG) from 1982, 1988 and 1995 to investigate the feasibility of using cross-sectional and survival methods to calculate median ages at women's key events: menarche, first intercourse, first pregnancy, first marriage, first birth, completion of desired fertility, and infertility/sterility. Hazards models are also used to compare ages across demographic subgroups.    Cross-sectional estimates are useful for comparing different measures and can be calculated for more events. Life-table estimates are useful for cohort and subgroup analyses, and the life-table approach produces small but notable differences in estimates compared with the cross-sectional approach. Women are at risk of unintended pregnancy for an increasing proportion of their reproductive years, implying a growing need for services.	Lawrence	B. Finer	Jacqueline	E. Darroch
2002	35	Adolescent Sexuality and Health Risks	Trends in Age at First Sex: An Application of Survival Analysis Techniques to Survey Data from Africa	DHS data from seven African countries conducting three or more surveys since 1985 were analyzed using survival analysis techniques, combining information on virginity status and retrospective reporting of age at first sex. Median age at first sex was classified by age group, survey year, birth cohort, residence and education, extrapolating with a gamma model where necessary. Age group comparisons generally suggested a slow secular rise in age at first sex. However, tracing birth cohorts between surveys revealed inconsistencies - median ages reported by members of a birth cohort in their teens were higher than those reported when they reached their twenties, even allowing for residence and education changes in sample composition - probably a result of young, sexually active women denying they had ever had sex. A multivariate approach allows us to separate the effects of reporting error and compositional change and estimate true changes in sexual debut over time.	Basia	 Zaba	Elizabeth	 Pisani
2002	35	Adolescent Sexuality and Health Risks	Premarital Sex in Vietnam: Is the Current Concern with Adolescent Reproductive Health Warranted?	To the extent that research on Vietnamese adolescents has been conducted, it has been concerned with unprotected and unsanctioned sexual activity and its health consequences, namely abortion and sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV. The question we pose in this paper is whether the current concern about young people in Vietnam is warranted. Is the population community justified in focusing its attention on early sexual activity and HIV risk?     Insofar as the behavior or situation of young people can be considered problematic, are there other aspects of young peoples' lives in Vietnam that should give us greater pause? This paper reviews the literature on adolescent sexual behavior in Vietnam and analyzes data on premarital sex from a 1999 survey conducted in 6 provinces in the country among 2126 adolescents aged 13-22. Data on other aspects of adolescents' lives are summarized in order to put the sexual activity data in perspective.	Barbara	 Mensch	Wesley	 Clark	Nguyen	 Anh Dang
2002	35	Adolescent Sexuality and Health Risks	Reproductive Health Risk and Protective Behaviors among Adolescents in Kwazulu Natal	The risk of pregnancy or HIV infection continues to be a cause for concern among the youth of South Africa. A greater understanding of the factors that put adolescents at increased risk of HIV infection and teenage pregnancy is needed to develop prevention programs that will encourage positive behaviors among adolescents.     This study is aimed at identifying factors associated with risk-taking behaviors and those factors that tend to play a protective role in minimizing risk-taking behaviors. The study  shows that females were more likely to have used a contraceptive method to prevent a pregnancy and sexually transmitted disease than their male counterparts. Condom use at last sex was more common among males than among females.  The risk of pregnancy or HIV infection continues to be associated with lower levels of protective behaviors.     Addressing the factors that influence risky sexual behavior remains paramount to reducing HIV infection and pregnancy among adolescents.	Ntsiki	 Manzini
2002	36	Economic Status and Health Over the Life Course	Mother's Education and Infant Mortality Rates in the United States: Why Are There Black-White Differences?	Do similar levels of education translate to equivalent child survival benefits across racial/ethnic groups within the same society? To address this question, this paper used data from the 1995 Cohort Linked Births/Infant Deaths to investigate the variations that exist in maternal education effects on infant mortality rates in the United States. The analysis shows that, in general, infant mortality rates decreased as mother's level of education increases, irrespective of race. However, while Black infants were 1.7 times as likely to die as White infants if their mothers had 9-12 years of schooling, the ratio was 2.7 times for infants whose mothers had 16+ years of schooling. Further multivariate analysis showed that controlling for the effects of birth-weight differences reduced the Black-White odds ratio from 2.7 to 1.32. Controlling for the effects of three other variables further reduced the odds ratio to 1.25. The policy implications of these results are discussed.	Jacob	 Adetunji
2002	36	Economic Status and Health Over the Life Course	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality in Mid-Life: Cause or Effect?	This study investigates the relationship between health and SES using a panel sample of mid-life adults. Mid-life is characterized by large social inequalities in health. First, the association between initial SES indicators and mortality over six years is examined to establish an independent effect of SES (education, income, and wealth) on mortality using extensive baseline SES and health controls. Next, a test to determine if SES is causally related to health in mid-life is undertaken by regressing change in health between waves 2 and 3 on change in income between waves 1 and 2. Third, the corollary that change in SES in the second interval is predicted by change in health in the first interval is considered. Preliminary analysis shows that only wealth predicts mortality. The relationship between initial wealth and subsequent mortality is not due to the effect of wealth, but rather reflects previous income, health, and family background.	Michael	 Hurd
2002	36	Economic Status and Health Over the Life Course	The Impact of Chronic Financial Strain on the Health Status of Older Adults	In an effort to improve our understanding of persistent socioeconomic disparities in health, this paper examines the cumulative impact of financial strain over the life course on the health status of older Americans. Our study is based on data collected as part of the Aging, Stress and Health Study (funded by N.I.A., Leonard Pearlin, P.I.), which interviewed 1200 white and black men and women ages 65+ in a large metropolitan area in 2001. We rely on elders' reports of current health status and retrospective reports of financial difficulties they may have experienced during childhood, early adulthood, early and later middle age, and older ages. From these questions, we differentiate individuals who have experienced a lifetime with little or no financial stress from those who have had sporadic or more long-term episodes of financial difficulty. Moreover, we examine the impact of hardship at different points during the life course.	Joan	R. Kahn	Leonard	I. Pearlin
2002	36	Economic Status and Health Over the Life Course	Racial Disparities in Men's Mortality: The Role of Childhood Social Conditions in a Process of Cumulative Disadvantage	Black American men live fewer years than whites and, moreover, the onset of chronic illness occurs earlier in the life cycle for Blacks. This results in Blacks living more years with chronic health problems and a higher prevalence of functional disability beginning in mid-life. Recent research suggests that these different health experiences result from socioeconomic disparities, rather than behavioral effects or discrimination, per se. Applying a life course perspective, we use the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men (1966-1990) to investigate the childhood origins of these divergent health trajectories. We use discrete-time hazard models to estimate racial differences in men's risk of mortality as a function of childhood living arrangements and family of origin socioeconomic status, net of adult socioeconomic indicators, marriage and health related behaviors. The findings suggest that childhood socioeconomic conditions explain a substantial part of the race gap in adult men's mortality, consistent with a process of cumulative disadvantage.	David	F. Warner	Mark	D. Hayward
2002	36	Economic Status and Health Over the Life Course	Job Characteristics as Mechanisms in SES-Health Relationships	Although prior research has documented socioeconomic gradients in health, the causal mechanisms linking SES and health have not been well explored. We will investigate the impact of the physical and psychosocial characteristics of employment on several physical and mental health outcomes using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS). We do so with an eye toward understanding the ways in which job characteristics mediate the relationship between SES and health. We will also explore the roles of job satisfaction and psychological well being as mediators in the relationships between job attributes and health.       To address these questions we will employ a series of structural equation models to examine the impact of job characteristics as measured in 1975 and 1992 on health as measured in 1992, both in cross-section and longitudinally. However, we will also assess the cumulative health impact of job characteristics (and changes in job characteristics) between 1975 and 1992 on health in 1992.	John	R. Warren	Pascale	 Carayon	Peter	 Honnakker
2002	37	The Changing Face of Atlanta	Immigration and Ethnic Diversity in Atlanta: Recent Data		Deborah	 Duchon	Moshe	 Haspel
2002	37	The Changing Face of Atlanta	Changing Labor Markets in the Urban South: Data from the Multi-City Study		Irene	 Browne
2002	37	The Changing Face of Atlanta	Persistent Inequalities: Poverty and Segregation in Atlanta		Obie	 Clayton
2002	37	The Changing Face of Atlanta	A Look to the Future: Political and Institutional Responses to the Challenges We Face		Michael	 Rich
2002	38	Education and Fertility	The High Fertility of College Educated Women in Norway: An Artifact of the Separate Modelling of Each Parity Transition	College education has a positive impact on birth rates, net of age and duration since previous birth, according to models estimated separately for second and third births. Whereas a high fertility among the better-educated perhaps could be explained by socioeconomic or ideational factors, it might just as well be a result of selection. When parity transitions are modelled jointly, with a common unobserved factor included, negative effects of educational level appear. The effects are less clearly negative for women born in the 1950s than for those born in the 1940s or late 1930s. The cohorts from the 1950s show educational differentials in completed fertility that are quite small and to a large extent stem from differences in childlessness. Second-birth progression ratios are just as high for the college educated as for women with only compulsory education, and the third-birth progression ratios differ very little.	Oystein	 Kravdal
2002	38	Education and Fertility	Women's Schooling, Fertility, and Investments in Children in South Africa	It is widely observed that parental schooling has a negative effect on fertility and a positive effect on children's schooling outcomes. This paper explores the mechanisms through which schooling affects fertility and investments in children, and examines empirical evidence from South Africa. Modeling the effects of schooling on choices about the quality and quantity of children demonstrates that a plausible outcome of increased parental schooling is increased investments in child quality while decreasing the quantity of children. Increases in women's labor supply need not accompany the decrease in fertility, since home productivity may rise as fast as labor market productivity. Empirical evidence from South African surveys support the model, suggesting that the most important effects of schooling on fertility work through increased investments in child quality, with a relatively small role played by increases in wages and labor market opportunities.	David	 Lam	Kermyt	G. Anderson
2002	38	Education and Fertility	How Big Are Educational and Racial Fertility Differentials in the U.S.?	Using data from CPS surveys, we show that shifts in fertility timing have occurred disproportionately for the more educated and for whites (compared to the less educated and to African Americans). Such timing shifts imply that the underlying period quantum of fertility is considerably higher for college-educated women and for whites than suggested by the standard total fertility rate. Applying the Bongaarts-Feeney model (1998) with corrections suggested by Zeng and Land (2001), we decompose observed racial and educational differences in age-order-specific fertility rates and TFR into tempo and quantum components. We find that all of the racial difference in period fertility and roughly half of the differences by education can be attributed to differential changes in tempo. We discuss the likelihood that racial and educational quantum differences in completed fertility are on the wane and speculate that the dramatic differences in fertility timing will remain.	S.	Philip  Morgan	Yang	 Yang
2002	38	Education and Fertility	Educational Differences in Contraceptive Use, Abortion, and Fertility in Matlab, Bangladesh: The Role of Family Planning Services	As Bangladesh has undergone one of the fastest demographic transitions in history, more educated women have been better able to achieve their desired family size. We examine the reasons behind this and assess the role of family planning services in the process. We use longitudinal data on pregnancies and their outcomes from the Matlab Demographic Surveillance System during the last two decades and data on fertility intentions and contraceptive use from 1984 and 1990 KAP surveys.     We find that educational differentials in fertility did arise at the initial stage of the demographic transition, but they decreased over time as the contraceptive use increased and as desired family size fell. The idea of a small family size occurred equally across social groups, but the achievement of low fertility was earlier among the more educated because of their greater or better use of contraceptives and also their greater use of abortion.	Mizanur	 Rahman	Julie	 DaVanzo	Abdur	 Razzaque
2002	39	Work, Retirement and Aging	Work and Retirement among the Older Population in Four Asian Countries	This paper utilizes aggregate and individual level data, from representative surveys from the mid-1990s, to develop a comparative picture of the labor force patterns of the older population and the factors affecting labor force participation in four countries - the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand.    The aggregate data reveal that the Philippines and Thailand have somewhat higher labor force participation rates for men, and much higher rates for women, than Singapore and Taiwan. The survey data examining the factors affecting work and retirement show that poor health was a very important determinant of retirement in each country, education had small and inconsistent effects, and pension income or coverage had effects that varied from country to country. Family factors also played a role in retirement decisions. Attitudinal and preferences regarding work and retirement are also presented and generally confirm the patterns observed in the more formal analyses.	Albert	 Hermalin	Angelique	 Chan
2002	39	Work, Retirement and Aging	Do Local Labor Market Conditions Shape Labor Force Transitions of Older Workers?	Personal and household resources associated with older workers' movements out of and into the labor force are well documented. Less well known is how local labor market conditions are associated with these movements.  Drawing on the PSID merged with county-level data from the Regional Economic Information Service and other sources, this paper examines whether older men's and women's labor force behavior is linked to local conditions. I estimate competing risk hazard models of retirement or disability as well as models of reentry from these states. The results clearly show that the local labor market's industrial structure is significantly associated with the risk of retirement even after controlling for the individual's human capital, health, and occupation.	Diane	K. McLaughlin
2002	39	Work, Retirement and Aging	Transfers, Informal Insurance, and Precautionary Saving	A branch of the literature on the precautionary motive for saving has found that means-tested social insurance has a dampening effect on saving. A separate literature has focused on grown children of retirees, and has demonstrated the importance of inter vivos transfers to parents with little retirement accumulation. Combining these findings, we examine the contention that informal insurance, in the form of transfers within the family, can have the same moral hazard effect on saving that more formal forms of social insurance have been shown to exert. Using multiple waves of the Health and Retirement Study, we identify possible influences on saving behavior, such as anticipated inter vivos transfers in retirement. We use exogenous state-level variation to identify instruments for several potentially endogenous variables. In our empirical work to date, estimated impacts of potential intergenerational transfers on retirement portfolios are mixed.	Jennifer	 Mellor	Eric	R. Jensen
2002	39	Work, Retirement and Aging	Lump Sum Pension Distributions: Evidence from the 1991-1993 Panels of the SIPP	Are individuals spending or saving lump sum distributions from their employer-sponsored pension plan? We address this question using data from the 1991, 1992, and 1993 panels of the Survey of Income Program and Participation matched to restricted earnings data maintained by the Social Security Administration. To examine the specific uses of lump sums distributions we use both descriptive analysis and a multivariate probit model. Furthermore we introduce an earnings measure from the Social Security record of lifetime earnings, not used in previous lump sum studies - five-year average earnings before the distribution. We examine the role of this earnings measure in affecting lump sum use, along with assessing the relationship of earnings in the year of the distribution and projected average lifetime earnings.	James	H. Moore	Leslie	 Muller
2002	40	Unmet Need for Family Planning: Measurement and Level	Unmet Need over the Life Course - A Multistate Life Table Analysis	In life, a person/couple passes through a series of stages of contraceptive need. Each stage is an outgrowth of the ones before. The objective of this study is to explore the changes in need of contraception to regulate women's reproductive career and to determine unmeet need. Several types of unmet need are distinguished, depending on availability, effectiveness and safety of methods. Multistate contraceptive life tables are constructed to picture the contraceptive use dynamics and to explore transitions into and out of categories of need.     Several policy-relevant questions are addressed. What is the prevalence of unmet need by age? What is the lifetime probability of unmet need? What is the expected duration of episodes of unmet need? The contraceptive calendars from the Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey 1993-94 and 1996-97 are used to examine these questions. The results demonstrate the nature and importance of a life course perspective on unmet need.	Mohsina	 Khatun	Frans	 Willekens
2002	40	Unmet Need for Family Planning: Measurement and Level	Unmet Need in Mozambique and Brazil: The Bounds of Fertility Transition and Challenges for Family Planning	Mozambique and Brazil are Portuguese-speaking countries with large territories and substantial regional, social and ethnic diversity. Brazilian TFR was 2.5 in 1996 (77% of married women were using contraception, 40% sterilized). Mozambique's TFR was 5.6 in 1997 (5.6% were practicing contraception as opposed to 17.8% of sexually active unmarried women). Brazil never had official family planning programs and was considered pronatalist. Mozambique has one since 1980, but the colonial government was considered pronatalist.     We estimate the unmet need for women and men considering type of methods, unmarried individuals, sexual activity, fertility preferences, lack of knowledge/access to services and social/health hindrances. Considering sterilization prevalence, unmet need in Brazil may be higher than reported (7.3%). In Mozambique, social/health issues are more relevant and it may be lower than reported (22.5%). We have looked at two different situations of fertility transition of societies with socio-demographic similarities.	Andre	J. Caetano	Carlos	 Arnaldo
2002	40	Unmet Need for Family Planning: Measurement and Level	Unmet Need in the Developing World and the Former Soviet Union	A new estimate for the percentages and numbers of women with unmet need is provided for 115 countries. Fifty-five national surveys cover most of the developing world's population excluding China; countries without surveys are given the regional average. Both married and unmarried women are included, and young women, aged 15-19 and 20-24, receive particular attention. The basic DHS definition of unmet need is employed, but an alternative definition is included that treats certain pregnant and amenorrheic women differently. Traditional method users are considered. Only 17.1% of couples in the developing world have unmet need; or 3.2% for unmarried women.  Unmet need numbers reflect upward pressures of population growth, overall about one-eighth in the last five years, vs. downward effects due to declining proportions with unmet need. The net result is that a substantial proportion of couples, fully one in six, or 123.9 million, fall into the unmet need group.	John	 Ross	Bill	 Winfrey
2002	40	Unmet Need for Family Planning: Measurement and Level	Men's Unmet Need for Family Planning in Sub-Saharan Africa: 1985-1999	This paper presents estimates of men's unmet need for family planning for 22 sub-Saharan African countries. Data are from the men's module of the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Men's unmet need is defined as the percentage of married men who are not using modern contraception and who do not want to have additional children. Levels of men's unmet need are compared across countries, and then contrasted with those for women. Trends in men's and women's unmet need are examined over the 1985-1999 period, for countries with more than one DHS data set. Preliminary findings suggest that African men also have substantial levels of unmet need. The author then relies on the observed trends in the unmet need of men and women to categorize the different patterns in African fertility transitions. Finally, the programmatic implications of the findings, especially in the area of spousal communication, are discussed.	Pierre	 Ngom
2002	41	Community Influences on Young Adult Transitions	Continuity and Change in Pathways to Young Adult Disadvantage	This paper uses the rich information collected in the British National Child Development Study, a longitudinal birth cohort of children born in 1958. The focus is upon pathways to disadvantage in early adulthood (up to age 33) and examines parental and childhood antecedents of disadvantage, as well as exploring in some detail the routes through late adolescent experiences, status at age 23 and mediating factors between ages 23 and 33. The main outcomes considered are low income, receipt of welfare benefits, living in social housing, low status occupational class, mental health, and physical health. The key roles of early demographic and employment behavior in determining disadvantage are emphasized. The lasting influences of parental background and childhood circumstances are also explored.	John	 Hobcraft
2002	41	Community Influences on Young Adult Transitions	Neighborhood Context and the Relationship between Adolescent Family Social Capital and Later Life Outcomes	This paper estimates the effects of adolescent family social capital on early adulthood academic, arrest, and non-marital birth outcomes. Specifically, we assess how the aspects of neighborhoods in which families are embedded shape family social capital effects. Using longitudinal data on nearly five hundred families in urban Philadelphia neighborhoods, our models include within-family social capital measures such as parent marital stability and fiscal stability and measures of family community connections such as parent school involvement, and size of neighborhood social networks. Neighborhood types are characterized in terms of wealth, presence of adult role models, and social connectedness. We find some evidence of the effects of both levels of social capital on non-marital births, dropping out of high school, but arrests seem to be most strongly related to attendance in public school and household demographics. We also find that social capital is better transmitted into positive outcomes in high-resource neighborhoods.	Julie	 Kmec	Mary	J. Fischer
2002	41	Community Influences on Young Adult Transitions	Childhood Poverty, Resilience, and Pro-Social Behavior in Early Adulthood	We identify young adults who transcend disadvantaged childhood backgrounds and grow into productive adult roles. Specifically, we estimate the long-term effects of childhood poverty and welfare receipt on pro-social behavior in early adulthood. Achieving this objective is made possible using proprietary data from the 2000 NLSY Young Adult Sample (Center for Human Resource Research at Ohio State). We link the 1725 young adults aged 18 to 29 in 2000 to data collected from childhood and parents in the earlier 1979-1998 NLSY waves. Our research focuses on indicators of pro-social behavior: Establishing healthy intimate and friendship patterns, and civic involvement (including volunteerism). This research speaks to concerns about whether child poverty and family instability have long-term problems that are revealed in adulthood - when they become (or not) productive and well-adjusted members of American society. Our research takes a step forward in identifying the agency and resilience of today's young adults.	Daniel	T. Lichter	J.	Brian  Brown
2002	41	Community Influences on Young Adult Transitions	Off to a Good Start: The Early Transition to Adulthood	We use two longitudinal data sets - the High School and Beyond Sophomore Cohort of 1980 (last interviewed in 1992) and the National Educational Longitudinal Study 8th graders of 1988 (last interviewed in 2000) - to explore cohort differences in the early stages of the transition to adulthood. Specifically, we examine the extent to which family resources and school quality influence a successful launching of adult life. We examine whether coming out of a high school of high quality can compensate for some of the problems associated with coming from a disadvantaged family background. We ask, for example, whether young adults from low-income families who attend high quality high schools are less likely to experience early adult problems such as teen pregnancies or long periods of unemployment than are young adults from low-income families who attend high schools with significant problems.  We also explore changes in these associations over time.	Gary	 Sandefur	Jennifer	 Eggerling-Boeck	Hyunjoon	 Park
2002	42	Changing Gender Roles and the Family	The Other Partner: The Changing Role of Good Provider in Men's Union Formation Patterns in Industrialized Countries	Using comparable retrospective survey data, this study looks at the ways Canadian, Italian, and Swedish men enter their conjugal life (distinguishing between marriage and cohabitation) and at how the effects of their good provider status (employment and educational level) have changed in the last 30 years. Studies on women have shown the changing effects of human capital on first union formation, and this should affect have men as good providers. We examine three countries at very different points in the second demographic transition: Italy (where the growth in cohabitation is recent) and Sweden (where it has been underway much longer than in Canada). Our results show parallel changes underway in each country, indicating that it is important to continue to compare, both between countries and over time, if we are to understand the situations fostering (or not) changing gender roles for men as good providers in the second demographic transition.	Fran	 Goldscheider	Pierre	 Turcotte
2002	42	Changing Gender Roles and the Family	Age at Marriage in India: Still an Enigma to be Solved	According to recent National Family Health Survey-2, the median age at first cohabitation in India is found to be 17.4 for women age 20-49 with a low of 16.8 for women age 40-49 to a high of 18.3 for women age 20-24, suggesting a modest increase of 1.5 years over the period of about 23 years.    In this paper, we assess possible determinants that hinder the process marrying at a later age. Data is taken from NFHS-2 (1998-99) and NFHS-1. The statistical analysis brings out women's low status, high rates of early school drop out, and low socioeconomic condition. These factors contribute to marriage at early ages. The enigma can be solved only if we remove the negative stigma attached to marriage	A.	A.  Jayachandran	Sarbani	 Banerjee
2002	42	Changing Gender Roles and the Family	Nonmarket Time and Inequality: Trends and Gender Differences in Men's and Women's Housework, Child Care, and Shopping	This paper examines trends and gender differences in nonmarket time. The analysis documents a trend toward greater similarity in women's and men's nonmarket time that is due to redistribution. Men are spending substantially more time in core nonmarket tasks (cooking, cleaning, and daily child care) and women substantially less time cooking and cleaning. Further, multivariate analyses find no gender differences in the effect of marriage or employment on men's and women's housework time, or in the effects of number of children or preschoolers on parents' child care or housework time. The results indicate that women and men are selectively investing nonmarket  time in tasks that construct family life, such as nurturing children, while doing more routine tasks, such as housecleaning, less frequently. This suggests that the symbolic meaning of nonmarket work may be shifting from representing gender subordination to representing family caring.	Liana	C. Sayer
2002	42	Changing Gender Roles and the Family	Women's Resource Position and Household Food Expenditures in Cebu, the Philippines	Recent studies have shown that women's income, more than men's, is directed towards increasing household well-being. This study furthers research in this area by evaluating the effect of married women's household resource position on food expenditures in the Philippines. Women's resource position is operationalized using measures of: percent of household income earned by women, proportion of spouse income transferred to women, women's control over spending their income, and women's control over buying food. Controlling for household socio-economic level and caloric need, women's income and spouse transfers positively affect food expenditures. Women's control over their income positively affects food expenditures when women earn at least 19% of household income. In households below median income, women's control matters more than in the full sample, while spouse transfers are only significant in households above median income. These findings indicate women may influence household resource allocation through various mechanisms, and that the importance of each mechanism depends on households' economic circumstances.	Kammi	K. Schmeer
2002	43	Social Environment and the Gradient in Health	The Sense of Control and Health Outcomes: Evidence from the Americans' Changing Lives Survey	A sense of control over the events and outcomes of one's life is highly valued in American society.  We examine the strength of the relationship between control and health and seek to advance understanding of this relationship in three significant ways, using a dataset that offers several strengths over existing studies.      The Americans' Changing Lives (ACL) study is a nationally representative longitudinal study of  psychosocial and socioeconomic predictors of health and aging.  The ACL study enables us to examine the relationship between self-efficacy and health in a sample of adults, not just the elderly or the ill.  We are able to investigate this relationship not just at a single point in time, but longitudinally, over eight years.  Finally, we are able to control for socioeconomic status.  In addition, we are able to consider the effect of self-efficacy on a range of health outcomes, including self-rated health, functional impairment and mortality.	Elizabeth	M. Armstrong	James	S. House
2002	43	Social Environment and the Gradient in Health	An Evaluation of the Effect of Participation in the Food Stamp Program on Future Mortality	Food stamp income is complex and paradoxical: although more impoverished groups usually experience higher morality, participation in a means tested program may predict lower mortality among eligible individuals. We examine the effect of participation in the food stamp program on mortality within the eligible population, and then, conditional on participation, the effect of the amount of food stamp income on mortality. Logistic regression models use the Family Resources Supplement to the National Health Interview Survey linked to the Multiple Cause of Death file, to examine the effect of self-selection bias. We find that the presence of unobserved individual characteristics does not bias the relationship between participation and mortality, after controlling for functional status. Participation predicts higher mortality even after testing for selection bias, but higher levels of income attenuate that risk, indicating disadvantage for some participants, and advantage for others. These policy relevant findings demand further research.	Patrick	M. Krueger	Richard	G. Rogers	Cristobal	 Ridao-Cano
2002	43	Social Environment and the Gradient in Health	Income and Health Dynamics in Vietnam: Poverty Reductions, Increased Health Inequality	Over the past decade, Vietnam has experienced a dramatic economic reform that has led to considerable poverty reduction. Nevertheless, these improvements have largely favored those with higher incomes so that health inequality has significantly increased as well. This study shows that  the poor are less able to access health care services, both preventive and curative and also less likely to have health insurance coverage than the rich. Health improvements favor the rich. The growing non-public private sector located mainly in urban areas is less accessible for the poor. Government financing of health accounts for a small percentage and this subsidy disproportionately benefits the non-poor.	Thang	M. Nguyen	Barry	M. Popkin
2002	43	Social Environment and the Gradient in Health	Procedural Justice, Distributive Justice, and the SES Gradient in Health	The SES gradient in health outcomes has been well documented.  Thus, health is influenced not simply by absolute material standards, but also by relative social standing.  SES differences in health behaviors and access to health care have not adequately explained the gradient.     Increased attention has been focused on group differences in psychosocial resources and stressors and the resulting allostatic load (cumulative wear and tear on the body).  Given the foci on relative social standing and on the stress process, it is clear that individuals' appraisals of their social environments and relationships are key factors in explaining the gradient.      We contend that incorporating findings from the social psychological justice literature will inform our understanding of the SES gradient in health.  We discuss perceptions of procedural (how resource allocation decisions are made) and distributive (how resources are allocated) justice and on emotional and behavioral reactions to perceived injustice.	Laura	L. Rudkin-Miniot	Kushang	V. Patel
2002	44	Women's Status and Employment in Developing Countries	Informal Employment in India - Intersections of Caste, Gender, and Ethnicity	We pose three main research questions in our paper:  1) Is informal employment a survival strategy for the underprivileged? 2) Do education and urban residence mitigate the differences in employment strategies between the privileged and the underprivileged? and 3) Is informal employment an avenue of escape for women faced with cultural constraints and discrimination in the labor market?    We use the Indian National Sample Survey 1993-94, in a weighted multinomial logistic regression, with five categories of employment status and a number of demographic independent variables such as caste, age, and education. We separately analyze men and women, in urban and rural areas, based on our hypothesis that educated Muslims and low caste individuals will be self-employed in non-farm occupations, as opposed to formal work. Women from upper castes will be out of the labor force or be self-employed, while lower caste women will be in casual work.	Maitreyi	 Das	Sonalde	 Desai
2002	44	Women's Status and Employment in Developing Countries	Does Child Care Provision Increase Women's Earnings? Evidence from the Urban Slums of Guatemala City	This study examines women's joint decisions to participate in the labor market and to seek formal child care in the slums of Guatemala City.  Both the mother's participation in the labor force and her use of formal day care are significantly affected by education and household demographics. Higher household wealth reduces the mothers's chances of working, but the value of assets she brings to her current marriage increases them.     A higher community-level price for informal care arrangements raises utilization of formal care arrangements.  Controlling for endogeneity of labor market participation, prices of both formal and informal care, have negative effects on earnings, but the price of formal care has a larger and more statistically significant coefficient.  This suggests that interventions to lower the price of formal daycare have the potential to improve women's incomes.	Kelly	 Hallman	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Marie	 Ruel	Benedicte	 de la Briere
2002	44	Women's Status and Employment in Developing Countries	Access to Credit and Women's Work-Decisions: An Empirical Study in Rural Malawi	This paper addresses the following: (i) Does access to credit for women change their status within the household with effects for their work choices (on-farm work vs. off-farm self-employment)? and (ii) Does the impact of access to credit on work choices differ by the headship status of the household? This paper defines access to credit as a variable that positively affects women's status and decision-making powers within the household by increasing their level of economic activity and giving them independent access to resources. This paper differentiates between access to credit and participation in a credit program. A non-participating household that has access can still benefit as it can take on activities that are risky but yield a high return. The on-farm and off-farm participation decisions of married men and women (spouses) and women (heads) are estimated through discrete models using data from rural Malawi.	Hema	 Swaminathan	Jill	L. Findeis
2002	44	Women's Status and Employment in Developing Countries	Married Women's Participation Choices and Productivity Differentials: Evidence from Urban Turkey	A factor that complicates female labor supply analyses is the variety of ways in which women engage in productive work. Besides wage labor these include home work (non-participation), work without pay in a family enterprise, and paid work on one's own account. We combine the last two (as self-employed) but treat unemployment as a fourth distinct state, and examine the participation choices of prime age (20-54) married women whose husbands are employed. We use 1988 household data from urban Turkey and control for regional differences by including district level variables. Results reveal striking observed and unobserved differences between the gainfully employed wage labor and self-employed subsamples. We compare the predicted market wage distributions (after accounting for unobserved heterogeneity) and find that the wage labor option attracts the best workers. The unemployed have higher (potential) productivity than non-participants, who in turn have higher productivity than self-employed workers.	Insan	 Tunali	Cem	 Baslevent
2002	45	Challenges and Opportunities of Multiple Race Identification	In the Eye of the Beholder: Observed Race and Observer Characteristics	Considerable recent attention has focused on the categories we use to measure race, but surprisingly little attention has been given to how racial classification varies by observer. This study addresses this gap through a web-based survey of college freshmen. Students were shown photographs representative of people from a broad range of racial categories, and asked to identify each person's race. Students provided information about their own race and gender, as well as the racial composition of their families, schools, and communities. These data allowed for an assessment of the relationship between observer characteristics and observed race. Results from this project will help guide the future collection and interpretation of racial data.	David	 Harris
2002	45	Challenges and Opportunities of Multiple Race Identification	Who Is Multiracial? Exploring the Complexities and Challenges Associated with Identifying the Multiracial Population in Census 2000	Despite the new opportunity to report more than one race, only 2.4 percent of the U.S. population identified with two or more races in Census 2000. These results lead us to question whether the population reporting two or more races reflects the potential number of people that - based on their interracial parentage - could have reported multiple races. This study investigates race reporting patterns from Census 2000 for children living in two-parent interracial families representing the four largest race combinations: White and SOR, White and AIAN, White and Asian, and White and Black.  We explore age, sex, Hispanic origin, and geographic characteristics for children who reported multiple races that matched their interracial parentage, and children who reported a single race, but could have reported multiple races based on their interracial parentage. The findings of this research shed light on the complexities and challenges associated with identifying the multiracial population.	Nicholas	A. Jones	Amy	Symens Smith
2002	45	Challenges and Opportunities of Multiple Race Identification	Pondering Poi Dog: Racial Identity of Multi-Racial Native Hawaiians	In this paper, we examine the conditions that lead to Native Hawaiian identification among multiracial Native Hawaiian children. We examine and present 1990 Census data, and initial data from the Census 2000 and the American Community Survey (Census 2000 Supplementary Survey).    Our primary research questions (using 1990 PUMS data) are: (1) how are patterns of racial identification affected by characteristics of the child and his/her parents, the household, and community, and (2) what are the primary differences in the determinants of racial identification between multiracial Native Hawaiians, American Indian, and Asian American children?.     Our analyses sheds some light on the processes of racial identity amongst multiracial individuals.  Also, our comparison of racial identification processes among different multiracial groups allows us to generalize from specifically predictive factors (such as residence in Hawaii) to find more theoretically useful patterns (such as a minority parent's personal connection to a cultural sanctuary).	Shawn	Malia Kanaiaupuni	Carolyn	A. Liebler
2002	45	Challenges and Opportunities of Multiple Race Identification	Consistency of Race and Ethnicity Reporting in Two National Health Surveys	In the brave new world of multiple race reporting, researchers are faced with the challenge of understanding how people report race and ethnicity and how to interpret data collected under the new OMB guidelines.      One commonly held assumption about race and ethnicity reporting is that respondents are always - or at least often - consistent in the way they identify themselves.  We use the linked 1993 National Health Interview Survey and the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth to determine the degree to which the same respondents to two national surveys are consistent in their race and ethnicity reporting.      Our findings indicate that there is a high level of agreement for reporting Hispanic origin and single race groups, but a low level of agreement for reporting multiple race groups.  Age, nativity, Hispanic origin and residence in a multiracial household appear to affect consistency of race reporting.	Jacqueline	B. Lucas	Jennifer	 Madans
2002	45	Challenges and Opportunities of Multiple Race Identification	Attributes of Bi-Racial Adolescents	Add Health provides a data set of adolescents who identified themselves as one race or more than one race. How are adolescents who chose one race different from those who chose two? We compared Black/White with Blacks and Whites, White/Asians with Whites and Asians, etc. on vocabulary (PPVT), school achievement (GPA), college educated parents vs. not, and two bioparent households vs. not. We chose these variables because they are more or less objective measures, not voluntary behaviors or perceptions. Those claiming two races really are in between their two race choices on GPA and PPVT. Education of parents and family structure show more complicated results that indicate selection effects.	J.	Richard  Udry	Jan	 Hendrickson-Smith
2002	46	Health in Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union	Mortality Crisis in Russia: New Health Threats	In 1992 and 1998 Russia experienced two economic crises accompanied by subsequent mortality upsurge. Using exploratory factor analysis of age-adjusted mortality from major causes of death, this study shows that more than 95% of the total variation in mortality in Russia can be explained by 3 factors: (1) factor related to social stress, correlated with mortality from ischaemic heart disease and alcohol poisoning; (2) factor of asocial behavior, correlated to mortality from tuberculosis, drug dependence, AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases; and (3) factor related to selective mortality, correlated to mortality from some chronic diseases (diabetes, asthma). Our analysis demonstrates that diseases related to the second mortality factor will determine the future mortality changes in Russia. These diseases, more common among younger age groups, are becoming a serious threat for population health in Russia and may affect other countries.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Victoria	G. Semyonova	Galina	N. Evdokushkina
2002	46	Health in Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union	Children at Risk: Infant and Child Health in Central Asia	Using Demographic and Health Surveys, government statistics, and field observations we examine the trends in infant and child health in Uzbekistan, Kazakstan and the Kyrgyz Republic.  Health indicators (mortality, diarrhea and respiratory illness, and stunting) for the population under the age of 5 are examined nationally, regionally and for ethnic groups.     Findings indicate increasing child mortality, persistently high rates of diarrhea and respiratory illness, and substantial rates of stunting.  Rural residence is a significant risk factor for negative health outcomes, outweighing effects of parity or sex. Strong ethnic differences emerge in the use of traditional versus modern disease treatment for children, but not in prevalence of illness.  Findings highlight the social costs of transition, illustrate the significant demands on the public health sector in this region, and assist in the identification of groups at highest risk for poor child health.	Cynthia	 Buckley
2002	46	Health in Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union	Smoking-Attributable Mortality in Ukraine, 1965-1994	This analysis quantifies the effect of tobacco on mortality in Ukraine between the years of 1965 and 1994. Using age- and sex-specific cause of death data from Ukraine for the 30 year period, I use indirect estimation to derive a conservative account of the proportion of overall mortality befalling working age Ukrainians that may be attributed to smoking. The results show that tobacco is the leading killer of Ukrainian working age males, accounting for between 27 and 37 percent of their deaths between 1965 and 1994. Smoking is one of the main causes behind the worsening prospects for survival among Ukrainian males and behind the increasing gender gap in mortality in Ukraine during this period. Moreover, there is evidence of a cohort effect on tobacco-related mortality, with male combatants from World War II experiencing higher levels of premature mortality attributable to cigarette smoking than all other cohorts.	Lisa	M. Godek
2002	46	Health in Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union	Ethnic Differentials in Mortality in Kyrgyzstan	This paper examines mortality by ethnic group in the former Soviet Republic of Kyrgyzstan before and after the break-up of the Soviet Union, and to study the extent to which there has been a differential effect of the health crisis on the various ethnic groups of this population. Due to a lack of available data, no studies have been able to show whether unusual mortality patterns recorded in Kyrgyzstan are attributable to data errors, or whether they are real and associated with specific risk factor distributions. In this paper, the range of uncertainty is narrowed by using newly-available census and vital registration data from the National Statistical Committee of the Kyrgyz Republic. A particular focus of this research is infant and child mortality by ethnic group.	Michel	 Guillot
2002	47	Income and Wage Inequality	Evaluating the Evidence from the Literature on the Returns to College Quality	This paper makes three contributions to the literature on the earnings effects of college quality.  First, we present evidence on the returns to college quality for men from the NLSY.  Our evidence assumes that the rich data in the NLSY suffice to control for the non-random selection of students.  Second, we show that studies using only a single variable, such as mean test scores to measure quality understate its effects.  Such studies ignore the fact single measures represent error-ridden proxies for the underlying quality.  Third, we examine the support problem. If high quality universities have very few low quality students, then the earnings effects in studies that use linear models depend heavily on the linear functional form restriction.      We find that the support problem is important but not over-whelming since there are some, but not many, low ability students at good universities and high ability students at low quality universities.	Dan	 Black	Jeffrey	 Smith
2002	47	Income and Wage Inequality	To What Degree Does Food Assistance Help Poor Households Acquire Enough Food?	The research examines the efficacy of public versus private food assistance in alleviating poor households' food shortages by considering the effects of all major forms of food assistance– Food Stamps, WIC, and food pantries.  The analyses use 1993 data from 398 low-income households in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.     The paper makes three contributions to current food assistance literature.  First, the authors recommend a refinement of the standard food consumption model to address biased estimation procedures.  Second, the authors extend the standard food consumption model to include both public and private food assistance.  Finally, the research examines the separate effect of  widely available forms of food assistance, helping poor households acquire enough resources to potentially meet basic nutritional requirements.  Findings suggest that receiving a significant amount in Food Stamps impacts whether a household attains at least the Thrifty Food Plan more so than receiving food from a food pantry or through WIC.	Beth	O. Daponte	Amelia	 Haviland	Joseph	 Kadane
2002	47	Income and Wage Inequality	Labor Supply Dynamics, Unemployment, and Human Capital Investments	In the last decades, the OECD labor markets faced important labor supply changes with the arrival of women and the cohorts of the baby-boom. Using a survey where workers declare their true employment experience, this paper argues that these supply trends imply more inexperienced workers. It then investigates the important consequences of this fact on the skill composition of the labor force, between-groups wage inequality and the level of unemployment. The main result is that a labor market with wage rigidities may not recover from such a temporary labor supply shock: with a younger and less experienced labor force, there is higher unemployment among low-experience workers, they do not accumulate enough on-the-job human capital, this reduces in the long-run the supply of skilled (experienced) workers and the demand for unskilled workers. This intertemporal multiplication of supply shocks generates multiple equilibria.	Etienne	 Wasmer
2002	47	Income and Wage Inequality	What Helps Lift Working Poor Families Out of Poverty?	Understanding the relationship between work and poverty gained importance over the last decade, as states implemented a variety of work-based welfare reforms, welfare caseloads dropped to record lows, employment among single mothers increased, and the share of low-wage workers in the labor market grew.  Indeed, the working poor are the fastest growing segment of the poverty population.     Using the 1993 SIPP, we examined monthly variation in work and poverty status, and conducted event history analysis to determine the most important predictors (demographic, family, human capital, job, and labor market) of monthly poverty exits among the working poor.      Descriptive results showed that nearly 40 percent of the 1993 poor population and 70 percent of the 1993 working poor population, lived with one or more workers who were able to pull the family out of poverty at least some of the months during the year.	Susan	M. Hauan	Laura	 Chadwick	Scott	 Fitzgerald
2002	48	Spatial Analyses in Demography	National Historical Geographic Information System	The Minnesota Population Center has undertaken a major project with exciting implications for spatial population analysis. The National Historical Geographic Information System is creating a database incorporating all available aggregate census information for the U.S. between 1790 and 2000. This project includes all surviving machine-readable aggregate census data for the U.S. and will add new data transcribed from printed and manuscript sources. These data will be freely disseminated on the web in a Geographic Information Systems framework. We are creating new census tract maps back to 1910, state and county maps to 1790, and additional maps where feasible. Availability of high-quality boundaries for key statistical areas will allow us to reconcile changes in census geography. Census data, XML encoded metadata, and boundary files will be disseminated through an integrated web-based data access and mapping system.    For additional information on the project, see http://www.nhgis.org/	John	S. Adams	Catherine	A. Fitch	Steven	 Ruggles
2002	48	Spatial Analyses in Demography	Sewers in the City: A Case Study of Individual-Level Mortality and Public Health Initiatives in Northampton, Massachusetts at the Turn of the Century	Research of the Connecticut Valley Historical Demography Project has suggested that the New England mortality plateau was associated with stressful conditions in industrializing  and rapidly growing mill towns, and that mortality decline did not take hold until after both growth slowed and public health measures were instituted.      This paper presents a geographic, individual-level, analysis of the cause-specific mortality effects of the sewer systems which were implemented in Northampton over the decades of the plateau and initial mortality decline.  Linked census and death data provide information on individual-level correlates of mortality.  Geocoding  individuals and the expanding sewers in Northampton between 1880 and 1910 allows us to analyze the ecological mortality effects of these initial public health infrastructures.     This research adds to a growing body of research on early public health measures through offering unique insights from emerging mid-sized  industrializing communities struggling with the strains of rapid population growth.	Douglas	L. Anderton	Susan	I. Hautaniemi	Tyler	W. Hautaniemi	Alan	C. Swedlund
2002	48	Spatial Analyses in Demography	Neighborhood Definitions and the Spatial Dimension of Daily Life in Los Angeles	In recent years, the effects of neighborhood characteristics on children's well-being has become a topic of considerable debate. A key unresolved research question concerns the appropriate definition of neighborhood. In this paper, we investigate how adults and children define their own neighborhoods and how salient these neighborhoods are to daily life. We draw on data from a major new longitudinal study, the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey, which we have specifically designed to test hypotheses about neighborhood effects on children. Previous studies have defined neighborhoods as census tracts or zip codes, but have rarely been able to investigate how these definitions are related to the respondents' perceptions of neighborhood boundaries or to the geography of parents' and children's daily lives. The findings from this paper offer useful insights to researchers deciding among alternative neighborhood definitions for surveys or analyses.	Anne	 Pebley	Narayan	 Sastry
2002	48	Spatial Analyses in Demography	Spatial Patterns as Predictors of Fertility: Change in Rural Egypt	We use data from the 1986 and 1996 censuses of Egypt to show that spatial location is an important predictor of fertility levels in the predominantly rural governorate of Menoufia, Egypt. In an ordinary regression equation, it appears that levels of female education and the percentage of women married in a shiakha (equivalent to a village) are the principal correlates of fertility in each of those two years. However, that model is misspecified because it ignores the substantial spatial autocorrelation that exists in the data. Using both the Getis/Ord spatial filtering approach and the Fotheringham et al. Geographically Weighted Regression approach, we show  that a large portion of the variability in fertility in Menoufia is accounted for by where people live, and a smaller fraction is accounted for by sociodemographic characteristics independent of location.	John	R. Weeks	Arthur	 Getis	Xiaoling	 Yang	Tarek	 Rashed	Douglas	A. Stow	Saad	 Gadalla	Allan	G. Hill
2002	49	Youth in Aging Societies:  Intergenerational Cooperation or Competition? Preston Revisited	Preston Revisited: A Political Scientist's Critique		Fay	L. Cook
2002	49	Youth in Aging Societies:  Intergenerational Cooperation or Competition? Preston Revisited	Conflict and Cooperation between the Generations in the Health and Retirement Study		Robert	 Willis
2002	49	Youth in Aging Societies:  Intergenerational Cooperation or Competition? Preston Revisited	Population Aging and Transfers Up versus Transfers Down		Ronald	 Lee
2002	49	Youth in Aging Societies:  Intergenerational Cooperation or Competition? Preston Revisited	Intergenerational Transfers in a Social Context		Beth	 Soldo
2002	50	The Effects of Demographic Change on Gender Relations	Gender and Time Allocation: A Demographic Perspective		Suzanne	 Bianchi
2002	50	The Effects of Demographic Change on Gender Relations	City Growth, Poverty and Gender Relations in Nairobi?		F.	Nii-Amoo  Dodoo
2002	50	The Effects of Demographic Change on Gender Relations	Work and Women's Lives: Revisiting the Roles of Supply and Demand?		Fran	 Goldscheider
2002	50	The Effects of Demographic Change on Gender Relations	Daughters, Sons, and Sex Selection: Designer Family Building in East Asia		Daniel	 Goodkind
2002	50	The Effects of Demographic Change on Gender Relations	Gender and Demographic Inquiry into the U.S. Family		Pamela	J. Smock
2002	51	Migration and Social Networks	English Language Skills, Ethnic Communities, and Household Composition among Older Mexican Immigrants	We examine the living arrangements of older Mexican immigrants in order to demonstrate how the formation of complex households is related to English language proficiency. We also examine how living in communities with a relatively high density of co-ethnics impacts household composition. Data from the 1990 Census of Population are employed to evaluate hierarchical non-linear models of living arrangements. We find that strong English language skills increase the probability of living independently and increase the likelihood of being head of a complex household. Our results also show that living in an area with a high concentration of Hispanics increases the probability that an older Mexican immigrant will live with other adults without headship as compared to living independently. Cross-level interaction models show that the relationship between language ability and living arrangements is weakened in communities with larger numbers of Hispanic persons.	Jeffrey	A. Burr	Jan	 Mutchler
2002	51	Migration and Social Networks	A Comparison of Urban and Rural Origin Migration from Mexico to the United States	Mexico-U.S. migration scholars have shown a growing interest on recent cross-border flows originating in Mexico's urban centers. Although a handful of reports have analyzed the characteristics of these flows, no study has systematically compared the newer urban and metropolitan streams with the more established rural migrations. This paper develops such a comparison by using the updated Mexican Migration Project dataset, which now includes 71 communities. The comparison between urban and rural origin flows is conducted by looking at three classical themes in the study of migration: causes, social organization (networks), and economic and social incorporation of migrants at the destination. The authors construct demographic and social profiles of migrants coming from communities located in three different types of settings: metropolitan centers, where manufacturing and services dominate; small urban places, which function as the commercial centers of predominantly agricultural and craft producing regions; and rural localities, where agricultural activities absorb most of the male labor force.	Nadia	 Flores	Ruben	 Hernandez-Leon
2002	51	Migration and Social Networks	Migrant Social Capital and Education in Migrant-Sending Areas of Bangladesh: Complements or Substitutes?	This paper studies the role of migrant social capital on children's education in Matlab, in an area of rural Bangladesh with high rates of out-migration and dependence on urban-rural financial transfers.  A primary point is the role of migrant social connections as complements or substitutes for investments in children's education.  Past research shows investments in children act as a substitute for retirement insurance in developing societies.      In areas of high out-migration, high social costs and risks associated with migration may reduce the marginal returns to educational investment.  The analysis combines household survey data with a series of surveillance data, predicting education among children in terms of past migration experience at the village- and compound-levels.  We test the impact of past migration experience on overall levels of educational attainment and on within-household educational inequalities.  Further, we model gender differentials in educational in light of the changing relationship between gender and migration.	Randall	 Kuhn	Jane	 Menken	Nizam	 Khan
2002	51	Migration and Social Networks	Flocking Together: Homophily in the Strong Ties of Immigrants	This paper compares the level of intergroup ties among  first-generation immigrants and the native-born along the dimensions of race/ethnicity, sex and educational level. It uses the Los Angeles and Boston segments of the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality, which oversamples minorities.      For Asians and Hispanics, the level of homophily dropped between the first and later immigrant generations, in keeping with an interethnic assimilation pattern. Homophily among non-kin also dropped for most groups along two other dimensions: sex and education.     Immigrants and the native-born show no difference in the level of racial and ethnic homophily in their strong ties when they are residents of enclaves. However, among those who do not live among co-ethnics, immigrants are more likely than the native-born to maintain co-ethnic strong ties.	Susan	K. Wierzbicki
2002	52	Interventions and Policy on Adolescent Reproductive Health Services	Assessing Adolescent Reproductive Health Policies and Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa Case Studies from Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Togo	Addressing adolescent reproductive health issues is particularly crucial in sub-Saharan Africa where rates of maternal mortality, unsafe abortion, and sexually transmitted infections including HIV among youth, are the highest in the world. Despite the importance of the topic, however, adolescent reproductive health issues is still a sensitive subject in the region and there is often an important gap between the declarations of government officials and the actual design of reproductive health policies and programs geared toward youth. This study addresses this issue in two parts. First, it presents key elements of a framework for assessing the degree of development of policies and programs promoting adolescent reproductive health, and to set the benchmarks against which future policy and program development can be measured.  Second, the study analyzes the development of ARH policies and programs and demonstrates the framework's application in three countries in Francophone Africa:  Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Togo.	Anne	E. Calvès
2002	52	Interventions and Policy on Adolescent Reproductive Health Services	Kids and Condoms: Where Do Youth Seek Reproductive Health Services?	Research in Bangladesh, Kenya, Mexico and Senegal is testing the feasibility and effectiveness of community, school, and health center interventions to improve adolescent reproductive health. Fourteen percent of youth 10 to 19 had experienced intercourse, according to baseline surveys. One in four used a contraceptive, typically a condom, to prevent pregnancy or infection at first intercourse.     Fewer than 10 percent reported visiting health centers for reproductive health information in the past year. Most go to pharmacies if they needed condoms or contraceptives. One-third to one-half (except in Bangladesh) believed that they would be treated respectfully at a pharmacy. Few knew how to use condoms, and knowledge that condoms could prevent transmission of STIs was limited.     Strategies that target youth need to emphasize pharmacies as distributors of contraceptive methods, particularly condoms. Services must consistently and continually provide accurate information and educational materials, and staff encouraged to conform to national YARH protocols.	Susan	E. Adamchak	Jane	 Chege	Nafissatou	 Diop	Ubaidur	 Rob	Ricardo	 Vernon
2002	52	Interventions and Policy on Adolescent Reproductive Health Services	A Quasi-Experimental Study to Assess the Impact of Four Adolescent Sexual Health Interventions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Using a quasi-experimental design, this study assesses the impact of four adolescent sexual health interventions that were implemented in Cameroon, Botswana, South Africa and Guinea.    Significant changes were observed among young women.  Perceived benefits of abstinence, monogamy and condom use increased because of three out of four interventions. Discussion of contraception/sexual matters increased as a result of two interventions. A reduction in sexual behavior occurred in Cameroon. Contraceptive use increased in three of the interventions. Among young men, however, consistent improvements in health belief indicators occurred only in Cameroon. The Cameroon intervention used multiple communications media (including radio and peer education) and reached over 90% of adolescents.     Sexual health interventions targeted at adolescents can change attitudes and sexual behavior if they use multiple channels of communication (including interpersonal and mass media channels), make contraceptives widely available and reach a substantial proportion of young adults.	Sohail	 Agha
2002	52	Interventions and Policy on Adolescent Reproductive Health Services	The Effectiveness of Adolescent Reproductive Health Interventions in Developing Countries: A Review of the Evidence	About half of all people infected with HIV/AIDS are under age 25 and more than 13 million adolescent girls give birth each year in the developing world. These outcomes can have negative impacts on the transition from adolescence to adulthood, resulting in lower educational or employment opportunities, sterility, and possibly death. In response, adolescent reproductive health (ARH) interventions have been implemented in many developing countries in recent years. However, relatively few rigorous evaluations of intervention impact have been undertaken, and those that have been undertaken have yet to be synthesized and transformed into lessons learned for future programs.      This paper presents a review and synthesis of findings from 39 strong evaluations of ARH programs in developing country settings and identifies best bets and worst bets for future programs.	Ilene	S. Speizer	Robert	J. Magnani	Charlotte	 Colvin
2002	53	Abortion	Life Course Determinants of Premarital Pregnancy and Abortion	There are three processes affecting abortion which are interdependent, but not often considered together: women's level of sexual exposure in relationships, women's propensity to become nonmaritally pregnant, and women's structural positions which influence the decision to abort. This study uses event history analysis to examine how differences between women, and in women's romantic, cohabiting, and other sexual coupling experiences expose women to differential levels of sexual exposure and risk for premarital pregnancy. I propose a rigorous test, controlling for background and psychosocial differences which might account for women's different types of coupling behavior and propensity to get pregnant. Furthermore, I include changing educational and occupational opportunities that affect the propensity to abort once an unwanted pregnancy has occurred. Prospective and retrospective data come from the 1960 Child Health and Development Studies (van den Berg et al. 1988) and the Women's Roles in Young Adulthood Study (Udry et al. 1996).	Monica	 Gaughan
2002	53	Abortion	Teenagers and Abortion: The Effects of Social, Economic, and Neighborhood Factors	Many researchers have investigated the link between state policies and abortions. In contrast, little effort has been directed toward examining whether local policies and neighborhood characteristics are related to abortions. This paper examines whether factors such as the presence of an abortion provider in the county of residence, the number of family planning clinics in the county of residence, the number of doctors per woman in the county of residence, and local health care spending affect a minor's decision to abort a pregnancy. This study considers the impact of these variables on both the decision to get pregnant and, conditional on pregnancy, the decision to abort. The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health data set contains a contextual data file with information about abortion providers, health care access, and family planning clinics at the county level as well as detailed information on  neighborhood characteristics, peers, and friends.	Susan	L. Averett
2002	53	Abortion	Methodological Innovation on Studying Abortion: Developing an Alternative Quantitative Survey in India	This paper documents the methodological innovation in developing a quantitative methodology at the household level that can adequately address complex issues related to abortion behavior. ICRW, Washington and IIPS, Mumbai are jointly engaged in conducting and analyzing a community based quantitative survey of approximately 2300 women of reproductive age in Madhya Pradesh, India. The study addresses major gaps in current data and knowledge concerning Indian women's use of abortion with regard to the practice of legal, illegal, safe, and unsafe abortions; the level of demand for abortion, and; determinants, including lack of contraceptive availability, household decision processes, and son preference. The research team has successfully developed a large scale survey design that can address these complex issues by incorporating  narrative and multi-visit techniques from qualitative methodologies. The paper discusses the motivation behind this approach, its critical components, as well as the process, challenges and lessons learned in implementing it.	Anju	 Malhotra	Laura	 Nyblade	Ravi	K. Verma
2002	53	Abortion	Sex-Selective Abortions in India	Provisional estimates from the 2001 Census of India, which show unusually high sex ratios for young children in India, have sparked renewed concern about the widespread use of sex-selective abortions to satisfy parental preferences for sons. According to the 1998-99 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), the sex ratio at birth in India was abnormally high (108-122) in 18 out of the 26 Indian states. NFHS-2 data also permit an examination of the use of ultrasound and amniocentesis for determining the sex of fetuses. For India as a whole, the sex ratio at birth was 111.7 for women who had ultrasound, 122.2 for women who had amniocentesis, and 107.0 for women who did not have either of these procedures as part of an antenatal check-up. This paper uses the NFHS-2 survey data to quantify the use of sex determination techniques for fetuses and the extent of sex-selective abortions in India.	Fred	 Arnold	Sunita	 Kishor	T.K.	 Roy
2002	54	The Implications of Social Change for Family Attitudes and Behaviors: An International Panel	Changing Attitudes toward Family Issues in Argentina, 1980-2000	Using data from the World Values Survey (WVS) from the early 80s to mid-90s, this paper examines trends in Argentineans' values and beliefs towards family issues, including marriage, sex, divorce, abortion, childbearing and childrearing paying particular attention to gender differences. The period under study coincides with dramatic changes in the economy and the labor market, as well as in family behaviors. Our results show that there have been important shifts on family attitudes, with a significant increase in tolerance to divorce, abortion, single parenthood, and sexual freedom. At the same time, there is a high and increasing positive views towards marriage, and the need for kids to be raised in intact families. These shifts in the value system are not due to socioeconomic changes experienced by the population over the period under study and they have not been similar for men and women.	Georgina	 Binstock	Marcela	 Cerrutti
2002	54	The Implications of Social Change for Family Attitudes and Behaviors: An International Panel	Union Formation Experiences, Cohort Change, and Attitudes towards Family and Work	Recent period changes in values and attitudes may reflect either or both the causes or consequences of changing family formation experiences. We examine the link between attitudes and family formation experiences over individual and historical time by drawing on data three decades: the 1970s (from the NLS-72), 1980s (from High School and Beyond), and the 1990s (from NELS:88), and focus on a series of items which follow from the lead in, How important is each of the following to you?      Results suggest that marriage and cohabitation experiences cause important attitude changes, such that marriage - and sometimes cohabitation - increases the affinity to marriage and family institutions and to more gendered work roles.  Further, results suggest that the effects of these union formation experiences have changed in important ways over time.	Marin	 Clarkberg	Judith	 Rosenstein
2002	54	The Implications of Social Change for Family Attitudes and Behaviors: An International Panel	New Patterns of Household Formation in Eastern and Central Europe: Economic Crisis or Ideational Drift?	Many Eastern and Central European nations have experienced rapid demographic change in fertility and household formation patterns during the 1990s. Was this solely the byproduct of their economic crises or has there been a cultural component at work as well? Use is made of the 1999-2000 European Values Surveys for these countries to find out how individuals in various household positions are being sorted according to values orientations. Over 200 items are being tested for their discriminating power with respect to the sorting over the 8 household positions. Subsequently, correspondence analysis is used to plot the distances between the household positions and the net effects of the value items (net = after controls for age, age squared, gender, education and social stratification). The outcomes show a strong resemblance with the Western European ones, which lends support that similar ideational mechanisms are operating in Central and Eastern Europe as well.	Ron	 Lesthaeghe	Johan	 Surkyn
2002	54	The Implications of Social Change for Family Attitudes and Behaviors: An International Panel	Wage Work to Prepare for Marriage: Labor Force Entry for Young Women in Egypt	This paper explores values and attitudes related to work, marriage, and family among young wage workers in Egypt. We analyze data from two nationally representative labor  force surveys conducted in 1988 and 1998, along with in-depth interviews from a qualitative study of young working women in rural and urban Egypt. Rising material aspirations and associated costs appear to be at the root of rising age at marriage. Young couples are expected to accumulate enough resources to set up their own separate household before they  marry. This nuclear family form represents a radical departure from the recent past when a new couple  typically began married life as part of an extended household in the manner described by Hajnal's (1982) characterization of a joint household formation system. The paper concludes with discussion on the implications of women's work for family change.	Sajeda	 Amin	Nagah	 Al-Bassusi
2002	55	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health	Individual and Contextual Risks of Death among Race and Ethnic Groups in the United States	This paper examines the effects of both individual- and contextual-level factors on black/white and multiple Hispanic subgroup (Mexican-Americans, Puerto Ricans, and other Hispanic) differentials in adult (ages 18-64)  mortality. In addition, we use a new, innovative, and more appropriate geographic area - the very small area (VSA) - as our unit of analysis at the contextual level.      We employ the 1986-1997 National Health Interview Survey-National Death Index (NHIS-NDI) linked file and Cox proportional hazards models to reveal that higher mortality risks are associated with not only individual characteristics, but also neighborhood characteristics. Findings also indicate that percent foreign born in a neighborhood is protective of Hispanic subgroup mortality for Puerto Rican, Mexican-American, and other Hispanic adults in the 45-64 age category. In addition, Hispanics/Latinos ages 45-64 in neighborhoods with a high percent foreign born experience lower risks of mortality than other individuals even net of controls for individual-level nativity and socioeconomic status.	Stephanie	A. Bond Huie
2002	55	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health	Mortality among Aged Hispanic Americans: Past Evidence and New Results	Numerous studies have documented lower mortality rates at older ages among Hispanic Americans relative to non-Hispanic whites despite their lower socioeconomic status. This mortality advantage appears to be particularly pronounced for the foreign-born. This paper contributes to the literature on Hispanic mortality by: (1) providing a critical review of past evidence; (2) presenting new mortality estimates based on Social Security data for various Hispanic subgroups at ages 65 and above; and (3) comparing these new estimates to those obtained from other sources. A comparison of mortality estimates based on Social Security data with vital statistics and census-based estimates will help evaluate the accuracy of the latter for estimating mortality among various Hispanic subgroups in the United States.	Irma	T. Elo	Cassio	M. Turra	Bert	 Kestenbaum
2002	55	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health	The Relationship between Ethnicity, Socioeconomic Factors and Overweight: The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health	Obesity is a major public health issue, particularly among minority populations, contributing substantially to total U.S. mortality. Reducing racial/ethnic disparities in health is a major focus of U.S. public policy. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we examined the relationship of family income and parental education to overweight and the extent to which race/ethnic differences in SES account for disparities in overweight prevalence in white, black, Hispanic and Asian teens.  We project the effects on overweight prevalence of equalizing SES differences between groups.    Keeping adolescents in their same environments and changing only family income/parental education had a limited effect on disparities in overweight prevalence. One can not assume that the benefits of increased SES found among white adults will transfer to other sex-age-ethnic groups. Our findings suggest that efforts to reduce ethnic disparities in overweight must look beyond income and education.	Penny	 Gordon-Larsen	Linda	 Adair	Barry	M. Popkin
2002	55	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health	Racial Differences in Obesity and Educational Status	Obesity is related to health problems in adulthood including diabetes, arthritis, and heart disease. The prevalence of obesity varies across many demographic characteristics. In particular, obesity is inversely related to educational status. However, as the average educational level has increased in the U.S. population, the prevalence of obesity also has been increasing. Obesity is also related to race. African American women have the highest rates of obesity in the United States. Using data from the 1982 through 1996 NHIS we examine the role of educational status on body size. Have the educational differentials in obesity changed over time? Are they constant across race and gender? What are the implications for health and functioning?      Our analyses show that obesity has increased at all educational levels for both Caucasians and African Americans. Among those in younger cohorts, lower than average educational attainment appears to be more strongly related to obesity in recent cohorts.	Christine	 Himes	Sandra	L. Reynolds
2002	56	Paradoxes in Demographic Knowledge: Time, Space, and Levels of Analysis	The Creation of Demographic Facts and the Origins of China's One-Child Policy	In 1979, after 10 years of rapid fertility decline, China adopted a stricter policy encouraging all couples to have but one child. What made such a policy thinkable? Drawing on work in science studies on the social construction and political effects of scientific facts, this paper focuses on the role of China's population specialists in creating the demographic facts about the Chinese nation. It was these facts, and the rhetoric in which they were presented, that persuaded China's leaders that a one-child policy was the only choice if China was to avoid national catastrophe. The paper is based on documentary research in Chinese policy and demography archives, as well as interviews with Chinese policymakers and population specialists conducted over 15 years. The China case sheds important light on the humanly constructed nature of demographic findings and on the power of demographers in the making of population policy and political reality.	Susan	 Greenhalgh
2002	56	Paradoxes in Demographic Knowledge: Time, Space, and Levels of Analysis	Uncertainty as Knowledge: Exploring Public and Professional Discourses on Low Fertility	This paper explores how the social organization of demography's local scientific culture (Watkins 1993) helps shape demographic knowledge outside of the discipline. While recognizing that demographic knowledge is reproduced in new ways in its public circulation, my concern is how our discipline's scientific knowledge also derives many of its features from the way it organizes knowledge-producing communities (Swidler and Arditi 1994).     Analyzing public and professional debates over contemporary fertility trends in Europe and beyond, I describe how demography negotiates its presentation of scientific self (Gieryn 1996). On one hand, in the popular press, the TFR is commonly used to substantiate the alarming problem of low fertility. At the same time within disciplinary boundaries, demographers reveal uncertainty in how best to measure contemporary fertility. After describing public and professional divergence, I ask how our own disciplinary practices themselves shape public and professional knowledge.	Laura	 Stark
2002	56	Paradoxes in Demographic Knowledge: Time, Space, and Levels of Analysis	But We Are Not the Same: Units of Analysis in the Study of African Fertility	Ethnographic and demographic approaches to the study of fertility offer not only different results, but different kinds of results, applicable over different units of analysis. Focusing on the well-known correlation between schooling and fertility, this paper examines a case in which findings that apply to one unit of analysis are contradicted at another.     The paper uses original ethnographic field data to show the social-structural relationships between schooling and fertility among the Beti of southern Cameroon. Then, using the 1998 CDHS, the paper shows that the national-level correlation is heavily mediated through ethnic affiliation, and that a large proportion of the educated are Beti. Thus, an adequate explanation of the correlation in Cameroon must account both for the social practices of the Beti and for the processes of selection to that lead to their over-representation among the educated. Understandings of African fertility will require a multi-level and multi-disciplinary approach.	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2002	56	Paradoxes in Demographic Knowledge: Time, Space, and Levels of Analysis	Mayans, Caciques, Farmers, and Forests: Revisiting Migration Theories' Relevance to Frontier Expansion	This paper examines how individual decision-making within local socio-political processes helped open Mexico's agricultural frontier. Research on frontiers stresses the national policies which frame colonization and the local economies and ecologies which affect settler land use.  Transnational theories emphasize social structure, social identities, and individual decision-making in migratory outcomes. I use both approaches to delineate disjointed colonization processes in Calakmul, Mexico. Calakmul's settlers had to work through a series of sometimes non-comparable issues in order to establish long-term farming operations. In the paper, I describe how people used ethnicity, kinship, and a concept of justice that stressed individual willpower to build a new social structure and shape access to resources. I also challenge a truism of Calakmul's colonization. Local politicians assert that, before the late 1980s, government agents were absent from Calakmul. A transnational perspective reveals how indirect rule and specific forms of governance can figure in frontier colonization.	Nora	 Haenn
2002	57	Projecting and Assessing the Demographic Impact of AIDS	Impact of HIV on Child Mortality: Results from a Multi-Center Study	Data on 26,000 child-years of observation from longitudinal, community-based studies in Uganda, Tanzania and Malawi, classified by maternal HIV status and survival, were analyzed using multivariate hazard models with time-varying co-variates. Hazard ratios and life-table functions are calculated for each study and for pooled data. Children of HIV+ mothers faced twice the risk of dying as children of HIV- mothers, maternal death increased the risk of child death by a factor of four, independently of HIV status. Elevated mortality risks were experienced in the year preceding the mother's death, as well as when orphaned.  Mortality impacts of maternal HIV and survival are concentrated at ages under 3. Child mortality estimates based on retrospective reports by surviving HIV positive mothers under-estimate the mortality of all children born to such women by around 8%. Competing-risk methods are proposed for obtaining estimates of mortality by infection status of the child.	Basia	 Zaba	Michael	D. Bracher	Sian	 Floyd	Mia	 Crampin	Jessica	 Nakiyingi	Mark	 Urassa	Raphaeli	 Issingo	Andy	 Sloggett
2002	57	Projecting and Assessing the Demographic Impact of AIDS	Estimating and Projecting the Size and Impact of HIV/AIDS Epidemic: The UNAIDS Reference Group Approach	Every two years UNAIDS prepares estimates of the HIV/AIDS epidemic for every country in the world. In preparation for the 2001 round of estimates, the UNAIDS Reference Group on Models, Estimates and Projections developed a new approach and updated many projection assumptions. The new approach includes (1) a new model (Epidemic Projection Package) for estimating and projecting HIV prevalence from HIV surveillance data; (2) updated assumptions about rates of progression from infection to death for adults and children, the fertility impact of HIV, and the distribution of HIV infection by age and sex; (3) an updated version of the Spectrum software to integrate HIV and population projections with the latest demographic estimates from the UN Population Division and (4) a new methodology for estimating maternal, paternal and double AIDS orphans. This paper describes the methodology, assumptions and results from this new approach.	John	 Stover	Karen	A. Stanecki
2002	57	Projecting and Assessing the Demographic Impact of AIDS	Projecting Numbers of Orphans in the Presence of an AIDS Epidemic	This paper describes a method used for estimating the number of maternal orphans, incorporating the effects of HIV on both fertility and mortality. The method also allows for differences in paediatric HIV survival (according to mode of infection), and for improving non-HIV childhood mortality over time, making use of the ASSA2000 suite of models. In addition the number of dual orphans (i.e., children that have lost both parents) is estimated. The model is applied to South Africa in detail as well as to a number of other sub-Saharan African countries. The model produces results which are lower than other models, but on the basis of comparison with the results from DHSs and the methods underlying other models it is argued that these results are reasonable. In addition the model is used to anticipate the impact of sexual behavioral change and interventions (such as antiretroviral treatment) on the number of orphans.	Leigh	 Johnson	Rob	 Dorrington
2002	57	Projecting and Assessing the Demographic Impact of AIDS	The Demographic Impact of HIV Medication Programs	The HIV pandemic in parts of Africa is on the verge of entering a new phase, one characterized by the increasing use of recently developed medications. In this paper, I  produce a new approach to forecasting the demographic impact of these new medications, and apply it to Botswana.     The model disaggregates people by age, sex, education, years since infection, and susceptibility status. The demographic impact of a medication program depends on a number of factors including the effects of the medication on reducing infectability, and on its effects on the riskiness of sexual behavior.      The paper shows the sensitivity of Botswana's population to the parameters of the model. It also considers the possible offsetting effects of increases in the riskiness of sexual behavior and the effects of the medications. This analysis shows that the effects of a medication program diminish quickly over time as the number of medicated people increases.	Warren	C. Sanderson
2002	58	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Child Labor, Child Schooling, and Fertility in Rural Ghana: A Multilevel Analysis	This study examines the effects of community level opportunities for child labor and child schooling on recent fertility and contraceptive use in rural Ghana while controlling for other individual household and community determinants of fertility. The data come from the 1987 and 1988 Ghana Living Standard Measurement Surveys and the 1984 Ghana population census. My analyses find that community level measures of children's roles are important determinants of recent fertility and contraceptive use even when other powerful determinants of fertility are included in the analyses. The proportions of a district's children  in unpaid family employment, self-employment and wage employment are all positively related to individual women's recent fertility and negatively related to their contraceptive use. The proportion of a district's children in school is negatively related to recent fertility but positively related to contraceptive use at the individual level.	Kofi	D.  Benefo
2002	58	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Explaining an African Fertility Mystery: Below Replacement Fertility in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia	The total fertility rate in 2000 was 5.9 children per woman in the whole of Ethiopia and 1.9 children per woman in Addis Ababa. A striking aspect of the apparent fertility decline in Addis Ababa is that it occurred in the absence of any policy decisions instituted at the national level that could account for such a dramatic fall in fertility. There are no comprehensive family planning programs organized by the government. Is the decline in fertility due to contraceptives provided by private organizations and markets? Findings from this study indicate that a decline in fertility in Addis Ababa in fact did occur, but to less of an extent than the recorded TFR in the DHS. Individuals and couples in Addis Ababa are delaying marriage and postponing births, accounting for the greatest part of the fertility decline, and have begun to use contraceptives.	Dennis	 Hogan	Amson	 Sibanda	David	 Lindstrom	Zewdu	 Woubalem
2002	58	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Role of Policy Environment in Fertility Change in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Case of Kenya and Malawi	During the 1960s-1980s global population actors such as the United Nations and the World Bank urged third world governments to adopt population policies in order to contain rapid population growth. This paper compares the responses of Kenya and Malawi, two countries with quite different policy histories and demographic profiles, to these international pressures. We describe the evolution of policy using interviews with Kenyans and Malawians who participated in developing the policies. We also describe the process of change in fertility-related behavior and its relationship to program indicators using data from national surveys conducted between 1978 and 1998, and longitudinal survey data collected in rural Kenya and Malawi between 1995 and 2001. We conclude that ideational change and an enabling socio-economic environment for programs, rather than the adoption of a population policy per se, are the most critical factors driving the timing and pace of fertility transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa.	Eliya	M. Zulu	Chiweni	E. Chimbwete	Susan	 Watkins	Gloria	 Chepngeno
2002	58	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Is the Importance of Education for Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa Substantially Underestimated When Community Effects Are Ignored?	Discrete-time hazard models for first- and higher-order births are estimated from DHS data for 22 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa for the 1990s. It is found that, among women with the same education, fertility decreases with increasing average educational level in the neighborhood (DHS cluster). When the aggregate variable is left out, some of its effect is captured by the individual variable, but only a small part. For example, a simulation based on a model including only individual education reveals that average fertility for these 22 countries would have been 0.52 lower if education were expanded from the current level in the region to that in Kenya. However, according to a model where also average education is included, the drop would have been 1.00, of which 0.38 is the individual effect. A considerable aggregate contribution is estimated even when several potential determinants of education included.	Oystein	 Kravdal
2002	59	Child and Youth Well-Being in Developing Countries	The Hidden Costs of Ethnic Conflict: Decomposing Trends in Educational Outcomes of Young Kosovars	Using the 2001 Kosovo LSMS data, this paper examines cohort differences in exposure to the ethnically-segmented education system to estimate its effects on post-primary educational outcomes of Albanian youth defined in terms of enrolment in secondary education. The first cohort includes individuals who entered secondary education before 1991, when the parallel education system was initiated. The second includes individuals who entered secondary school in the last ten years under the ethnically-segmented education system and during the recent conflict.    Our results suggest that the last decade of ethnic tension has claimed a substantial toll on the educational outcomes of the young male Albanian Kosovars. In addition to declines in their enrolment rates in secondary education, if enrolled, they are expected to complete one less year in education. However, the parallel system has encouraged secondary school enrollment for girls, but with a sharp decline in the expected numbers of years completed.	Soumya	 Alva	Edmundo	 Murrugarra	Pierella	 Paci
2002	59	Child and Youth Well-Being in Developing Countries	Changes in Use of Health Services during Indonesia's Economic Crisis	This paper uses panel data from the 1997 and 1998 rounds of the Indonesian Family Life Survey to examine changes in the health sector in Indonesia during the first year of the economic crisis. Changes in the characteristics of health facilities themselves were substantial. Prices rose at public and private sector sources of care, while public facilities experienced drug stock outages with increasing frequency. Community health posts also experienced changes for the worse, particularly with respect to the availability of supplies and supplementary food. These changes are related to use of care by adults and children, which generally declined between 1997 and 1998. Declines in use are also related to characteristics of the individuals themselves, such as age, and to socioeconomic characteristics of the households.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Bondan	 Sikoki	Wayan	 Suriastini	Duncan	 Thomas
2002	59	Child and Youth Well-Being in Developing Countries	Maternal Education and Child Nutritional Status in Bolivia: Finding the Links	This study models various pathways linking maternal education and child nutritional status in Bolivia, using both a national sample and a regional sample of women with children.  Pathways examined include increased socioeconomic power, knowledge, modern attitudes towards health care, increased autonomy, and reproductive behaviors.      Based on data from the 1998 Demographic and Health Survey, as well as the 2000 Family Interaction and Child Well-being Survey, we use logistic regression techniques to model the intervening effects of these pathways and determine the proportion of the maternal education effect explained by each.     We find that socioeconomic power is the primary mechanism linking maternal education and child health.  In addition, health knowledge, attitudes towards modern health care, and increased autonomy also play a weaker role as intervening factors. Reproductive behaviors is the weakest link between maternal education and child health, but it has an effect on child health independent of maternal education.	Michelle	Bellessa  Frost	David	W. Haas	Renata	 Forste
2002	59	Child and Youth Well-Being in Developing Countries	Economic Crisis Impacts on Children: Evidence from Indonesia	We examine impacts of the economic crisis on child outcomes in Indonesia using 2 waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, 1997 and 2000. We focus on standards of living, and non-income measures of well-being such as schooling enrollments, physical measures of child health (such as height, weight, and hemoglobin), and child utilization of health facilities.    We use IFLS2, fielded in 1997, immediately before the crisis began in Indonesia, and IFLS3, a brand new wave of IFLS that was fielded on the full sample in 2000. IFLS2 contains over 7,500 households and IFLS3 over 10,000 (the increase caused by some households splitting off into new households).      IFLS3 has very high follow-up rates, similar to the success of IFLS2. Some 94.5% of initial IFLS1 households (IFLS1 was fielded in 1993) plus households that split off in either 1997 or 1998, were found and interviewed in 2000.	John	 Strauss	Kathleen	 Beegle	Agus	 Dwiyanto	Bondan	 Sikoki		 Sukamdi
2002	60	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Regional Variation in Racial Intermarriage and Group Boundaries	Current assimilation studies examine variation over time in the strength of group boundaries without describing the sources of this variation. This paper examines regional differences in U.S. racial intermarriage to identify sources of variation in the strength of group boundaries. I rely on Blumer's group position framework which locates the hardening of group boundaries in threats to a historically determined sense of the appropriate hierarchical arrangement of groups. Worsening economic conditions and increases in the sizes of minority groups are expected to lead to stronger group boundaries and less intermarriage. This paper uses the one in six Long Form Sample of the 1990 U.S. Census to allow for a high level of detail with respect to the classification of groups. This paper also provides more accurate descriptions of intermarriage patterns by controlling for the population composition of local areas instead of treating the entire U.S. as a single marriage market.	Vincent	K. Fu
2002	60	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Relationship Trajectories of Cohabiting Parents in the Fragile Families Study: The Role of Gender Conflict in Explaining Racial and Ethnic Differences	Using emerging data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study, our paper analyzes the union transitions (to marriage or breaking up) of unmarried, cohabiting couples, who have just had a baby together.  Black couples were much more likely to break up within one year of their baby's birth and much less likely to marry, compared with white and Hispanic couples.  Taking advantage of the availability of data on couples in this study, our focus is on the role gender conflict plays in racial and ethnic differences in union transitions.  Based on prior research, we expect black women to place a greater emphasis on the role of the male breadwinner compared with white and Hispanic women.  We expect the gap between expectations and capacities to help explain racial and ethnic differences in relationship trajectories.	Kristen	 Harknett	Sara	 McLanahan
2002	60	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Race Differences in Nonresident Father Involvement: New Findings from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth	Although the vast majority of African American children will live apart from their biological father, we currently have very limited information on nonresident father involvement among African Americans. This study investigates race differences in patterns of paternal involvement, focusing specifically on African American nonresident fathers. The analysis is based on nonresident fathers from the 1998 and 2000 rounds of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). These data provide important new information on African American and White nonresident fathers' perceptions of the father role as well as the quantity and quality of contact with absent children. Additionally, we exploit the longitudinal nature of this data set and examine race differences in paternal involvement over time. Continued lack of attention to African American nonresident fathers is problematic given that nonresident fatherhood is such a prominent feature of African American family life.	Susan	D. Stewart
2002	60	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Non-Marital Fertility among Mexican Origin Women	This research examines race/ethnic differences in non-marital fertility, focusing on Mexican Origin and Mexican-American women using data from the 1995 NSFG supplemented with contextual level data. It investigates how rates change once life-course, demographic, and economic variables are controlled and it explores ways in which the cultural and economic environments interact to shape these patterns. Rates of non-marital fertility for all Mexican origin women fall in between those for white and black women, with rates for the Mexican born remaining relatively high throughout the twenties. Fertility within cohabiting unions for Mexican born women accounts for the majority of the excess in non-marital fertility relative to whites. U.S. born Mexican women have similar levels of fertility within cohabiting unions relative to whites, but higher levels outside of cohabiting unions. Though neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage is significantly associated with non-marital fertility, it does little to explain the race/ethnic difference in rates.	Elizabeth	M. Wildsmith	Kelly	 Raley
2002	61	Estimates and Projections for Small Areas	The Evaluation of Small Area Estimates Produced by the Private Sector	The paper reports the evaluation of the 2000 population and household estimates produced by Claritas Inc. for block groups and larger areas nationwide. Several measures are examined, including mean absolute percent error, bias, error distribution, and the extent to which estimates improve on the use of the previous census counts. Because private sector suppliers did not produce block group estimates until after 1990, this is the first description of error rates for nationwide estimates at this level. At the census tract level, where the private sector has produced estimates for over 25 years, the 2000 evaluation is compared with similar evaluations against the 1990 and 1980 censuses. A separate evaluation of pre-control estimates describes the extent to which the final tract level estimates were improved (or not) by adjustment to control totals based on place and county estimates produced by the Census Bureau.	Ken	 Hodges	Andrea	 Poveromo	Fred	 Wilcox
2002	61	Estimates and Projections for Small Areas	Criteria for Selecting a Suitable Method for Producing Post 2000 County Population Estimates in Illinois	Accuracy is the most important factor among the criteria in the selection of a method for producing population estimates. The following three sets of controlled county estimates and another set of uncontrolled estimates for the Administrative Records method were used for 2000: the Administrative Records method; the Ratio Correlation method; and an average of these.    The 2000 estimates were adjusted for undercount. We compared performance of these methods with the performance of two naive models - i) do nothing by using the 1990 population as 2000 estimate and ii) constant growth rate by applying the growth rate between 1980 and 1990 to the 1990 population to obtain a 2000 estimate. We analyzed the data using mean absolute percent errors, mean algebraic percent errors and median absolute percent errors. Overall, the adjusted controlled Administrative Records method performed best.	Mohammed	 Shahidullah	Mark	 Flotow
2002	61	Estimates and Projections for Small Areas	An Evaluation of State Population Projections by Age	Many studies have evaluated the forecast accuracy of projections of total population size, but few have considered the accuracy of projections by age group. For many policy purposes, however, the relevant variable is a specific age group rather than the total population. Examples include children for projecting school enrollment, women of childbearing age for projecting births, and the elderly for projecting Social Security expenditures.    In this paper we evaluate the accuracy of several sets of age-group projections for states produced by the U.S. Census Bureau during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. We compare the accuracy of these projections with the accuracy of a simpler version of the cohort-component method (Hamilton-Perry). We close with several conclusions regarding the accuracy and bias of age-group projections and the potential costs and benefits of using simpler projection methods.	Stanley	K. Smith	Jeff	 Tayman
2002	61	Estimates and Projections for Small Areas	Estimating the Size of the Hispanic Population for High-Growth States in Census Off-Years	In the 1990s, the Hispanic population grew at an unprecedented rate in many states that had not been traditional destinations for Hispanic migrants. While state agencies often acknowledged this growth, Census Bureau projections and estimates dated August 2000 were on average 38% below final census 2000 figures for the ten states with the highest percent Hispanic population growth. The discrepancy between estimates and reality has been a problem for state agencies trying to budget for service provision to their Latino constituencies. Yet, their use of non-census data often prompts critics to dismiss their estimates as politically motivated.    This paper tests, for the ten highest percent growth states, a simple, politically neutral method to make annual, state-level estimates of the Hispanic population in census off-years. Using readily available data from state birth records, the CPS, and the census, this method yielded 1999 year-end estimates that were closer to census 2000 figures.	Melanie	 Wasserman
2002	62	Transnational Networks, Migration and Gender	Gendered Experiences, Gendered Perceptions: Transnationalism and Integration Patterns among Latino Immigrants in the U.S.	The gender dimension has been absent in the traditional literature on international migration. Recent ethnographic studies, however, suggest that immigration is experienced differently by men and women. This paper analyzes the processes of immigrant incorporation and transnationalism as gendered experiences.    We analyze the experiences of male and female Dominican,   Salvadoran and Colombian immigrants in the U.S. We first build measures of transnationalism and incorporation.  Second, we elaborate a model causally linking incorporation to transnationalism and other variables such as socioeconomic status and time in the U.S. The results from the latent variable structural equation model suggest some important differences in the experiences of Latino/a immigrants. For example, experiences of discrimination significantly increases the probabilities of engaging in transnational activities for men, but not so for women. Similarly, socioeconomic status is a significant predictor of men's closeness to American peers, but is not significant for women.	José	 Itzigsohn	Silvia	Elena  Giorguli Saucedo
2002	62	Transnational Networks, Migration and Gender	Ties That Bind: Gender, Social Capital, and Economic Outcomes among Mexican Immigrants in the U.S.	With few exceptions, most sociologists have found that social capital is a beneficial tool in the process of immigrant adaptation. I argue, however, that much of the past work has been built upon erroneous assumptions and samples unrepresentative of female migrants. Therefore, the generalizability of these past results reporting highly beneficial wage effects of social capital are questionable. In particular, I argue that social capital may actually perpetuate traditional gender roles, and thus gender-based wage stratification within ethnic communities.      By using Mexican Migration Project data, I am able to triangulate the past qualitative research regarding the relationship of gender, social ties, and economic outcomes, and provide one of the only quantitative analyses of the topic, which examines gender differences in the presence, composition, utilization, and economic returns to social ties, and explores possible mechanisms through which these gender differences may be operating.	Gretchen	 Livingston
2002	62	Transnational Networks, Migration and Gender	Migration, Remittances, and Gender in the Context of Development: The Case of Thailand	In developing countries, migration often generates flows of resources from migrants to their households of origin. This paper investigates factors affecting migrants' remittance behavior. Using the data from the 1992 National Migration Survey (NMS) of Thailand, it examines 1) the migrant's propensity to remit, and 2) the volume of remittances made per migrant. The study focuses on individual as well as household socio-economic and demographic characteristics as potential determinants of migrant remittance behavior.     The analyses reveal that, in Thailand, making remittances to parents is a common behavior among migrant children. Female migrants make significant contributions to their origin households by sending remittances. Poor economic status of origin households is also an important explanatory variable for the out-migration of its members and their remittance behavior. The study confirms that remittances made by out-migrants are crucial resources for many households to overcome capital constraints or to ensure their survival.	Keiko	 Osaki
2002	62	Transnational Networks, Migration and Gender	Family Structure, Market Development and Remittances	The remittances narrative as postulated by the New Economics of Labor Migration (NELM) makes two assumptions that match the western Mexican setting.  The first assumption is explicit: sending regions feature underdeveloped markets.  The second is implied: a cohesive, traditional family is needed to make sense of remittances. While NELM has found strong support from research on Mexican migration to the United States, the remittances narrative may not be readily applicable to other settings.    We explore this idea by focusing on the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. Instead of a traditional family, both share a Caribbean family type.  Puerto Rico's developed markets also contradict NELM.  Hence I predict a hierarchy of remitting behaviors in which Mexicans stand first, Puerto Ricans last and Dominicans in between.  Using data from the University of Pennsylvania migration projects, we find strong evidence of this hierarchy in both sending behavior and amount remitted.	Mariano	 Sana
2002	63	Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Data	Qualitative/Quantitative Synergies in a Random-Assignment Program Evaluation	This paper describes the productive synergy that resulted from a mixed qualitative/quantitative approach to evaluating program impacts of New Hope, an anti-poverty program developed and implemented in Milwaukee, Wisconsin in the mid-1990s. An overarching conclusion is that the combination of the two methodologies can indeed enrich evaluation efforts. The assessment of New Hope was enhanced by decisions to randomly sample qualitative cases from the larger population of New Hope participants and to train graduate student research assistants to both conduct the qualitative interviews and analyze the quantitative data. The mixed method approach was helpful for understanding program impacts estimated in the quantitative data and for identifying subgroups for which program impacts were the strongest. The n=43 qualitative data were helpful for identifying some but not all kinds of experimental impacts. Case studies from the qualitative data provided important context for the evaluation report and were also used to generate measures for a follow-up survey.	Greg	J. Duncan
2002	63	Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Data	Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches to Understand the Nutrition Transition in India	We explore differences in body mass index, diet, and lifestyle factors between women of varying socioeconomic status in rural and urban South India.     We use NFHS2 data, as well as in-depth interviews and focus groups with women in Karnataka. We model predictors of overweight (BMI > 25) and underweight (BMI       	Paula	 Griffiths	Margaret	 Bentley
2002	63	Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Data	An Integrated Economic and Social Analysis to Assess the Impact of Green Revolution Technologies on Poverty in Bangladesh	Green revolution technology has contributed to increased agricultural production, but questions have been raised concerning its exact impact on poverty reduction. This study undertakes an integrated economic and social analysis to assess the impacts of such technologies on poverty in rural Bangladesh.     The research builds upon a rich pre-existing multi-round household survey.  It is supplemented with new qualitative and participatory data collection which enables us to focus on a broader concept of poverty - one which encompasses not only income and expenditure, but also vulnerability and capabilities. Issues not easily addressed in a quantitative study - such as perceptions of poverty, livelihoods strategies, the institutional setting, and technology dissemination pathways - are informed by the qualitative data.      Besides the main focus of the research effort is to contribute to the development of capacity for assessing program impact using an integrated set of tools from a range of disciplines.	Kelly	 Hallman	David	 Lewis	Suraiya	 Begum
2002	63	Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Data	Widows and Professional Inheritors: Understanding AIDS Risk Perceptions in Kenya	Among the Luo of Kenya, widows have traditionally been inherited, remarried to a local clansman, who supports them socially and financially.  Uninherited women, in contrast, need numerous sexual partners to support themselves economically.      In the era of AIDS, we would expect uninherited widows to perceive themselves at higher risk of AIDS.  Contrary to this hypothesis, regression results from a survey of the Luo find that inherited widows are significantly more likely to perceive themselves at high risk of AIDS. Further qualitative investigation explains this finding:  Inherited widows fear they have contracted AIDS from professional inheritors, young men who inherit numerous women in order to acquire the wealth of deceased husbands.  The prevalence of professionals is believed to have increased in recent years, and these men are presumed to be particularly risky.  While uninherited widows engage in unprotected sexual relations with multiple partners, they are not as fearful of contracting AIDS.	Nancy	 Luke
2002	64	Maternal and Infant Health in LDCs	Covariates of Child Mortality Clustering in African Families	After decades of sustained child mortality reductions, infant and early childhood mortality levels in Africa remain high. This can partly be ascribed to the concentration of child mortality within particular families, communities or geographic localities. Strong mortality clustering is indicative of marked social inequality and of an unequal distribution of health and health-related resources and infrastructures. It also signifies a concentration of nutritional and sanitary behaviors harmful to the good health and longevity of children. Finally, it likely points to the existence of particular genetic problems in certain families, or environmental problems within specific communities. Using nationally representative family-level data from all sub-regions of Africa, two important findings emerge from this study. First, levels of mortality have generally declined in all countries over time, and as mortality decreases, mortality clustering tends to follow the same trend. Second, bio-demographic covariates have a more important effect on familial mortality clustering risks than socio-economic ones.	Barthelemy	 Kuate-Defo	Khassoum	 Diallo
2002	64	Maternal and Infant Health in LDCs	Socio-Economic Differentials in Mortality Reduction Associated with Measles Vaccination: Evidence from Matlab, Bangladesh	Studies convincingly show that measles vaccination reduces overall childhood mortality, nearly as much as 40% or higher. There is, however, a strong socio-economic differential in the mortality impact of measles vaccination intervention, with the poorest and most vulnerable children disproportionately benefiting in terms of improved survival. Using longitudinal data from rural Bangladesh this paper evaluates the mortality reduction resulting from targeted measles vaccination in different socio-economic group. Our results show that measles vaccination of poorer children (lowest 20% on a socio-economic status scale) reduces mortality by 34%, compared to only 3% among the upper 20 percentile children. Overall, immunization of the lowest 30% children is equivalent to the vaccination of upper 70% in reducing overall mortality. The paper also compares population attributable fractions (PAF) of childhood mortality reduction by vaccination in different socio-economic groups. The results make a compelling argument for targeted vaccination in settings where coverage rates are low.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed	Michael	 Koenig
2002	64	Maternal and Infant Health in LDCs	Weaning Initiation Patterns and Subsequent Linear Growth Progression among Children Aged 2-4 Years in India: Does the Universal Breastfeeding Policy Apply to India?	Reliance on full breastfeeding alone for a longer time could have deleterious nutritional and health implications at later stages of children's life. We investigated the association between timing of weaning and stunting of children in India, using the data from National Family Health Survey, 1992-93. Logistic analyses were employed on a pooled data comprising of one state each from 6 regions of India (N=6285) with height status of children aged 2-4 years as the dependent variable. Timing of weaning was considered the independent variable. Children weaned at age 6 months and after 6 months were more likely to be stunted at later ages compared with those weaned before 6 months (p       	Sabu	S. Padmadas	Inge	 Hutter
2002	64	Maternal and Infant Health in LDCs	Nutrition, Seasonality, and Morbidity among Children in Rural Pakistan	Many studies have demonstrated that the nutritional status of small children is affected by morbidity and infections. Using data from Pakistan Panel Survey conducted in rural areas of Pakistan, this paper tries to identify the mechanism through which seasonality has an impact on morbidity patterns that in turn affect the nutritional status of children.    Usually in children, the nutritional status is determined by anthropometric measures, which in turn is affected by factors such as incidence of morbidity and infection. The longitudinal nature of the data allows investigating the effects of two major seasons of Pakistan (i.e., summer and winter) on morbidity patterns and a consequence on nutritional status of children. Both random-effects and marginal models are used to analyze such effects.	Faiza	 Tabassum	Zoe	 Matthews	Nyovani	 Madise	Peter	W.F. Smith
2002	65	Is Health Policy Economic Policy?	The Impact on Late-Life Health of Early-Life Events and Conditions		James	W. Vaupel	Gabriele	 Doblhammer
2002	65	Is Health Policy Economic Policy?	Socio-Economic Status, Race-Ethnicity and Health across the Life Course		Robert	M. Hauser
2002	65	Is Health Policy Economic Policy?	Health and Labor Outcomes over the Life Course		Duncan	 Thomas
2002	65	Is Health Policy Economic Policy?	Is Medical Care Worth the Cost?		David	 Cutler
2002	66	Demographic Consequences of Socioeconomic Change in the Formerly Planned Economies of Europe and Asia	Changing Patterns of Fertility Behavior in a Time of Social and Economic Change: Evidence from Mongolia	In 1989, after a long period of socialist rule, Mongolia initiated a democratization process of its political system together with a transition towards a market economy. This paper examines how changes in socio-economic conditions in Mongolia have affected fertility patterns in recent times. It also provides an outline of changes that have taken place in terms of pro-natalist policies. The study is based on data from the Reproductive Health Survey of Mongolia (RHSM) conducted in 1998. In terms of economic activity we find an inverse, although weak, relationship for older cohorts. This is in strong contrast to the young cohort, for which the economic downturn has had a strongly depressing effect on fertility. We also find important effects of micro level variables, including education and housing. Our findings suggest that the fertility decline observed for the older cohorts are very much part of the first demographic transition, in which the collapse of pro-natalist policies has been influential.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Gereltuya	 Altankhuyag
2002	66	Demographic Consequences of Socioeconomic Change in the Formerly Planned Economies of Europe and Asia	Subfecundity in the Republic of Moldova: Prevalence and Associated Demographic and Health Factors	The successor states to the former Soviet Union have experienced dramatic declines in fertility during the 1990s. The high abortion rates found in many of the successor states, as well as the prevalence of pelvic infection caused by abortion or childbirth complications and sexually transmitted infections, raise concern about women's future childbearing capacity.    The present study reviews the literature on definitions and estimates of infertility, then examines estimates from the former Soviet region and other populations and evidence on predictors of infertility. Data from the 1997 Moldova Reproductive Health Survey are used to develop estimates of current infertility in various subgroups of the population of Moldova. The effects of abortions, pelvic inflammatory disease, and past IUD use on current infertility are assessed, controlling for several other demographic and health variables that have been shown to be associated with infertility.	Cheryl	C. Sawyer
2002	66	Demographic Consequences of Socioeconomic Change in the Formerly Planned Economies of Europe and Asia	An Analysis of Steady Life Partner and Married Respondents in East and West Germany in 1994: The ISSP Gender and Changing Family Module	In socialist Eastern Europe, universal marriage at young ages was commonplace. The 1990s saw a change in the political structures of countries in Eastern Europe, which had a dramatic effect on the lives of individuals. The timing of major life events has been altered in response to the evolving political makeup. This research examines the situation of cohabitation and marriage patterns and attitudes in both a former socialist and a market-based economy, using the geo-political boundaries of the former East and West Germany. I present a cross-sectional picture of respondents' attitudes toward cohabitation and marriage in 1994. Using the 1994 ISSP Family and Changing Gender Roles II Module for Germany, I explore attitudes toward marriage and cohabitation by gender and region of Germany to develop separate models to depict who will cohabitate in East and West Germany, each controlling for a variety of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.	Linda	M. Hooper
2002	66	Demographic Consequences of Socioeconomic Change in the Formerly Planned Economies of Europe and Asia	The Migration Response to Economic Shock: Lessons from Kazakhstan	This paper investigates the determinants of migration between Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation for the period 1995-1999. The paper draws on a unique vital registration database of all legal migration between the two countries. These data are reconciled between the two statistical agencies, and provide information on monthly migration flows by age and (rural or urban) location. This time series enables us to estimate both responsiveness and lag structure of those responses to macroeconomic shocks for different groups, using a detailed, consistent economic database for the two countries.    Migration responds very quickly to clear news such as exchange rate shocks, and threshold effects  -  migration responds abnormally to dramatic events, such as the August 1998 Russian financial crisis. Investment and construction activity have longer lags, while real wage effects are greatest, but have the longest lags. Differentials in real pension rates have small effects even for elderly migrants.	Charles	 Becker	Yerbolat	 Mussabek	Ai-Gul	 Seitenova	Dina	 Urzhumova
2002	67	Demography of Crime and Incarceration	The Space-Time Dynamics of Criminal Violence and Population Change	Despite the longstanding interest in the demographic context of criminal violence, our understanding of the relationship between violent crime and population dynamics is limited in two important respects: most research is based on cross-sectional designs, and models are commonly based on the assumption of unidirectional causality.       To address these limitations, we analyze annual data on homicide, robbery, and population for U.S. counties, 1977-1998.   This design is particularly well suited for tracing the spatial imprint of criminal violence and disentangling the causal processes linking violence with population change.  The geographic and temporal detail provides statistical leverage for identifying reciprocal causal processes using newly developed econometric techniques for Granger causality modeling in pooled cross-sectional time series.      By applying this innovative method, our analyses shed new light on one of the core substantive issues in sociological criminology - the space-time dynamics of population change and violent crime.	Steven	F. Messner	Glenn	D. Deane	Luc	 Anselin	Jon	G. Bernburg
2002	67	Demography of Crime and Incarceration	Crime and the Hispanic Paradox: Ethnic and Immigrant Differences in Adolescent Offending	This paper examines a neglected aspect of the so-called Hispanic Paradox - the idea that some Hispanics, particularly first-generation Mexican immigrants, have positive health outcomes despite having high rates of poverty and related socioeconomic risk factors. Thus far, evidence of such a paradox has derived primarily from research on infant and adult mortality and low birth weight.  In this paper, we examine whether such a paradox holds for crime as well by examining two waves of data on adolescent cohorts from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods. We examine possible explanations for group differences in offending that pertain to both individual-level factors, such as family structure, parental criminality, and acculturation, and neighborhood-level factors, such as immigrant concentration, collective efficacy, and neighborhood norms.	Jeffrey	D. Morenoff	Tamara	 Johnson
2002	67	Demography of Crime and Incarceration	The Effects of a Criminal Record on Employment Opportunities for Black and White Job Seekers	This research investigates the employment of ex-offenders in Milwaukee, exploring the ways in which criminal records increasingly contribute to the economic disenfranchisement of low-wage workers. The project is comprised of two studies. The first, an employer audit, tests the effect of a criminal record on actual hiring decisions and assesses the extent to which this effect varies by race of applicant. The second, a survey of employers, gathers self-reported information about the considerations and concerns of employers in hiring entry-level workers with criminal records. Together, these two projects provide new information about the obstacles facing ex-offenders in the labor market, and offer a unique approach to the study of low-wage employment.	Devah	I. Pager
2002	67	Demography of Crime and Incarceration	Prison vs. Probation: The Effect of Sentence Type on Recidivism	Over the last three decades, states have responded to increasing crime rates by enacting ever stricter punishments for a wide variety of offenses. While harsher sentences presumably have a deterrent effect, and certainly prevent offenders from reoffending while they are in prison, relatively little emphasis has been placed on rehabilitation. Consequently, many ex-offenders continue to commit crimes upon release. This study evaluates the effect of prison vs. probation on criminal recidivism rates in Florida. Changes in Florida's sentencing guidelines in the mid-1990s provide a natural experiment that can be used to estimate the causal effect of sentence type on subsequent recidivism. Combining these results with figures on the public costs of imprisonment and probation yields an estimate of the cost-effectiveness of these different sentence types.	Aaron	J. Sparrow
2002	68	AIDS, Family Planning and Reproductive Health	Stimulated and Frustrated Demand for Female Sterilization among HIV-Positive Parturients in Brazil: Evidence from a Prospective Study	This paper explores the sterilization intentions of HIV-infected pregnant women and the realization of those intentions postpartum in two cities in Brazil. We find that while a significant proportion of women in both cities intended to become sterilized after delivery, where they live is crucial as to whether they achieved this desire postpartum. A much higher proportion of women in Sao Paulo became sterilized postpartum compared to a tiny proportion of women in Porto Alegre. Qualitative data show that, in fact, sterilization is an option encouraged in clinics in Sao Paulo. In Porto Alegre, on the other hand, desire for postpartum sterilization may even be underestimated.  Some women, knowing the difficulties of obtaining a tubal ligation, may have preferred a postpartum sterilization but instead expressed an intention to use another method. The local health service's position on sterilization, therefore, appears more important than the women's choice to use the method.	Regina	Maria  Barbosa	Daniela	Riva  Knauth	Kristine	 Hopkins
2002	68	AIDS, Family Planning and Reproductive Health	Choosing between Two Stigmas: The Complexities of Childbearing in the Face of HIV Infection in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper examines how HIV-related stigma couples with strong social pressures for childbearing to constrain a woman's decisions about family planning, prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV (MTCT), and other HIV prevention behavior. It demonstrates how HIV-related stigma is layered onto existing stigmas women face because of their relative lack of social and economic power. Understanding how HIV infection and its accompanying stigma shape the context, needs, and desires of women, men, and their communities around childbearing is critical to providing effective family planning and MTCT prevention services. The analysis uses ethnographic data from two sources - a community-based survey on the prevention of MTCT in Botswana and Zambia and an on-going study of HIV/AIDS related stigma and discrimination in Tanzania.	Laura	 Nyblade	Jessie	 Mbwambo	Sanyukta	 Mathur	Kerry	 MacQuarrie	Gad	 Kilonzo	Peter	 Kopoka
2002	68	AIDS, Family Planning and Reproductive Health	Mapping Dual Method Use Decisions: Results from an Integrated Qualitative-Quantitative Study in Central Texas	The primary purpose of this study was to identify factors that contribute to decision-making regarding dual method use (DMU). The conceptual model for the study integrated qualitative, know-groups validation with the Multi-Attribute Utility Theory decision model to provide comparable information about the determinants of DMU in two groups, each objectively known to be salient for risk of either pregnancy or STI. Phase 1 conducted exploratory, open-ended interviews with approximately 50 volunteers from a population of women seeking clinic services and used text analysis to identify factors important to DMU decisions. Phase 2 (ongoing) will use approximately 150 survey interviews to determine the relative importance of Phase 1 factors, thus allowing construction of DMU hierarchy maps for each saliency group. Results of the study will suggest strategies for improving adoption and continuation of DMU, and have implications for research on DMU in other populations as risk.	Jason	B. Smith	Priscilla	R. Ulin	Carla	 Piedrahita
2002	68	AIDS, Family Planning and Reproductive Health	Determinants of Husband-Wife Communication about Family Planning and AIDS in Malawi	This paper uses qualitative and quantitative data collected from rural Malawi to examine the context, content and determinants of spousal discussion about family planning and HIV/AIDS infection. The data highlight the role of gender relations and imbalances in influencing reproductive health behavior. Women, who mostly initiate these discussions, raise the issues tactfully to avoid appearing to undermine men's authority and integrity. They usually justify use of contraception for their personal health and family welfare, while they justify the need for sexual prudence and fidelity to protect their children from suffering if both parents die from AIDS. There is a high correlation between couple discussion of family planning and HIV/AIDS, although the contexts in which such discussions take place are quiet different. The results highlight the need for IEC programs to pay greater attention to understanding how various target groups comprehend and express their vulnerability to various reproductive health risks.	Eliya	M. Zulu	Gloria	 Chepngeno
2002	69	Union Formation	High Hopes, but Even Higher Expectations: The Retreat from Marriage among Low-Income Couples	This paper explores the perceptions and objections that low-income cohabiting parents have to marriage. We use data from the Fragile Families Survey, a longitudinal survey of 5000 new parents, and the Time Love, Cash, Caring, and Children Project (TLC3), an in-depth qualitative study of a sub-set of 75 romantically involved Fragile Families couples.     We demonstrate that these parents take marriage extremely seriously - more seriously, in fact, than the decision to have a child.  Most couples have had in-depth conversations about marriage, but surprisingly, these marriage conversations do not involve references to children, policy, or political concerns. However, because these couples do take marriage so seriously, they have extremely high requirements for the emotional and financial status of their partners.  While these couples have a pro-marriage attitude, they also equate marriage with emotional guarantees and a middle-class lifestyle. Unfortunately, these goals may be unobtainable for many low-income cohabiting parents.	Christina	 Gibson	Kathryn	 Edin
2002	69	Union Formation	Romantic Relationships among Immigrant Adolescents	Adolescent romantic relationships and the experience of adolescence among U.S. immigrants are both understudied. Research at the intersection of these two areas on romantic relationships among immigrant adolescents explains how culture, family, and peers shape the antecedents of permanent union formation. Romantic relationships in adolescence are important developmental steps along the way to marriage (see Furman, Brown, and Feiring 1999).  Our data (National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health) enable us to study differences by immigrant generation within ethnic group background (Mexican, Cuban, Central and South American, Puerto Rican, Chinese, Filipino, Other Asian, African and Afro-Caribbean, and Canadian and European). We describe differentials in relationship patterns (i.e., partner similarity, physical involvement) by generational status and race/ethnicity. We then explore longitudinal effects of parent-child closeness and parental attitudes. We include contextual measures such as the immigrant/ethnic composition of the school and neighborhood, and friends' behaviors.	Rosalind	B. King	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris
2002	69	Union Formation	Cohabitation, Marriage, and Trajectories in Relationships, Well-Being, and Attitudes: An Exploration of Selection versus Causal Effects	In this analysis, we follow union trajectories over time,  tracing changes in variables that have been found to be associated with union status and with the nature and stability of marriages.  We use data from waves 1 and 2 of the NSFH, a national sample survey focusing on family structure, process, and relationships (Sweet, Bumpass, and Call 1988; Sweet and Bumpass 1996).  These data contain a rich array of measurements in many of the domains hypothesized to differentiate cohabitation and marriage, and to affect the stability of marriage.      We build on prior work showing consistent differences between married and cohabiting couples, but do so using a different perspective, sample, and methodology.	Kelly	A. Musick	Larry	 Bumpass
2002	69	Union Formation	To Live Together...As Man and Wife? The Process of Entrance into Cohabiting Unions	Well over half of today's young adults either have or will live with a partner prior to marriage. While many studies indicate that the majority of cohabitors report plans to marry their partner, little research has examined whether these plans are determined prior to entering into a cohabiting union, or how coresidence alters attitudes towards the relationship and its future. This paper advances theories of union formation by deciphering the processes underlying the entrance into informal unions, and examining how marriage intentions are shaped by the experience of sharing a home and a bed. Data are from 25 open-ended interviews with cohabitors theoretically sampled to reflect racial/ethnic, economic, and familial diversity. Preliminary analysis suggests that marriage is not a manifest expectation in the initial entrance into cohabiting unions. How couples negotiate the intricacies of living together, individual life plans, and sometimes opposing time frames, often shape future intentions.	Sharon	 Sassler	Alexis	 Yamokoski	Tameka	 Jobe
2002	70	Census 2000: New Trends	The Geography of Gay and Lesbian Couples: What We Can Learn from Census 2000	One of the most publicized stories to emerge from Census 2000 has been the increase in the reporting of same-sex unmarried partnerships, commonly understood to be gay and lesbian couples. This paper explores the geographic distribution of these couples in the United States as observed in Census 2000. Acknowledging that changes in counting procedures for same-sex unmarred partners limit the ability to make comparisons between 1990 and 2000, the paper begins by examining basic findings from the 1990 Census and explores any notable changes in the 2000 data.      The primarily descriptive analysis include consideration of estimates of the undercount in 2000; estimates of the total gay and lesbian population; differences in location patterns of gay men, lesbians, married, and unmarried heterosexual partners; and analysis of racial/ethnic, age, and housing tenure characteristics of gay and lesbian neighborhoods    A preliminary analysis can be found at:   http://www.hrc.org/familynet/documents/L%20census.pdf.	Gary	J. Gates
2002	70	Census 2000: New Trends	An Exploratory Analysis of the Association between Demographic Variables and More than One Race Reporting in Census 2000	The question on race from Census 2000 was different from previous censuses because it allowed respondents to select one or more races to indicate their racial identities. Little is known about the association between various demographic characteristics and the probability of reporting more than one race. This paper represents an initial analysis of the association between sex, age, Hispanic origin, and relationship to householder and more than one race reporting. It uses Census 2000 data and logistic regression to analyze the probability of reporting either one or more than one race among respondents who self-identify as White, Black or African American, American Indian and Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, and Some other race. It also examines the probability of two or more race reporting among several detailed groups, such as Chinese, Samoan, and Cherokee. This paper demonstrates that the influence of the selected demographic variables on two or more race reporting varies by race.	Elizabeth	M. Grieco	Claudette	 Bennett
2002	70	Census 2000: New Trends	Suburban Population Growth and Decline: The Emergence of New Patterns in the 1990s	By the 1970s, about one-third of U.S. suburbs (urban places outside central cities in metropolitan areas) were actually losing population. Differential patterns of loss by community social characteristics were quite evident; declining populations were especially found in older metropolitan areas, and were especially evident in inner suburbs in older metropolitan areas.    Census data from the 1990s show clear changes in these patterns. First, overall patterns of loss have sharply declined. Second, patterns of suburban population growth and decline are somewhat less correlated than in the past with commonly emphasized social characteristics of communities. Third, a distinct pattern of renewed suburban growth is found in the suburbs that were most likely to be characterized by loss in the 1970s, the 'inner' communities in the oldest metropolitan areas. In this respect, the well-known renewal or revitalization of central city neighborhoods may have also 'passed over' to nearby suburban communities.	Avery	M. Guest
2002	70	Census 2000: New Trends	Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation in the United States: 1980-2000	Residential segregation has been the subject of considerable research. A tour through any major American city reveals that many neighborhoods are racially and ethnically homogenous. In addition to controversies about the causes and consequences of segregation are substantial disagreements as to how to best measure it. Massey and Denton (1988) identified 19 segregation indexes and distinguished five key dimensions of segregation: evenness, exposure, concentration, centralization, and clustering.     Based on Massey and Denton's recommendations, we analyze trends in segregation using one index from each of the five dimensions over the 1980 to 2000 period. Using data from Decennial Censuses, we explore not only trends in Black/White segregation, but also the segregation of Hispanics, Asians and Pacific Islanders, and American Indians and Alaska Natives. We present a variety of descriptive statistics and discuss how each of the various measures contribute to our understanding of racial and ethnic group residential patterns.	John	 Iceland	Daniel	H. Weinberg
2002	70	Census 2000: New Trends	Hispanic Minorities in Census 2000: Who They Are, Where They Are	Census 2000 counts a large increase in the Hispanic population, but fails to identify fully its national origins.  Alternative estimates presented here suggest that there are now more than 1 million Dominicans and Salvadorans in the country, and more than a half million from several other origins. This study shows that the newer groups add to the diversity in Hispanics' social and economic characteristics, making it harder than ever to identify a single Hispanic situation. It documents the concentration of new groups in the Northeast, Florida, Texas, and California, analyzes trends in their residential segregation, and describes the formation of new ethnic enclaves in both cities and suburbs during 1990-2000.	John	 Logan
2002	71	Environment and Health	Tracking the Sensitivity of Early Childhood Diseases to Climate Variability in Niono District, Mali	There is a need to better understand climate-disease interactions to improve the targeting of IMCI and other interventions to reduce major childhood diseases. In fall 2001, retrospective surveys were conducted in six villages in Niono District, Mali, selected to contrast irrigated vs. dry- zone agriculture and arid vs. less arid sectors. The survey obtained data on household composition, migrations, agricultural production, disease incidence, and health care behavior for September 2001 and 1997 and 1999, when climate events occurred. Health consultations, rainfall and temperature data were obtained for 1995-2001.    Both survey and consultation data showed marked seasonal and climate-related variations in major childhood diseases. Each disease illustrates a different seasonal and climate-related pattern. Logistic regression is used to control for the independent influence of a family's economic situation and health care patterns as well as irrigation in the village on the variation in disease.	Sally	E. Findley	Nafoman	 Sogoba	Moussa	 Dembele	Deborah	 Balk	Malanding	 Jaiteh
2002	71	Environment and Health	Does the Environment Provoke Geographical Differences in Mortality by Cause?	This paper refers to 94 Italian provinces and considers trends in mortality by cause, age and sex, which appear to be most influenced by the geographical context. A first goal is to define which causes of death have changed the geographical panorama. Another goal is to study the relationship between mortality by cause and socio-economic, environmental, cultural and nutritional variables. We refer to mortality data by cause for the adult and elderly population for the 1990s in light of external variables for the same years (static analysis) as well as for the 1970s and 1980s (dynamic analysis). These will be tested using advanced statistical methods and linear and non-linear models.	Graziella	 Caselli
2002	71	Environment and Health	Carbon Monoxide-Related Mortality in the United States, 1979 to 1998	Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning is responsible for over 2000 deaths in the United States every year. In this paper we describe 31 years (1968-1998) of CO-related deaths in the United States and to evaluate reasons for changes in trends over time. From 1968 through 1998, the annual age-adjusted rate of unintentional CO-related deaths decreased 79%, and CO-related suicides decreased 40%. Negative binomial regression analyses indicated that 72% of the 31-year decline in CO-related deaths was attributable to declining motor vehicle-related death rates, which only began to decrease following the 1975 introduction of the catalytic converter to automobiles to meet standards set by the 1970 Clean Air Act. These findings suggest that if age-specific rates of CO-related deaths had remained at pre-1975 levels, an additional 21,788 motor vehicle-related poisoning deaths and 8,530 non-motor vehicle-related poisoning deaths would have occurred from 1975 to 1998.	Joshua	A. Mott	Mitchell	I. Wolfe	Lauren	 Ball	Jeanne	 Moorman	David	 Mannino	Stephen	 Redd
2002	71	Environment and Health	Air Pollution and Lung Cancer: A Case Study of Bangkok Residents: Some Preliminary Findings	Air pollution has become one of the major problems impacting quality of life of the residents in Bangkok city. Since Bangkok is the biggest urban area of Thailand, it is hypothesized that lung cancer is increased with the increasing level of air pollution.     In this case control study, residential history, occupational exposure, smoking habit and other health risk taking behaviors such as transport mode and commuting pattern are taken into account. The primary objective in this research is to establish that air pollution is a risk factor in lung cancer for Bangkok residents. Direct measurement of air pollution was carried out using personal pumps in order to measure the air particulate matter level, PM10. Analysis of carcinogenic markers such as BC and PAH was performed. The preliminary results imply a relationship between air pollution and lung cancer risk in Bangkok residents who are exposed to high air pollution across time.	Priyakamon	 Siriwan	Sureeporn	 Punpuing	Chai	 Podhisita	Alan	N. Gray	Somkiat	 Wongtim	Martin	A. Hooper	Philip	 Rayment
2002	72	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children of Long-Term Welfare Recipients	This paper addresses how family structure affects the well-being of children who grow up on welfare. While a vast accumulation of research suggests that children growing up in single-parent families experience worse outcomes than children in two-parent families, we look at four aspects of family structure that have not been widely studied and are of concern to policy makers. First, we expand on previous research looking at how particular family structure arrangements affect child outcomes. Second, we examine transitions between family structure arrangements and how these changes affect children. Third, we explore the role of non-custodial father involvement in children's lives. Finally, we look at how family environment mediates the effects of family structure on child outcomes. These findings inform forthcoming discussions around welfare reform reauthorization and initiatives to promote marriage among welfare recipients.	Jennifer	 Ehrle	Matthew	 Stagner	Katherine	 Kortenkamp
2002	72	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Does Family Structure Affect Children's Educational Outcomes?	In this paper we estimate a statistical model of intra-household allocation of human capital that controls for family structure and uses data from the NLSY79, NLSY79-Child, and PSID. Our analysis begins with estimates of the effect of family structure on children's educational outcomes assuming family structure is exogenously assigned. Next, we exploit the sibling structure in the data to control for unobserved heterogeneity across families using family fixed effects. Finally, we compare educational outcomes for stepchildren and their half-siblings in the same blended family who are the biological children of both parents. As additional variables are added to the specification, family structure effects attenuate. Using fixed effects estimates, we find that family structure effects are statistically insignificant. Comparing half-siblings in our data, we find no difference in educational outcomes as a function of family structure.	Donna	K. Ginther	Robert	A. Pollak
2002	72	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Family Structure, Adult Transition, and Next Generation Parenting	Numerous studies have demonstrated that children in one-parent families fare worse than children in two-biological-parent families, regardless of social-demographic backgrounds. A majority of these studies focus on the consequences of family disruption on children's development or their transition to adulthood. Relatively little attention has been paid to the consequences on these children after they enter adulthood and become parents themselves. Part of this oversight is due to data limitations. Examining the long-term consequences of family disruption on offspring's own parenting behavior requires panel data with information not only about respondents' families of origin, but also about their families of procreation. In this paper, thirty years of data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and data recently released from the 1997 Child Development Supplement are used to address one important question, Does a non-traditional pathway to adulthood intensify the potential negative consequences of family disruption on next generation parenting?	I-Fen	 Lin
2002	72	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	The Impact of Stepfamilies on the Health and Health Behaviors of Adolescents	Although encouraging marriage among women with children has been an important focus of recent welfare policy debates, our understanding of the implications of parental remarriage for youth well-being remains largely incomplete. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, the current research investigates the impact of stepfamilies on adolescents' subjective assessments of health, health behaviors, and access to health care services. While most previous studies of the effects of family-structure on youth well-being have failed to clearly define stepfamilies, this research distinguishes between stepfamilies formed after marital dissolution and those formed after a non-marital birth. Although approximately one-third of all children are currently born outside of marriage in the United States, remarkably little is known about stepfamilies formed through the latter route. Finally, careful attention is paid to racial and gender differences in the impact of stepfamilies on adolescent health.	Megan	M. Sweeney	Tami	 Videon
2002	73	Future of Fertility in Low Fertility Countries	Towards a Theory of Lowest-Low Fertility	Lowest-low fertility, defined as a period total fertility rate below 1.3, has rapidly spread in Europe during the 1990s and is likely to expand further. This paper argues that the emergence and persistence of this new phenomenon is due to the combination and interaction of four factors. First, tempo- and compositional distortions reduce the TFR below the associated level of cohort fertility, and these distortions can be quantified with appropriate adjusted measures. Second, late childbearing has become a rational response to increased returns to human capital and high economic uncertainty in early adulthood. Third, social interaction reinforces the behavioral adjustment of individuals, and it can lead to postponement transitions with large and persistent changes in the mean age at birth. Fourth, delayed childbearing is associated with postponement-quantum interactions that reduce completed fertility. The paper concludes with some speculations about future trends in lowest-low fertility countries and candidates.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2002	73	Future of Fertility in Low Fertility Countries	Can the Level of Brazilian Fertility Be Even Lower?	The Brazilian TFR plummeted from 6.2 in 1960 to 2.0 in 2001, bringing Brazil into the group of countries with a low level of fertility. Despite the substantial decline, there has been an increase in union instability, which has been shown to increase the level of fertility in Brazil, and an increase of the contribution of teenage pregnancies to the overall level of fertility. We argue that Brazil represents a case of rapid fertility transition where, were it not for specific characteristics of teenagers and consensual unions, the TFR could reach even lower levels.    In the absence of other methods, the fertility decline in Brazil is primarily due to the increased prevalence of female sterilization. Desegregating the fertility indicators of different groups of women, we have found that the decline would have been more rapid in the absence of the increase in teenage pregnancy and union instability.	Tiziana	 Leone
2002	73	Future of Fertility in Low Fertility Countries	Low Fertility and High Sex Ratio at Birth in Rural China: An Inevitable Tradeoff?	Many scholars attribute China's high sex ratio at birth and the missing girls problem to its stringent birth control policy.  This paper discusses whether the tradeoff between high sex ratio at birth and low fertility in rural China is inevitable with the wide availability and accessibility of modern technology for prenatal sex determination, with or without the birth control program. The data are derived from a questionnaire survey of 1056 married women below age 45, in rural Henan in July and August 2001. We conclude that the tradeoff was inevitable with available modern technology for prenatal sex determination and safe abortion, and with strong son preference and declining family size preference, and with abortion as a socially accepted way of birth planning in a culture that views life as starts from live birth. But China's stringent birth control policy ushered its early arrival and exacerbated the problem.	Yaqiang	 Qi	Junhong	 Chu
2002	73	Future of Fertility in Low Fertility Countries	Low Fertility: Unifying the Theory and the Demography	In recent years, particularly in European countries, there has been a leap forward in the study of the demography of low fertility including such factors as the timing of the first birth, parity progression ratios, the extent of 'recuperation' for a late start to childbearing, and completed cohort parity distributions. Much of this work is set in a quantum versus tempo framework. Some of these studies have examined the linkages between changes in the demography of low fertility and particular changes in social policy or social changes such as increasing education levels or unemployment levels among young people. These studies enable a reassessment of theories of low fertility. How consistent are particular theories with the emerging empirical research? This paper reviews the empirical studies and assesses their implications for theory with the aim of achieving a more unified theory of low fertility.	Peter	 McDonald
2002	74	Child Care and Child Outcomes	Maternal Employment, Child Care, and Child Behavioral Outcomes: What Do We Know?	This paper investigates the impact of early maternal employment and child care on children's behavioral outcomes, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) and NICHD Study of Early Child Care (SECC). The NLSY is limited in that its behavioral outcomes are based on mothers' reports. Further, the NLSY has no information on the quality of care and only limited information on the quality of children's home environments. Therefore, we use a second dataset, the NICHD-SECC, which has, in addition to early maternal employment and mother-reported behavior problems, the quality of the home environment, the quality of the child care environment, and several additional measures of children's behavior and socioemotional adjustment. Thus, we will be able to use the NICHD-SECC dataset to determine whether the findings from the NLSY hold up when controls for home and child care quality are introduced and when other outcome variables are studied.	Wen-Jui	 Han	Jane	 Waldfogel	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2002	74	Child Care and Child Outcomes	Family Leave and Child Outcomes: Evidence from the NLSY	While family leave policies have been advocated on the grounds that they allow new mothers to take longer maternity leaves, thus promoting better child outcomes, the empirical evidence on the connection between leave policies, leave-taking, and child outcomes is scarce. In this paper, we utilize data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to estimate both the effect of family leave coverage on leave-taking, and the effect of leave-taking on child outcomes. Our data include detailed measures of family leave coverage, usage, and length of leave, child health and development, and parental behaviors. By shedding light on the pathway from family leave policies to child outcomes, the results prove relevant not only to the literature on the effects of early experiences on child outcomes, but also to the current policy debate about allowing more workers to take leaves and for longer periods of time.	Lawrence	M. Berger	Jennifer	 Hill	Jane	 Waldfogel
2002	74	Child Care and Child Outcomes	Re-Assessing the Impacts of Head Start on Children's Cognitive and Health Outcomes	Positive evidence on the benefits of Head Start using large, nationally representative data comes from a handful of studies that used family fixed models, which assume that unobserved family characteristics determine participation in Head Start. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and NLSY79 Children data, I present evidence from difference-in-differences estimators that use paired matching for control selection. Specifically, I match each Head Start child with a set of control children who are similar in terms of demographic and socioeconomic variables, and compare pre- and post-Head Start outcomes with comparable outcomes for control children.    My matched-pairs difference-in-differences estimators suggest that, contrary to previous findings, Head Start has little effects on child cognitive outcomes, but positive short-run effects on health measures. My study demonstrates the importance of selecting appropriate controls and controlling for unobserved child-specific characteristics in evaluating early childhood interventions.	Kumiko	 Imai
2002	74	Child Care and Child Outcomes	Child Care and Health Outcome in India	A common observation in developing countries such as India is the functioning of a traditional child care system.  Older children, for example, often take care of their brothers and sisters. Women who regularly work outside the home depend on their relatives to provide for child care. Recently, however,  there is a growing demand for institutional child care facilities. Underlying the functioning of the traditional child care system is the assumption that children are being well taken care of. In this paper we assess health effects of child care by non-mothers in a traditional setting using data from the National Family Health Surveys of India, I and II.    Logistic regression analyses show statistically significant health consequences of different types of child care. Compared with mothers, children who are taken care by non-mothers have higher chance of diarrhea, cough and fever. Sex differentials prevail irrespective of the child-care given.	S.	 Kaushik
2002	75	Linkages of Domestic and International Migration	Internal Migration of Immigrants: Do Immigrant Characteristics, Class of Entry, and Context Matter?	This paper models the internal migration of international migrants as a function of three factors: 1) immigrant characteristics, defined as age, education, sex, marital status, and language knowledge and age of children (on arrival); 2) criterion of admission (family, humanitarian or economic) and entry status (main applicant or dependent); and 3) ethnic and economic contexts. Ethnic context is measured as a destination/origin ratio for the birthplace/ethnic group to which a specific migrant belongs and economic context is measured as the difference in the unemployment rate at the time of internal migration between place of destination and origin.     The population studied in this project consists of sub-population of all foreign born, namely those who were admitted for permanent residence (landed immigrants) over a ten year period between 1986 and 1995 and who were adults in the prime labor force and migratory ages during the period (age 20-44 on arrival).	Monica	 Boyd	Maureen	 Kelly	Doug	 Norris
2002	75	Linkages of Domestic and International Migration	Immigration and Homeownership in Gateway Cities in California	A central element of the current debate about immigration in developed economies is about the trajectories of new immigrants, about how they are progressing in their adopted countries and whether they will assimilate to the host society. Part of that assimilation is related to their relocation behavior within the United States and especially within metropolitan areas after their arrival. Related to relocation behavior is the extent to which immigrants become homeowners. Owning a home in the U.S. is increasingly seen as a central part of upward social mobility and integration into the new society. This study examines the mobility and homeownership behavior of the foreign born in three large metropolitan areas in California- Los Angeles, San Francisco and San Diego. A combined three year file from the Current Population Survey for 1998-1999-2000 can be used to examine the residential locations and relocations within the metropolitan areas.	William	A.V. Clark
2002	75	Linkages of Domestic and International Migration	Disentangling the Segregation Patterns of Immigrants in Suburbia	This paper attempts to understand the segregation process of immigrants in suburbia, an emerging residential pattern in major North American cities. Recent studies document that large proportion of immigrants, including those who arrived recently, are not only residing in suburban areas, but also segregated in suburbia. This pattern seemingly challenges the spatial assimilation perspective. In this paper, we argue that the spatial assimilation perspective is still able to help us understand the pattern. However, we also argue that further specifications are needed.      We used 1996 Canadian census - Profile B, which provides detailed information on the census tracts. Our analysis focused on the patterns in Toronto. We analyzed residential patterns of five major immigrant groups: South Asians, East and Southeast Asians, Southern Europeans, Eastern Europeans, and blacks. The results of our analyses confirmed the arguments. Implications of our results are also discussed.	Eric	 Fong	Tracy	 Matsuo	Rima	 Wilkes
2002	75	Linkages of Domestic and International Migration	Extending the Theory of Cumulative Causation for Two Competing Migrations: The Case of Internal and International Migration from Mexico	The theory of the Cumulative Causation of Migration postulates that past migration in a community will bring increased migration in the future through the effect of social networks and economic and social changes product of remittances. This statement has been tested in the case of migration from Mexico to the United States, showing that the proportion of individuals that have migrated increases with the level of past migratory experience. Nevertheless, the theory of cumulative causation has also some implications for internal migration that have not been explored before, mostly under the assumption that internal migration and international migration are independent.     Using data from the Mexican Migration Project, I explore the relation between the evolution of internal and international migration at the community level, and show that the cumulative causation of each.	Estela	 Rivero-Fuentes
2002	76	Comparative Studies of Race and Ethnicity	The Immigration Aftermath of Decolonization: The Case of Second-Generation North Africans in France	Immigrations resulting from decolonization challenge the ability of researchers to track the second generation through classifications based on country of origin. We consider a classic case - the immigration from North Africa to France following the independence of Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. It was ethnically complex, composed of the former colonists of European background (the pieds noirs) and low-wage laborers belonging to the indigenous population (the Maghrebins). The key to distinguishing these two populations lies in the exact citizenship status of the immigrants, for the former colonists were French by birth and the others were not.     Analyzing micro-level data from the censuses of 1968, 1975, 1982, and 1990, we apply this distinction to the family origins of the second generation. We show that the pied-noir population exhibits signs of rapid integration with the native French, while the Maghrebin population remains apart. This finding suggests a method for future research on incorporation.	Richard	 Alba	Roxane	 Silberman
2002	76	Comparative Studies of Race and Ethnicity	Ethnic Differences in the Transition to Higher Education in Malaysia: The Effects of Colonialism and of Subsequent Preferential Policies	We use the second wave of the Malaysian Family Life Survey conducted in 1988-89 to examine the effects of the New Economic Policy (NEP) instituted by the Malaysian government in 1971 to promote educational opportunities of hitherto disadvantaged ethnic Malays. We employ logistic regression to compare the likelihood of the transition to higher education, given the completion of secondary school, across generational cohorts (pre-NEP and post-NEP generations) and across the three ethnic groups - Malays, Chinese, and Indians. The results show an increase in the likelihood of making the transition in each subsequent cohort for all the three ethnic groups. However, Malays who reached college age after 1971 experienced a much larger increase in the odds of continuing beyond secondary education relative both to their Chinese and Indian counterparts and to the pre-NEP cohorts of Malays. We discuss these and other findings and conclude with an evaluation of the NEP's impact on Malaysian society.	Hui	P. Liew	Victor	 Agadjanian
2002	76	Comparative Studies of Race and Ethnicity	Trends in Wage Inequality for Cohorts of Brazilian Black and White Women	We analyze trends of wage inequality of the Brazilian female labor force, by race, during the 1980s and 1990s, a period marked by decreasing fertility, increasing levels of education, female labor force participation. The main hypothesis is that the racial wage gap is determined both by individual and occupational differences. Increasing returns to skills and increasing demand for skilled labor result in a divergence of wages growth between high and low skilled workers. This increasing gap results in an increase of wage inequality by race.     To interpret trends, we take into account race differences in marriage patterns, fertility, household arrangements, educational levels, labor market participation, skill levels, occupational location and earnings, distinguishing between period and cohort measures. We use 1987-1999 Brazilian Household Sample Surveys data to examine the importance of within/ between-cohort changes for black and white women. Earnings functions are estimated from the pooled time-series of these cross-section data.	Ana	 Oliveira
2002	76	Comparative Studies of Race and Ethnicity	Inconsistency in Racial Classification between Interviewers and Respondents	I investigate the extent to which interviewers and respondents consistently classify race in a survey of Brazil.  Overall, classification as white, brown or black is consistent 79 percent of the time. However, persons at the light end of the color continuum tend to be consistently classified while ambiguity is greater for those at the darker end. Using statistical estimation, the findings also reveal that consistency varies from 20 to 100 percent depending on one's education, age, sex and local racial composition. Furthermore, both whitening and darkening occur, depending on whether the reference is interviewer or respondent. For example, interviewers whitened the classification of higher educated persons who self-identified as brown, especially when such persons reside in mostly nonwhite places. Finally, I discuss the implications of these findings for survey research and comparative analysis.	Edward	E. Telles
2002	77	Population and Macroeconomics	Where Do U.S. Immigrants Come From, and Why?	This paper offers new estimates of the determinants of immigration rates by sending-country source between 1971 and 1998. We examine many more countries over a longer period than have previous studies. More importantly, we isolate the economic and demographic fundamentals which caused the composition by sending country to diverge from earlier patterns but also we allow for the persistence in those patterns arising from the impact of the existing U.S. immigrant stock. In addition, we bring to the question, for the first time, new data measuring sending-country real earnings, demographic conditions, and skill premia which, although clearly relevant, have not been used in previous analysis of this question.	Ximena	 Clark	Timothy	J. Hatton	Jeffrey	G.  Williamson
2002	77	Population and Macroeconomics	Demography and Housing Demand: What Can We Learn from Residential Construction Data?	There are obvious reasons why residential construction directly and indirectly should depend on the population's age structure. We estimate this relation on Swedish time series data and OECD panel data. As expected large groups of young adults are associated with higher rates of residential construction. But there is also a significant negative effect from the age groups above 75. Theoretically this may be explained by a hump-shaped life cycle demand pattern over age. Strongly increasing mortality rates at that age form an important part of the explanation. The age effects on residential investment are considerably more robust than the corresponding house price results. In view of rapidly aging populations in the industrialized world the future looks bleak for the construction industry of these countries.	Thomas	 Lindh	Bo	 Malmberg
2002	77	Population and Macroeconomics	Towards an Age-Structured Demo-Economic Theory of Population Policy	This paper brings both intertemporal and age-dependent features to a theory of population policy at the macro-level. A Lotka-type renewal model of population dynamics is combined with a Solow/Ramsey economy. The model we present is closely related to the early contribution by Arthur and McNicoll (1977). In particular we extend their framework by (a) considering age-dependent fertility and savings controls, (b) an age dependent earnings profile and (c) age-specific migration as an additional control variable.     By using a new maximum principle for distributed parameter control (in contrast to integral-equations control theory as utilized by Arthur and McNicoll for age-independent controls) we derive meaningful qualitative results for the optimal fertility paths and savings rates. In particular, we analyze numerically how the optimal fertility policy and savings rates depend on the age-structure of population and capital.	Gustav	 Feichtinger	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Vladimir	 Veliov
2002	77	Population and Macroeconomics	Populations in Transition: Analytic Dynamics	Rapid fertility transitions appear to have large effects on national savings, and a growing literature uses simulation methods to examine transition dynamics. We present analytical formulae that show how population numbers and structure change over time when fertility and mortality rates undergo a transition. Our results apply to arbitrary initial age structures and make it possible to compare transition dynamics in among distinct populations and transitional trajectories. These results significantly extend our earlier work, in which we were restricted to stable initial populations. We illustrate the results with specific examples from Latin America and Southeast Asia. We discuss the ways in which these results can be used to advance the analytical modeling of economic impacts of demographic transitions.	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar	Nan	 Li
2002	78	Historical Demography	The Fertility Decline in Munich, 1850-1914: A First Look from Individual-Level Data	The population registration data for the city of Munich (the Polizeimeldeboegen, or PMBs) contain information on every person born in the city or who moved there during the period 1850-1914. Using a new sample of nearly 5000 couples, we present preliminary evidence on the fertility transition in that city: when it began, what form it took, and the roles of religion, migration, and socio-economic status in the pace of fertility decline.	John	 Brown	Timothy	 Guinnane
2002	78	Historical Demography	Rethinking the 'Early' Decline of Marital Fertility in the United States: New Evidence from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series	Although the United States is believed to have experienced a sustained decline in marital fertility beginning circa 1800, the only systematic fertility estimates for the period before 1880 are based on the age structure of the population reported in the federal census. This paper relies on new IPUMS samples of the 1850-1880 censuses, new estimates of nineteenth-century mortality, and own-child methods of fertility estimation to reexamine the evidence of early fertility decline in the United States. The results suggest that that most of the observed change in the nation's age structure before 1840 resulted from increasing mortality, although declining nuptiality likely played a role as well. More importantly, own-child methods of fertility estimation, which allow age-specific marital fertility rates to be constructed for the first time, indicate that parity-dependent control of marital fertility cannot be detected in the United States until after 1850, and then only in the Northeast.	J.	David  Hacker
2002	78	Historical Demography	Health Costs of Childbirth	Do childbirths abridge the health or survival of the mothers? In this paper data is used from the adult-life long health histories of members of four friendly societies operating in England and Wales in the period 1800-1930. This to explore whether women who gave birth to children suffered lasting or deferred effects in health or survival.     The women in the study include mothers and non mothers, which makes it possible to contrast experience in the two groups.  Preliminary investigation suggests that women with few or many births experienced little lasting health damage, and that damage was concentrated among women who gave birth to 4-6 children.	James	C. Riley
2002	78	Historical Demography	Race, Regional Origin, and Residence in Northern Cities at the Beginning of the Great Migration	Southern blacks and whites began moving to northern cities in large numbers during the second decade of the 20th Century.  Little is known about the residential settlement patterns of the migrants within their cities of destination.  We use city-level and ward-level data for northern and western cities, along with the 1920 PUMS, to investigate variation in neighborhood characteristics by race and migration history within northern and western cities in 1920.  Our multi-level analyses reveal sharp differences between blacks and whites in the racial composition and quality of neighborhoods, even after controlling for a variety of sociodemographic characteristics.  Regional origin also affects neighborhood outcomes, primarily as a result of the differences in the urban locations of black and white southern migrants.  Black migrants experienced a relative residential disadvantage because of their greater concentration in cities that constrained their residential opportunities.  In contrast, white migrants selected destinations that enhanced their locational attainment.	Stewart	E. Tolnay	Kyle	D. Crowder	Robert	M. Adelman
2002	80	Adult Health and Mortality in Industrialized Countries	Body Size and Mortality - Observations from Two Cohorts of U.S. Military Officers	Body size in males predicts social and reproductive success; in females it is not a handicap. Tall people have tall children. For males, there are many reports on tallness coming with better health. Of major causes of death in developed societies, only some cancers are more frequent in taller people. We analyze two datasets with all graduates of the classes 1925 and 1950 of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. Both samples are drawn from a population highly screened for health, physical and mental fitness. Thus, the genetics contribution to phenotype variation might be higher than in the general population. In both samples, tallness came with increased general mortality.    In general samples this life shortening risk factor may be masked by other life prolonging effects of high social status. Perhaps this is the first evidence of an evolutionary constraint on tallness, predicted, but not found so far.	Ulrich	 Mueller	Kerstin	 Walter	Allan	 Mazur
2002	80	Adult Health and Mortality in Industrialized Countries	How Can Age Patterns of Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates Be Explained?	The analysis of epidemiological data on cancer presented in the IARC monographs shows that overall cancer incidence and mortality rates increase, level off and then decline at old ages. In addition, male and female cross-sectional cancer incidence rates intersect near the age of female climacterics. In this paper we discuss the contribution of different factors to the age pattern of cancer incidence and mortality rates. To explain these phenomena we suggest the model of cancer initiation and development. In this model cancer incidence rate is composed of time-dependent, age-related, and ontogenetic components. The latter component determines the wave-like age-profile of individual vulnerability to diseases, which has different shape for males and females. We show that this difference is responsible for the intersection of the male and female cancer incidence curves. The ontogenetic component makes also an important contribution to the decline of incidence and mortality rates at old ages.	Anatoli	 Yashin	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Konstantin	 Arbeev	Serge	I. Boiko
2002	80	Adult Health and Mortality in Industrialized Countries	The Decline of Mortality at Older Ages: Spatial and Temporal Diversity	In industrialized countries, recent trends in mortality at older ages have varied during the past decades and from country to country. Rhythm of decline has also changed from age to age after age 60. Using a set of available life tables completed by the Kannisto data basis, we'll try to identify the main variations in the mortality pattern at older ages in developed countries. We will then look at causes of death to see if these variations can be related to different pathological patterns. In some cases, we will see that different pathological patterns are actually associated with contrasted trends in age specific mortality like when comparing France to Denmark but, in other cases, not fewer pathological differences are found when trends in age specific mortality are very comparable. Nevertheless we will try to discuss a fundamental logic which could associate pathological patterns and age structure mortality at old ages.	France	 Meslé	Jacques	 Vallin
2002	80	Adult Health and Mortality in Industrialized Countries	Job Security, Stress and Health: Evidence from Russian Privatization	I examine the health consequences of concern over job loss. I use panel data from Russia which includes measures of health and perceived likelihood of job loss. To deal with concerns about reverse causality and unobservable differences between those with high and low likelihood of job loss, I instrument for changes in likelihood of job loss using industry-by-region privatization rates which were announced between two rounds of the survey. For men, I find that increased concern over job loss is associated with a 5% increase in measured blood pressure, an 11% increased likelihood of chest pains and a 3% increase in the likelihood of heart attack. Alcohol consumption increases by 34 grams, and smoking by 2 cigarettes per day. For women, the effects are much smaller; about half in most cases. I argue these results suggest that much of the increased mortality in Russia following transition to a market economy may be attributable to economic stress.	Robert	 Jensen
2002	81	Immigrant Adaptation and Settlement Patterns	The Effects of Age at Arrival and Enclave Schools on the Academic Performance of Immigrant Children	This paper analyzes  the relationship between age at arrival and immigrant receiving high schools (i.e., enclave schools) on the academic performance of immigrant children using data from the Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Study (CILS) 1992-1993 and the Common Core of Data (CCD) 1992-1993.  I classify the public schools in the CILS universe as enclave schools based on the fraction of children in the school sample who were born abroad. More precisely, schools that had greater than 25 percent of the interviewed school sample born abroad were classified as immigrant receiving schools.  I find that the test score gap between US-born and first generation immigrant children decreases the longer immigrant children reside in the US. Overall, the findings in this paper suggest that immigrant children in enclave schools perform as well as immigrant children that attend non-enclave schools.	Kalena	E. Cortes
2002	81	Immigrant Adaptation and Settlement Patterns	The Influence of School Context on Immigrant Youth Adaptation	This research examines the role of school context in the assimilation processes of immigrant youth using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). We document behavioral differentials in delinquency and aggression by immigrant status and explore school composition and school climate factors as potential mediating mechanisms that may explain the adaptation of immigrant youth toward native norms of behavior. The schools that immigrant youth attend are typically large, urban schools with a substantial immigrant and minority presence, and are characterized by low school cohesion and high student disengagement. We find important school context effects of racial and ethnic composition and student disengagement on delinquency and aggression that are moderated by immigrant status such that immigrant youth are less adversely affected by negative school climate.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Kathryn	 Harker
2002	81	Immigrant Adaptation and Settlement Patterns	Self-Selection, Earnings, and Outmigration of Immigrants: A Longitudinal Study	In this paper we seek to deepen understanding of outmigration as a social and economic process and to investigate whether cross-sectional earnings assimilation   results suffer from selection bias. To model the process of outmigration we conduct a detailed event history analysis of men and women immigrants in Germany, surveyed by the GSOEP. Our 17-year longitudinal study reveals pronounced negative selectivity with respect to time since migration and to stable full time employment.     Our results show no selectivity with respect to human capital, earnings, occupational achievements, or gender. Further, we find that the likelihood of return migration  is also strongly determined by the range and nature of social attachments to Germany and origin countries, and that the effect of age is mildly curvilinear. Finally, we were not able to confirm the hypothesis that selective return migration biases cross-sectional assimilation results.	Amelie	 Constant
2002	81	Immigrant Adaptation and Settlement Patterns	Naturalization and Immigrant Welfare Receipt after 1996: Immigration and Welfare Reform	This paper draws on theories of risk aversion to develop hypotheses about the relationship between naturalization and welfare receipt in the post-welfare reform period. The research examines special CPS data for pre- and post-1996 that adjusts for the presence in the CPS of unauthorized migrants who are not eligible for naturalization. The research addresses the question of whether immigrants have increased their tendency to naturalize in the post-reform period simply in order to guarantee they will continue to be eligible to receive welfare. The findings do not support the view that immigrants are increasingly naturalizing because of welfare. It is not high benefit levels or greater access to benefits that make for the greatest tendency to naturalize, but rather combinations of high benefits and low access or low benefits and high access.	Frank	D. Bean	Jennifer	 Van Hook
2002	82	Around the World with CDC Surveys on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Related to HIV/AIDS	A Cross-National Comparison of Knowledge and Beliefs about AIDS in CDC Reproductive Health Surveys	For decades the Division of Reproductive Health at CDC has been involved in population-based, household interview Reproductive Health (RH) Surveys in developing countries.  These surveys have increasingly incorporated questions on knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs (KAB) regarding HIV transmission and prevention.  The HIV/AIDS modules of all of the RH surveys conducted by DRH since 1990, which includes over 20 countries spanning Latin America, the Caribbean, Eastern Europe, and Africa, are outlined.  Further, this data is compared and evaluated with respect to the new UNAIDS framework for monitoring and evaluation indicators. The HIV/AIDS modules typically include questions pertaining to source of HIV knowledge; modes and myths of transmission; HIV prevention; identification of high risk groups; and assessment of personal risk.   More recent surveys also include questions on voluntary counseling and testing, as well as an assessment of personal behavior changes made in response to risk of HIV acquisition.	Meredith	 Reynolds	S.	Afua  Appiah-Yeboah	Consuelo	 Beck-Sague
2002	82	Around the World with CDC Surveys on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Related to HIV/AIDS	Attitudes and Practices Related to HIV/AIDS Prevention: Results from the Zimbabwe National Young Adult Survey	Zimbabwe has one of the highest rates of HIV/AIDS infection in the world.  The National Young Adult Survey was conducted in 2001/2 for the Zimbabwe Ministry of Health by the Zimbabwe National Family Planning Council and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in response to the country's critical situation.  Its purpose was to provide national prevalence rates of HIV for Zimbabwean young adults, and other baseline data to aid in the development and evaluation of AIDS related  programs.  The Survey was based on a national household probability sample of over 6000 males and females 15-29 years of age.  This paper contains the first results of the Zimbabwe Young Adult Survey.  The analysis is descriptive, presenting rates of HIV prevalence, along with data on experience with and attitudes towards HIV testing, attitudes toward AIDS and persons infected with HIV, high risk sexual behavior, condom use and AIDS-related information.	Joan	M. Herold	Hazel	M. Dube	Leo	 Morris	Mike	 St. Louis
2002	82	Around the World with CDC Surveys on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Related to HIV/AIDS	Sexual Behavior of Young Adults in Mozambique	A Young Adult Reproductive Health and Behavioral Risk Survey was conducted in 2001 in a national household sample with 5,342 interviews of females (87% response rate) and 5,140 of males (81%). 79% of female respondents report sexual experience with 72% of them reporting pre-union experience; 74% of young adult men have had sexual experience and almost all report pre-union experience.  About two-thirds of sexually experienced unmarried females  and almost 90% of males had sexual relations in the last three months; 26% of females used condoms and 23% of males used condoms, up from 2% and 7%, respectively, in 1997. Knowledge of HIV/AIDS is somewhat improved (79%) but about the same as reported in 1997. Less than 5% of females and less than 8% of males could spontaneously name one of three possible means of MCT transmission. Only 21% of females and 38% of males know where to get HIV tests.	Leo	 Morris	Arao	 Balate	Ndola	 Prata	Elisio	 Maslive
2002	82	Around the World with CDC Surveys on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Related to HIV/AIDS	Changes in Reproductive-Related Behavior in the U.S. Population in the HIV Era: Data from National Surveys 1982-2000	This paper analyze trends in HIV-related behaviors using  nationally-representative health surveys and data systems:  the HIV/AIDS Reporting System, the National Health Interview Survey, the National Survey of Family Growth,  the General Social Survey, the Youth Risk Behavior Survey, and the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System.    The HIV epidemic has shifted to show more impact on women, persons infected heterosexually, and racial/ethnic minorities. Condom use has increased, but only 36% of at-risk persons reported using condoms with their main partners.  Use of condoms in combination with other effective methods was reported by about 3% of reproductive age women, and was more frequent among those with HIV risk.   HIV testing increased, particularly among the at-risk.  Considerable progress was made toward achieving the objective that all pregnant women be tested for prevention of perinatal HIV transmission.  This trend was associated with a marked decrease in the number of cases of perinatally acquired HIV.	John	E.  Anderson	John	S. Santelli	Constance	 Mugalla
2002	82	Around the World with CDC Surveys on Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviors Related to HIV/AIDS	Trends in Male Sexual Practices in Honduras	The intent of this study was to analyze trends in male sexual practices contributing to HIV infection in Honduras. Nationally representative data on men's reproductive knowledge, attitudes and behaviors was collected for the first time in Honduras in 1996 and again in 2001. Findings from the 1996 survey indicate high levels of sexual activity with 85% of men reporting having ever had sex.      Young age at sexual debut and infrequent/inconsistent condom use are common with 80% of 20-59 year-olds experiencing first sex before age 18 and only 13% of men using a condom at last sex. Multiple partners are also common, with 28% of men reporting having had sexual relations with 2+ partners in the year prior to the interview. This study analyzes, compares and contrasts 2001 data on these sexual practices with those reported in 1996. Trend data has been used to help identify program successes and gaps.	Jennifer	 Ballentine	Suyapa	 Pavon	Ramon	 Enamorado	Paul	 Stupp
2002	83	Family Exchanges and Investments	Parent-Child Bargaining, Parental Transfers and the Postsecondary Education Decision	Economic models of schooling decisions are largely unitary preference in nature. They ignore parent-child conflict, with parents often acting as the sole decision-maker. In this paper, a theoretical model is formulated in which parents and children participate in cooperative bargaining as a means of resolving disagreements. The model's implications are compared to those of the unitary preference model, motivating tests of parental altruism and income pooling. Reduced form equations for years of postsecondary schooling and transfers are estimated, both for the full sample and for subsamples defined by type of disagreement, using student-level data from the National Center for Education Statistics' High School and Beyond Surveys. While income pooling is rejected only for the group of students who prefer more schooling than their parents, parental altruism is rejected for all groups. A major finding is that parent-child disagreement is an important determinant of the level of financial support parents provide.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski
2002	83	Family Exchanges and Investments	Do Cohabiting Couples Underinvest in Household Public Goods? The Effect of Relationship Status on Households' Experience of Material Hardship in the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCW) to examine the extent to which the economic relationship between parents in cohabiting as opposed to married households affects the material hardship experienced by members of those households. My approach is to consider the availability and adequacy of certain household public goods, such as housing, heat, and electricity. Based on predictions generated from cooperative and non-cooperative bargaining models of intrahousehold resource allocation as well as from sociological literature on households, I examine the extent to which differences in relationship status, sources and types of income, and household composition influence the standard of living available to household members when total household income is controlled. I also test whether couples' money management patterns-whether they say they put all their resources together or keep some or all separate-appear to act as mediating factors in determining expenditures on household public goods.	Catherine	T. Kenney
2002	83	Family Exchanges and Investments	Who Helps? Household Change and Its Consequences for the Rice Harvest	This paper investigates the hypothesis that help received with the rice harvest in Nang Rong, Thailand depends on household size, composition, and change. Data to test this hypothesis come from linked surveys conducted in 1984 and 1994. The dependent variable is categorical: whether the household received help with the rice harvest at the latter date, and if so, whether from inside or outside the village. The effects of household size in 1984 and components of change between 1984 and 1994 are examined, controlling other determinants of help. Distinctions are then made between male and female members of the original household. Finally, size and change are decomposed to take marital status into account.  The findings suggest that ties of help and support between households are created, in part, through the mobility of original household members and, further, that these processes depend on the gender and marital status of those moving out.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Katherine	 Faust	Ronald	R. Rindfuss
2002	83	Family Exchanges and Investments	Internal Migration, Social Exchange, and the Continuing Strength of Family Relationships in Nigeria	This paper examines the effects of internal migration on family relationships among Igbo-speaking people in Nigeria. Based on anthropological and demographic study of a rural community and its migrants who have settled in Kano in northern Nigeria, the paper explores a range of 'exchanges' that characterize relations between migrants and their rural kin. In addition to data about remittances and other material exchanges, the paper focuses on generalized social exchange relationships that are less amenable to quantification, such as participation in rituals of the lifecycle that bring migrants 'home' and influence relationships between family members. The paper concludes that, among the Igbo, internal migration contributes to the importance of strong kinship ties and that these ties are maintained through culturally reproduced expectations regarding exchanges between kin. While migration and urbanization are often assumed to break down traditional patterns of family relationships, under some conditions, kinship relationships may become more important.	Daniel	 Smith
2002	84	Gender Differentials in Adult Health in Developed Countries	Gender Differences in Disability-Free Life Expectancy for Selected Risk Factors and Chronic Conditions in Canada	This article shows how mortality and morbidity patterns differ for women and men 45 years of age and older. The impact on disability-free life expectancy was calculated for selected risk factors and chronic conditions: low income, low education, abnormal body mass index, lack of physical activity, smoking, cancer, diabetes and arthritis. For each factor, the expected number of years free of disability was calculated for men and women using multi-state life tables. In terms of disability-free life expectancy, the greatest impacts on affected women were for diabetes (14.9 years), arthritis (8.7 years), low income (7.9 years), and physical inactivity (6.8 years), while for affected men, the greatest impacts were for diabetes (11.5 years), smoking (7.0 years), cancer (6.6 years) and arthritis (6.4 years). The implications of these results are discussed from the perspective of developing programs designed to improve population health status.	Alain	P. Belanger	Laurent	 Martel	Jean-Marie	 Berthelot	Russell	 Wilkins
2002	84	Gender Differentials in Adult Health in Developed Countries	Health Status and Functional Limitations in a National Sample of Elderly Mexicans: Levels, Age Patterns and Socioeconomic Differentials	We use newly available data from a nationally representative sample of the Mexican population 50 years and older to assess levels and age patterns of health status among males and females,  to compare them with those observed among elderly Mexicans living in the U.S., and to contrast them with levels and patterns of health status among elderly in other Latin American countries.      We also use couples (spouse-based) models to investigate the factors accounting for socioeconomic differentials in health status while controlling for factors (measured and unmeasured shared by spouses). finally, we investigate the role that the health status of one spouse has on the health status of the other.	Alberto	 Palloni
2002	84	Gender Differentials in Adult Health in Developed Countries	Disability and Depression among Older Married Couples: Are There Gender Differences?	In this paper, I examine whether there are gender differences in the effects of disability on depression for older married couples in the United States, paying particular attention to the way in which one spouse's disability affects the other spouse, and what effect, if any, there is of change in each spouse's disability over time. Specifically, I assess the gender-specific responses to three different dimensions of disability (medical conditions, functional limitations, and participation restriction) for each spouse and examine how changes in disability over time affect changes in both spouses' depression. Findings indicate that changes in each aspect of disability differentially affect changes in each spouse's depression. Husbands are affected by both their own and their wife's health declines, whereas wives are only affected by their own health declines. These findings highlight the importance of examining the married couple as a unit when dealing with disability and its associated consequences.	Michelle	L. Rogers
2002	84	Gender Differentials in Adult Health in Developed Countries	Gender Differences in the Effects of Family Socioeconomic Status on Health in Korea	Many studies document strong associations between socioeconomic status (SES) and health, but findings on gender patterns of the association remain inconclusive. This study expands the current research on the issue-gender differences in associations between socioeconomic status and health in four areas.	Yean-Ju	 Lee	Mee-Kyung	 Suh
2002	85	Values, Attitudes and the Family	A New Look at Unmarried Parents: Diversity in Human Capital, Attitudes, and Relationship Quality	This paper extends our understanding of how unmarried parents differ from one another and from married parents in two ways. First, in addition to married and cohabiting parents, I examine parents who live apart, but plan to jointly raise their child. Secondly, I distinguish between unmarried parents who intend to marry and those who do not. The results show that considering both living arrangements and marriage expectations are important to accurately assess differences between the parents. When married and unmarried parents are compared based on living arrangement alone, cohabitors are generally more like married parents than are visiting parents. However, when unmarried parents are assessed based on living arrangement and marriage expectations, those with high expectations, regardless of living arrangement are generally more like married couples. These findings have important implications for policy makers who hope to encourage family formation.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2002	85	Values, Attitudes and the Family	Single Parents by Choice or by Default? An Analysis of the Attitudes and Prospects of Unmarried, College-Educated Mothers	Dan Quayle's 1992 attack on TV's Murphy Brown inspired an unresolved debate about the wisdom of single motherhood among well-educated women. Until recently, data about this small but significant group of unmarried mothers have been scarce. Using the Fragile Families and Child Well-Being Study, a nationally representative sample of urban, unmarried mothers, this paper examines the attitudes among college-educated, single mothers as well as their partners' social and human capital to test two hypotheses. First, whether, as Quayle suggested, these mothers choose single parenthood because they want children, but not marriage. Second, consideration is given to whether unmarried, college-educated mothers remain single because they have less success in finding 'quality' men. Although most unmarried mothers do not complete college, understanding more about those who do may indicate whether single parenthood will become as widespread in the U.S. as in Europe, or whether it will remain a largely lower-class phenomenon.	Margaret	 Usdansky
2002	85	Values, Attitudes and the Family	Welfare Recipients' Attitudes toward Nonmarital Childbearing and Marriage	The PRWORA welfare reforms of 1996 included the goals of preventing nonmarital births and encouraging two parent families. Success in meeting these goals depends upon whether TANF recipients incorporate these objectives into their own intentions and behaviors. As the first in a series of products from the Welfare Reform and Family Formation Project, this study investigates the attitudes and expectations for childbearing and marriage held by welfare recipients, focusing on: 1) Variations across subgroups of welfare recipients; 2) Inter-relationships between attitudes toward marriage and childbearing; and 3) Changes over time with exposure to welfare reform.    We will address these questions using survey data from three state welfare reform experiments. The three surveys - of teen parents in California and adult single parents in Delaware and Indiana - provide some of the most detailed data on this subject currently available for a large population with direct exposure to welfare reform policies.	David	J. Fein	Rebecca	 London	Jane	 Mauldon
2002	85	Values, Attitudes and the Family	Public Perceptions of Teenage Pregnancy in Britain: Causes and Preventative Measures	Few groups in society excite as much public concern about policy as 'teenage mothers.' The debate on teenage pregnancy has moved on considerably under New Labour, culminating in a national campaign to reduce the rate of teen conceptions as well as support teenage parents (Social Exclusion Unit 1999). As part of the evaluation of this strategy the Teenage Pregnancy Unit and the Health Development Agency sponsored questions on teenage pregnancy carried in the 2000 British Social Attitudes survey.    The evidence from these questions reveals fascinating differences in opinions. Ideas about the factors encouraging teenage parenthood and, consequently, the measures that should be used to reduce it or support teenage parents and their children are not unanimous and multivariate analysis shows interesting differences. The more conservative views held by people over age 55 are one of the most interesting results and is also linked to religiosity and educational levels.	Lynda	 Clarke	Katarina	 Thomson
2002	86	Education, Marriage, and Fertility	Interrelations between Education and Timing of First Unions: The Case of Central and Eastern Europe	The impact of education on women's union formation has long been studied by economic and sociological theories. In studies using micro-data, unions have been found to be triggered by the end of education. Mixed evidence has been found on the impact of the level of education (Blossfeld and Huinink, 1991). However, the potential endogeneity of educational choices and union formation has rarely been assessed.     In this paper, we use two simultaneous hazard equations (Lillard, 1993) to assess such interrelations. In particular, we study Central and Eastern European countries, using micro-data from Fertility and Family Surveys (mostly focused on the period before the transition).     Our results for women show that educational enrolment has a key impact on first union formation, but that also the level of education has a substantive impact as expected by Becker's theory. On the other hand, union formation in almost all countries triggers the end of education.	Francesco	C. Billari	Dimiter	 Philipov
2002	86	Education, Marriage, and Fertility	Community Development and Continuation in School after an Adolescent Birth: A South African Analysis	This paper examines the effects of basic community development on subsequent return to school after an adolescent birth in African communities in South Africa. Often attention to teen childbearing focuses primarily on the individual or family circumstances. However, basic development factors such as access to running water, sanitation, and type of fuel can have substantial impact on girls' daily activities and educational opportunities. Having a child can increase the workload substantially, thereby reducing educational opportunities.     We use data from the 1996 South African Census (n=279,796) to examine the effect of development characteristics on whether girls who had a birth were currently in school at the time of the census. Using logistic regression models, I compare results of girls with and without births. The results have substantial implications for improvements in educational opportunities for Black South African girls.	Heather	J. Branton
2002	86	Education, Marriage, and Fertility	Can Early Family Formation Explain the Lower Educational Attainment of U.S. Fundamentalists?	Previous research (Glass and Jacobs, 1999) has demonstrated the negative effects of childhood fundamentalism on adult education and labor market outcomes. This analysis focuses on the impacts of growing up in a fundamentalist household on life course transitions, specifically family formation, and adult educational attainment. Specifically, we focus on two questions (1) How precisely does childhood fundamentalism affect adult educational attainment  -  is it indirectly through its effects on early fertility and early family formation and/or directly by lowering aspirations for education? (2) Are there gender or race differences in the effects of fundamentalism, such that fundamentalism could advantage youth in otherwise disadvantaged circumstances? We investigate these questions using a national sample of households to determine whether the effect of childhood fundamentalism on adult educational attainment can be explained by early family formation for American black and white women and men.	Scott	 Fitzgerald	Jennifer	 Glass	Jerry	 Jacobs
2002	86	Education, Marriage, and Fertility	Trends in the Effects of Marriage on Women's School Enrollment: 1968-1999	This paper examines whether increasing gender parity in educational attainment in the U.S. has resulted in increasing gender parity in school enrollment after marriage. We address the following questions: (1) How have the effects of marriage on women's school enrollment changed over time? (2) Are women still less likely than men to attend school after marriage, or have these odds changed across time? (3) If these odds have changed, to what extent do trends in the age and educational distributions of married couples explain changes in wives' enrollment relative to their husbands'? We use data from the 1968-1999 October Current Population Survey (CPS) and logistic regression models to predict the probability of women's enrollment in school as a function of marital status, age, and completed education, and the odds of wives' enrollment relative to their husbands' as a function of both husbands' and wives' age and completed education.	Christine	R. Schwartz	Robert	D. Mare
2002	87	Leaving the Parental Home	The Impact of Income and Occupational Status on Leaving Home: A Comparative Analysis Using the European Community Household Panel	We use three waves from the European Community Household Panel to analyze the impact of employment, earnings, household income, and welfare receipts on young adults' decision to leave the parental home. In particular we investigate the importance of these income sources in different welfare settings. We use a simultaneous equation approach to control for unobserved heterogeneity. This is important given that the ECHP does not include retrospective information on demographic events. We find employment and income to be very important for young adults in the Southern European Welfare State. For the Continental European Welfare State the results are less clear and there are significant variations. In the Scandinavian Social Democratic Welfare State the effect of employment and income appears negligible. The effect is also modest in the UK (the Liberal Market State), a feature we attribute to the educational system.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Stefano	 Mazzuco	Fausta	 Ongaro
2002	87	Leaving the Parental Home	Leaving Home in Denmark: A Multi-Destination Study Using Register Data	Most research on leaving home in the European context have been concerned with countries where the average age of leaving home is extremely high. Nordic countries, however, show quite distinct picture from other European countries, with a much younger age at departure. This paper looks into the parental home leaving process in Denmark and it observes how factors affecting the decision of young women to leave parental home interact differently given four risk-competing routes: leaving to live independently, leaving to enter a legal union, leaving to be in a consensual union and remaining in parental home. The source of data is the 'Fertility of Women and Couples Dataset,' which is register-based. A group of women, 13-17 is analyzed longitudinally from 1981 to 1994 and a multinomial logistic model is used to observe the effects of status at departure (e.g., work and educational status) in the choice of destination.	Isabella	 Carneiro	Lisbeth	B.  Knudsen	Jørgen	 Lauridsen
2002	87	Leaving the Parental Home	Effects of Community Characteristics on Early Life Transitions of Canadian Youth	While our earlier studies focused on the effects of  individual and parental traits on the timing and trajectories of early life course events, this paper looks at the impact of community characteristics. Effects on the timing of school completion, start of regular work, and home-leaving of Canadians born between 1971-1980 are examined using a data set that merged 1995 General Social Survey on the Families with data derived from enumeration areas of the 1996 Census. Hazards models of ages at transition are used to analyze the effects of communities while controlling for family and individual-level variables. We expect the results to show that community-level characteristics indicative of social capital, in addition to community affluence and opportunity structures, would have significant effect on the timing of transition to adulthood. The mechanisms by which the effects operate are explored.     (For an example of our work on early life transition see: http://www.ssc.uwo.ca/sociology/popstudies/dp/dp98-7.pdf )	Zenaida	R. Ravanera	Fernando	 Rajulton	Thomas	 Burch
2002	87	Leaving the Parental Home	The Attractiveness of Extended Coresidence with Parents as an Alternative to Early Marriage among Japanese Women	In Japan, and other countries characterized by high housing costs, increasing unemployment, highly differentiated gender roles, and low levels of premarital cohabitation, an emphasis on the increasing attractiveness of extended coresidence with parents has emerged as a popular explanation for the trend toward later marriage. Despite the intuitive appeal of this explanation, recent analyses of Japanese data provide no evidence that either greater parental resources or coresident children's limited contribution to family finances and housework contribute to later marriage. In this research, we address several limitations in existing research to reevaluate the importance of extended coresidence as an attractive alternative to early marriage among Japanese women. Despite using more recent longitudinal data containing direct measures of theoretically relevant variables, our initial results are consistent with earlier research in finding very little evidence that enjoyment of the parental provision of financial resources and domestic services contributes to later marriage.	Jim	 Raymo	Hiromi	 Ono
2002	88	Sexuality Education and Information for Adolescents	Communication and Contraceptive Behavior among Adolescents in Kenya	This study analyzes the direction and strength of association between exposure to family planning (FP) messages through mass media and interpersonal sources on the one hand, and knowledge of modern FP methods, approval of contraceptive use, intention to use contraceptives in future, and ever-use of a contraceptive method among adolescents on the other hand. Based on the 1998 Kenya DHS data, this study analyzed 1852 females aged 15-19 years. Results of logistic regression analyses show that mass media exposure is most significantly associated with the first two stages of behavior change (knowledge and approval); its effects are much weaker at intention stage and absent at the last stage (ever use of contraception). In contrast, interpersonal communication is strongly associated with all the stages of contraceptive behavior. To influence adolescent contraceptive behavior, both sources should be used concurrently.	Peter	M. Koome
2002	88	Sexuality Education and Information for Adolescents	Delivery of Sex Education to Adolescents in Lesotho	This paper discusses strategies for the delivery of sex education to adolescents in Lesotho. The study uses a qualitative methodology. The data for this study was collected in two phases, covering four districts. First, in 1999, ten focus group discussions were conducted with adolescents attending secondary schools. The second phase, conducted in 2000, involved 36 focus group discussions with parents and teachers. There is universal agreement among parents, teachers and adolescents that sex education should be introduced in schools curricula. There is a belief that if sex education is taught as a formal subject in schools, teachers will be able to provide adolescents with information on sexuality and sexual health and parents will be encouraged to discuss matters of sexuality in the home. The results of this study indicate that adolescents, parents and teachers are in support the Lesotho Government's initiative to incorporate sex education into the school curriculum.	Akim	 Mturi	Monique	 Hennink
2002	88	Sexuality Education and Information for Adolescents	Adolescents' Reproductive Health Seeking Behavior in the Northeast of China	To assess the sexual and reproductive health seeking behavior among unmarried youths and to help develop the effective risk reduction intervention, in 2001, a WHO supported research was carried out among females and males aged 15-24 years old residing in the Northeast part of China. This study is a community-based study. After the key informant interviews, survey and focus group discussions and in-depth interviews were conducted.     This paper is the primary report of the study. Results draw from key informant interviews indicated that sex education lack in the both middle school and university. Talk about sexual behavior is still a very sensitive topic in this area. There is far more ambivalence about sex education and reproductive health service providing to adolescent. People concern about introduction of sex education and reproductive health service would encourage adolescents sexual activities, although information about the sex from underground and private service facilities exist in this area.	Liying	 Zhang	Lianfu	 Zhou	Yunrong	 Liu
2002	88	Sexuality Education and Information for Adolescents	Barriers and Opportunities for Improved School-Based Sex Education in Nepal	Although early and universal marriage is common place in Nepalese culture, the practice of delayed marriage is increasing, leading to a rise in premarital sexual activity and risky sexual behavior. Research has also highlighted limited knowledge of contraception amongst young people and almost negligible usage.     Nepal's secondary school education curriculum includes Health, Population and Environmental Education in classes 9 and 10, within which reproductive health, family life education and safe motherhood is integrated. These classes however, tend to be biomedical in focus, teaching methods remain didactic and the time allocated to the subject remains limited.     Using information collected during in-depth interviews and focus group discussions with young people, teachers and parents, and data obtained during a questionnaire based survey of students, this paper explores: young people's, teacher's and parent's knowledge, experiences and attitudes towards school based sex education; barriers to improving the curriculum; and opportunities for change.	Nicole	 Stone	Padam	 Simkhada	Roger	 Ingham
2002	89	Consequences of International Migration for Receiving Countries	Does the Wave Change? Reinvestigating Mexican Migration in the 1990s	This paper investigates an unsettled empirical debate over whether the characteristics of Mexican migrants have changed over the last decade. Theoretical reasons and prosaic shifts in immigration policy suggest a shift toward women migrants and greater U.S. settlement; and away from traditional migrants and sending areas in Mexico. We combine 1997 U.S. (CPS) and Mexican (ENADID) data to control for place selectivity and to update the empirical evidence. We introduce an event history analysis to reveal shifts that might be otherwise hidden due to concomitant changes in the very demographic characteristics we are interested in. The findings suggest statistically significant changes in recent years. We discuss the ramifications for U.S. and bilateral immigration and guest worker policies.	B.	Lindsay  Lowell
2002	89	Consequences of International Migration for Receiving Countries	Do Amnesty Programs Encourage Illegal Immigration? Evidence from the IRCA	This paper examines whether allowing certain undocumented immigrants to legalize their status leads to additional illegal immigration. We focus on the effects of the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act, which granted amnesty to almost 3 million undocumented immigrants. We find that apprehensions of persons attempting to illegally cross the U.S.-Mexico border declined immediately following passage of the law but returned to normal levels during the period when illegal immigrants could file for amnesty and thereafter. Our findings suggest that the amnesty program neither stimulated nor discouraged illegal immigration in the long run.	Pia	 Orrenius	Madeline	 Zavodny
2002	89	Consequences of International Migration for Receiving Countries	Changes in the Cat and Mouse Game at the Mexico-U.S. Border: Consequences of Immigration Reform	Since mid-century, illegal immigration to the United States has emerged as a hotly contested public policy issue.  Congress first passed the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), the first U.S. legislation designed to curb illegal immigration, and ten years later, it passed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA), a get tough bill strengthening many of IRCA's provisions.      This paper assesses the extent to which reforms have deterred illegal migration from Mexico over the long run and shifted border-crossing behavior of women and men.  We estimate trends in the probability of taking a first illegal trip, and probabilities of women's and men's use of border smugglers and being apprehended.  The evidence suggests no significant overall deterrence of undocumented migration.  However, it does suggest that the game of cat and mouse played at the border shifts annually and that it depends on who is migrating, men or women.	Katharine	M. Donato
2002	89	Consequences of International Migration for Receiving Countries	Making the Change: Bottlenecks to Adaptation for New Immigrants	Between 1990 and 2000, many southeastern states experienced unprecedented growth in their Latino immigrant populations, offering a unique opportunity for demographers to examine the adaptation process of new immigrants in states previously unaffected by immigration.  We questioned whether non-traditional receiving states such as Georgia offer different barriers to adaptation than traditional receiving states such as Florida and California (whose adaptation barriers have been widely researched).      To explore this hypothesis, we conducted 68 semi-structured interviews with key informants in six counties throughout Georgia to examine the unmet needs of recent immigrants in the state. We also conducted 13 focus groups with 103 recent Latino immigrants to examine their difficulties in adjusting to life in Georgia. Findings from this study show that new immigrants often face bottlenecks - minor difficulties in adjustment that hinder several other aspects of adaptation. In this paper, we explore these bottlenecks (such as lack of transportation) and compare them to adaptation barriers in Florida.	Stephanie	A. Bohon	Jorge	 Atiles
2002	90	Quality of Care in Reproductive Health	Service Delivery Issues in the Provision of Antenatal Care in South Africa	We conducted a study to evaluate the provision of antenatal services to clients in South Africa in 2001. We used client flow analysis (CFA) to determine contact and waiting times for types of clients and activity sampling to determine how providers spent their time. The average antenatal first visit client spent over 4 hours in the clinic with mostly waiting.  By 8:30 over 50% of antenatal clients had their first contact. The minimum package is a series of examinations that includes history taking, physical examination, weight, blood pressure, urine, blood taking and treatment.  A high percentage of clients did not get the full package.     Providers spent an average of 37% of their day in direct contact with clients. In only 52% of antenatal first visit contacts and 41% of repeat visit contacts was information provided on eight key counseling topics. Contacts in which clients received counseling were longer.	Barbara	S. Janowitz	Saiqa	 Mullick	Busisiwe	 Kunene	Nudgga	 Maggwa	Carmen	 Cuthbertson	Laura	 Johnson	Stirling	 Cummings	Mags	 Beksinska
2002	90	Quality of Care in Reproductive Health	Improving Quality of Reproductive Health Care through Implementing a Client-Centered Approach in Pakistan	The ICPD agenda argued forcefully that a focus on family planning without adequately addressing other reproductive health issues is short sighted (Sai, 1997). It recognized that social and economic constraints to women's access to services are paramount for improvements in reproductive health. The paradigm shift also asked for a focus on clients, men, and women and away from government or provider driven targets and objectives.      There is very little practical experience to guide this policy change. In Pakistan the main policy questions are: first, to what extent is it possible to train workers to provide a wide range of reproductive health services as well as address the constraints to women's access of services; second, whether the provision of a combination of services and a focus on clients rather than on the achievements of targets lead to better quality reproductive health services. Our research measures these issues.	Zeba	A. Sathar	Anrudh	 Jain	Saumya	 Ramarao	Minhaj	ul Haque
2002	90	Quality of Care in Reproductive Health	Reproductive Health Services in Rural China: Changes and Challenges	China launched the FP/RH quality of care experiment project in 1995, following an official call for reorientation of family planning programs from a focus on demographic targets to meeting clients' needs. Starting from just 6 counties/districts, now more than 800 counties/districts have implemented quality of care programs. However, more information is available from input and process components than from the output and outcomes thus far. The measurable outcome effect such as improvement in RH status of women is still not very clear. This paper describes FP/RH service use and outcomes from women's perspectives, to analyze observable changes during the late 1990s in rural China, and to discuss the challenges for quality of care implementation. Both 1997 and 2001 national RH survey data are used, with emphasis on service availability and usage.	Zhenzhen	 Zheng
2002	90	Quality of Care in Reproductive Health	Client-Provider Interactions in Family Planning Service Delivery: The Correspondence between Provider and Client Expectations of Treatment	Many reproductive health programs suffer from poor quality services, in which women obtain insufficient information and support to use family planning well, and providers lack motivation to improve client-provider interactions. Research in Egypt, Peru and Uganda tests the feasibility and effectiveness of interventions to improve women's experiences with family planning.    The research assumes that process and content of consultations affect clients' satisfaction and behavior. But, do providers and clients share the same view of what is essential and desirable during interactions?  Do both providers and clients think it appropriate that clients ask questions? Agree on the type and amount of information conveyed? Have similar expectations about the degree of formality with which the session is conducted?      Baseline and post-intervention data collection include provider and client interviews. Comparable questions asked of providers and clients allow us to assess the congruence in their expectations and to measure clients' satisfaction with their consultation.	Susan	E. Adamchak	Harriet	 Birungi	Federico	 Leon	Laila	 Naiwar
2002	91	The Antecedents of Unmet Need for Family Planning	Empty Pockets: Estimating Ability to Pay for Family Planning	This research measures the extent of global reliance on international aid for family planning services and donated contraceptives and provides a gauge of the potential for cost recovery.    We present a national measure of consumers'' ability to pay for contraception for 103 aid-dependent countries.  We construct the measure using estimates of the cost of family planning, income distributions and an assumption that one percent of income goes towards family planning.  The results show that quite a large portion of aid-dependent nations is unable to afford contraception.      We include the measure of ability to pay in a model of contraceptive prevalence.  Ability to pay significantly explains contraceptive prevalence, implying that it is a barrier to usage.  We construct a rough test of the potential of cross subsidization, indicating that raising income levels is more important than income redistribution.  This research would suggest that caution be exercised in cost recovery programs.	Russell	A Green
2002	91	The Antecedents of Unmet Need for Family Planning	The Impact of Provider-Defined Service Improvements for Family Planning in Turkey	Contraceptive demand may go unmet as a result of low quality family planning (FP) services.  Service supply factors may not meet standards of care desired by current and prospective clients. Studies of the quality of family planning care emphasize the importance of contraceptive choice, provider competence, and provider-client interactions, among other factors. This study addresses improvements in service standards identified, defined and implemented by public and private providers of family planning care in Turkey over the period 1998 to 2001. A local task force of representatives from the health care system met to define and set minimum standards of care. The hypothesis tested is whether provider-defined standards have an impact on family planning client utilization levels and client-reported care outcomes. Our study provides relatively strong empirical support, given longitudinal data and panel regression analysis techniques, that such improvements can benefit client care and their contraceptive needs.	Amy	 Tsui	Ersin	 Topcuoglu	Pinar	 Senlet
2002	91	The Antecedents of Unmet Need for Family Planning	The X Factor: Birth-Spacers, an Under-Served Population: Demand and Responsiveness to Demand for Birth Spacing	To better understand the relationship between demand and unmet need for family planning, desire to space or limit births, and variables such as age and parity, PRIME II conducted an in-depth analysis of DHS data from 15 countries on married women of reproductive age. Analyses focused on the influence of age and parity on demand for spacing and limiting and use of specific family planning methods. Differentials in met need for spacing versus limiting were also examined.      Analyses demonstrated a sharply defined X pattern where demand for limiting supplanted demand for spacing based on age and parity of women. The age and parity levels at which this switch occurred varied, often substantially, among the 15 countries. The study also uncovered large differences among countries in met need for spacing and limiting. This research has important implications for how providers are trained to tailor messages to the needs of particular clients.	Susan	 Eudy	William	H. Jansen	Rich	 Mason	Dianna	 Frick
2002	91	The Antecedents of Unmet Need for Family Planning	Gender Relations and Contraceptive Use Dynamics: Longitudinal Evidence from Egypt	This paper examines the relationship between gender relations and contraceptive use in Egypt. The facets of gender relations examined are: rigidity of gender roles; wife's autonomy; wife's decision-making power; physical violence. The analysis uses longitudinal survey data collected in Egypt in the period 1995-1997 as a follow-up to the DHS. Roughly 2500 women were interviewed three times, with remarkably high sample retention. The longitudinal data permit the estimation of regression models in which gender relations are measured prior to contraceptive behavior and that include woman-specific effects, providing a more stringent test of the causal effect of gender relations on reproductive behavior than is usually the case in the literature on this topic. Moreover, each of the facets of gender relations is measured by numerous items. The analysis conditions contraceptive use dynamics on fertility preferences, i.e., women in need of contraceptive protection.	Fatma	 El-Zanaty	Laila	 El-Zeini
2002	92	Disparities in Aging: Gender, Race/Ethnicity and Economic Status	Gender and Intergenerational Exchanges in Vietnam		Jed	 Friedman	John	 Knodel	Truong	 Si Anh	Bui	 The Cuong
2002	92	Disparities in Aging: Gender, Race/Ethnicity and Economic Status	Identifying the Vulnerable Elderly in Asia and Their Level of Disadvantage	The vulnerability of the older population is a persistent theme within gerontology, arising from consideration of biological processes and underlying socioeconomic dynamics. These concerns often translate into assuming that certain groups of elderly are more disadvantaged, such as the oldest-old and those with limited economic and support resources. This paper introduces a new methodology for examining this issue by developing a risk factor for potentially vulnerable groups which measures their degree of disadvantage relative to those not in the group. This measure is used to compare profiles of disadvantage in economic, health, and social support outcomes for 12 vulnerable sociodemographic groups in four Asian countries: the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand. Data come from representative surveys of older adults in each country conducted in the mid-1990s.  Results indicate wide variation among the vulnerable groups in the degree and extent of their disadvantage.	Albert	 Hermalin	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal
2002	92	Disparities in Aging: Gender, Race/Ethnicity and Economic Status	Reliability of Respondent and Proxy Reports of the Social, Economic, and Health Status of Older Adults in Egypt and Tunisia	Reliance on proxies is common in research on older adults, yet the reliability of proxy and respondent reports is under-assessed in developing countries. Using data from the World Health Organization, we explore the reliability of self- and proxy-responses to items measuring the social, economic, and health status of adults aged 60+ in Egypt (n=941) and Tunisia (n=1129). Multivariate analysis is used to assess whether item reliability differs by respondent's gender and type of proxy, and whether effects of proxy type differ by respondent's gender. In both sites, items measuring availability of social support are highly reliable. Agreement on items measuring source of support is higher for males than females, particularly when proxies are spouses. Agreement on items measuring economic resources is low, with all proxy types more often reporting that respondents' economic needs are met. Agreement on items measuring health is moderate, with disagreeing proxies generally reporting better health.	Cesar	 Rebellon	Kathryn	M. Yount	Emily	M. Agree
2002	92	Disparities in Aging: Gender, Race/Ethnicity and Economic Status	Functional Capacity and Self-Evaluation of Health and Life of Oldest Old in China	This study is based on survey data from a sample of 8,805 elders aged 80-105 in 22 provinces of China.  Rural oldest old are significantly more active in daily living than urban oldest old; adaptation is perhaps the major explanation of this difference.  Female oldest old are seriously disadvantaged in functional capacities and self-reported health as compared with their male counterparts.      Percentages of being active in daily living, having good physical performance, normal cognitive function and well-being drop dramatically from age 80-84 to 100-105. Proportion reporting satisfaction in current life, however, remains almost constant from age 80-84 to 90-94 and declines slightly afterwards. This may suggest that being more positive in self-feeling of current life is one of the secrets of longevity.	Yi	 Zeng
2002	93	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developing Countries	My Decision, Your Decision or Our Decision? Wives' and Husband's Values and Attitudes and Their Influence in Couple's Actual Use of Contraception	Today's contraceptive use in Mexico appears as a quite extended practice, with about 70% of women ever using contraception. But, what are men's and women's values and attitudes regarding family size, family purpose, family planning, individual goals and gender roles within the family that are behind this behavior? Additionally, in what extent does this apparently consensual practice results from unequal effects of his or her ideas and decisions?    Using data from the Mexican Survey of Communication in Family Planning 1996 regarding 1,021 couples surveyed, this work compares the information provided for each member of the couple in terms of values and attitudes regarding family planning, ideal family size, knowledge on contraception, communication and family decision-making process.     Using logistic regression we estimate the effect of each couple's member characteristics on couple's current use of contraception. Preliminary findings show a disproportionate significance of husband's values and attitudes influencing the use of contraception.	Irene	 Casique
2002	93	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developing Countries	Women's vs. Men's Social Networks and Contraceptive Use Dynamics: Longitudinal Evidence from Ghana	This paper examines the effects of social network experience on contraceptive use dynamics in six rural and peri-urban communities in southern Ghana. The principal interest is the relative explanatory strength of women's vs. men's social network experience. Research on social interaction and reproduction in developing countries has largely neglected men's social networks, despite the fact that in most of these societies men have a decisive voice in reproductive decision-making. Panel survey data for roughly 900 women and their male partners covering three years of observation are analyzed. The monthly probability of use of modern contraception is modeled as a function of conventional demographic and socioeconomic variables and separate sets of social network variables specific to the woman and to her male partner. The regression equations include a couple-specific term, treated as random or fixed.	John	 Casterline	Paul	 Hewett	Dominic	 Agyeman	Peter	 Aglobitse
2002	93	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developing Countries	Which Men Promote Smaller Families? Marital Relations and Men's Reproductive Decisions among the Pare of Northern Tanzania	This research comes in the wake of increasing interest in men's roles in childbearing decisions in sub-Saharan Africa. This paper examines the relationship between male attitudes toward reproduction and marital relations. The research was conducted in a Pare community in Northern Tanzania. It is based on a combination of an ethnographic study and in-depth interviews. A subsequent survey was administered to 400 men, the husbands of a simple random sample of women previously interviewed.     Preliminary analysis suggests that in a marital union where the husband makes the major decisions, where bride-wealth is paid by the husband's family and where the marriage is likely to have been arranged by the parents, the number of children is significantly higher than in unions where these conditions do not hold. These marriages, in addition, are likely to be polygynous and the religion of the men, Muslim.	Marida	 Hollos	Ulla	 Larsen
2002	93	Men's Role in Reproduction in Developing Countries	'Because He Loves Me': Men's and Women's Perspectives on How and Why Husbands Are Involved in Maternal Health in Rural Guatemala	This study aims to extend notions of male involvement to the maternal health field and to understand how Guatemalan men and women think about husband involvement in pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period. Based on individual interviews and focus groups with men, women, and community health workers from two areas of Guatemala, this paper describes the pregnancy-related advice and assistance husbands give and the reasons men are and are not involved in maternal health. Both men and women reported that male involvement in maternal health is relatively high, desirable, unique, and affected by many factors, particularly love, men's work demands, economic concerns, and men's knowledge. The results help to fill the broad gaps in knowledge about male involvement in this aspect of family health and to amend stereotypes about husbands' relationship to maternal health care.	Marion	W. Carter
2002	94	The Demography of Affirmative Action	Does Affirmative Action Make a Difference?: Evidence from Washington State		Charles	 Hirschman
2002	94	The Demography of Affirmative Action	Color-Blind Affirmative Action		Glenn	 Loury
2002	94	The Demography of Affirmative Action	The Long-Term Consequences of Segregation		Douglas	S. Massey	Mary	J. Fischer
2002	94	The Demography of Affirmative Action	Before and after Hopwood: The Elimination of Affirmative Action and Minority Student Enrollment in Texas		Marta	 Tienda	Kevin	 Leicht	Kim	M. Lloyd
2002	95	Social Inequality in Childhood and Its Effects	Social Inequality in Reproductive Loss	Evidence from 1,373,943 pregnancies in the Czech Republic between 1987 and 1991 include 95,580 involuntary fetal losses, 621,030 induced abortions, and 657,333 live births (of which 6,358 ended in infant deaths). Event-history models consider fetal deaths after eight weeks of gestation (both spontaneous abortions and stillbirths) as well as infant deaths following live births.     Since most infant deaths occur at gestation durations when a significant share of the fetal population remains in utero, we consider the transition from viability in utero to fetal death, the transition from viability in utero to live birth, and the transition from live birth to infant death simultaneously. For early fetal deaths, induced abortions are considered as competing risks. Education of women, marital status and ages of women, are allowed to vary with time for all three processes.	Elwood	 Carlson	Mariana	 Mourgova	Jan	 Hoem
2002	95	Social Inequality in Childhood and Its Effects	Health Insurance and Child Mortality in Costa Rica	This study uses a natural experiment approach to evaluate the effect of health insurance on infant and child mortality. In the 1970s Costa Rica adopted national health insurance which expanded insurance coverage from 42 percent of the population in 1973 to 75 percent by 1980. We use county-level vital statistics and census data to isolate the causal insurance effect on mortality using county fixed effects models. We find that insurance increases are strongly related to mortality decreases at the county level before controlling for other time-varying factors. However, this effect can be almost fully explained by changes in other correlated maternal, household, and community characteristics. Although multicollinearity complicates exact causal attribution, these results question the proposition that health insurance can lead to large improvements in infant and child mortality, or that expanding insurance to the poor can substantially narrow socioeconomic differentials in mortality.	William	H. Dow	Kammi	K. Schmeer
2002	95	Social Inequality in Childhood and Its Effects	The Pediatric Paradox: Heterogeneity in the Birth Cohort	Racial comparisons of infant mortality indicate that low birth weight African American infants (the presumed disadvantaged population) have lower mortality rates than low birth weight European American infants. This paper explores the hypothesis that this paradox is due to heterogeneity. Analyses using Gaussian mixtures of logistic regressions suggests that birth cohorts are composed of two subpopulations heterogeneous for infant mortality. One subpopulation appears to account for the normal process of fetal development while the other may represent those compromised during development. Surprisingly, the compromised subpopulation has lower birth weight-specific mortality. This might be due to high rates of fetal loss in this subpopulation, which results in a highly selected birth cohort. Comparisons indicate that the Pediatric Paradox can be attributed to the larger compromised subpopulation with lower mortality of African Americans. This suggests that estimates of the disadvantage experienced by African Americans based on crude infant mortality rates are underestimated.	Timothy	B. Gage
2002	95	Social Inequality in Childhood and Its Effects	Parents' Occupational Class in Childhood and Adult Mortality and Cardiovascular Mortality Between 1971-98 in Finland	The purpose of the study was to analyze the relative importance of socio-economic conditions in childhood and adulthood as predictors of cardiovascular mortality in adulthood in Finland. The study is based on a 10% sample of the 1950 Finnish census, linked individually to information from the censuses 1970-95) and to deaths during 1971-98. Persons aged 0-14 years living with their parents in 1950 were included. The number of cardiovascular deaths during the 1971-98 were 1541 among men and 355 among women. Parent's occupational class in 1950 census was used as measure of socio-economic position in childhood and the own occupational class in 1970 served as indicator of socio-economic position in adulthood. The main statistical method used was Cox proportional hazards model. Both among males and females, parent's occupational class was in connection to increased mortality after the adjustment of occupational class in adulthood. The effect of parents' occupational class on mortality was systematic and graded.	Veijo	J. Notkola	Tuija	 Martelin	Seppo	 Koskinen
2002	96	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Attitudes Toward Unsafe Sexual Practices Among Low-Income Males in Brazil	In Brazil, the level of sexual activity before marriage is relatively high and increasing. However, premarital sexual activity has not been accompanied by adoption of safe sexual practices to avoid unwanted pregnancies and STD/AIDS. Our project was conceived as a response to the lack of knowledge on sexual behavior and to explore the socio-psychological determinants of unsafe sex among young people in shanty towns of Brazil. A survey especially designed to investigate these issues was conducted among single males aged 13-19 years in selected low-income areas of Recife (N = 1438). This paper presents the factors involved in sexual risk taking, considering a dyad approach, and identifies determinants of unsafe practices that can be effectively addressed in intervention programs. Findings provide a basis to improve strategies to reduce risks to reproductive health of unwanted pregnancies and STDs/AIDS among teenagers.	Fatima	 Juarez	Tais	 De Freitas Santos
2002	96	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Trends in Effectiveness of Safe Sex among Single Women in Three Latin American Countries	The HIV pandemic has brought the male condom to prominence as the main method for preventing STIs.  Most prevention efforts assume that there is little potential for this method in preventing unintended pregnancies, especially in developing countries. Few family planning programs give priority to promoting the condom among single women.  The availability of the calendar data for a number of developing countries participating in the DHS Program, provides a unique opportunity to address empirical issues related to the dynamics of condom use among single women in these settings.    Data from Brazil, Colombia, and Peru are used to address whether condom users differ from non-condom users in terms of their socio-economic and demographic characteristics.  Additionally, we address the fertility consequences of condom discontinuation and failure.    Our paper's findings have major implications for efforts to promote condom use among single women.	Mohamed	 Ali	John	 Cleland	Iqbal	H. Shah
2002	96	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Initiation of Sexual Activity and Subsequent Sexual Behavior among Female Adolescents in Nairobi Urban Slums	A recent cross-sectional survey conducted among 1934 female adolescents aged 12-24 years in Nairobi slums suggests that sexual activity starts earlier in the slums than the rest of Kenya. The survey further showed that a significant proportion (about one in four) of first sexual encounters among adolescent girls in the slums involve some form of coercion (forced or tricked into having sex). This paper examines: factors influencing timing of initiation of sex; and the relationship between undesirable circumstances of sexual initiation (young age or coercion) and subsequent sexual behavior (number of sex partners in the past 12 months, ever use of contraceptives, condom use in last sexual encounter). Undesirable circumstances of sexual initiation may lead to risky sexual behavior (multiple partners, non-use of contraceptives/ condoms). The results can be used to inform programs/policies addressing critical adolescent reproductive health issues in the developing countries, particularly the rapidly expanding urban poor population.	Monica	A. Magadi
2002	96	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Learning about Sex in Uganda: Evidence from Masaka District	Providing information about sex, contraception and condoms is a crucial component of efforts aimed at preventing unwanted pregnancy and HIV. However, most discussions of communication about sex have focused on communication between sexual partners, rather than on the context in which sex is learned and information about sex  (and sexuality itself) exchanged.    This paper examines the various channels through which young people seek out and receive information about sex-related topics. Particular attention is paid to the extent and timing of family communication with children about sex, the kind of information that families convey to young people, and variations by gender. The paper also examines changes over time in information channels and the effect of prior sexual experience on how adolescents receive and react to messages presented by various actors. The data are derived from focus group discussions conducted in Masaka District in 1995.	Anastasia	J. Gage	Brent	 Wolf	Stella	 Neema
2002	97	Sociocultural Issues in Maternal and Child Health in the U.S.	SES Impacts on Relationships between Medical Impairments in Children Aged 5-17 and Their Functional Limitations, Health Status, and School Attendance	Using the 19,570 children aged 5-17 in the child sample of the 1997-1998 National Health Interview Survey, we examine the relationship between medical impairments and negative outcomes, functional limitations, reported general health status, and days missed from school. We reviewed differentials in impairments by parental education, household poverty status and whether the child lived in a single parent household. We found few differences in impairments among SES groups. However SES differentials for functional limitations, general health status and days missed from school, were substantial differences. Children in advantaged situations, have fewer functional limitations, are in better general health and miss fewer days of school. We found that most of the explanation for these differences lay in the higher rate of negative outcomes for children with both impairments and lower SES. Medical usage explains some but not all of these results.	Roger	 Avery	Michael	 Msall	Brian	 Mayer
2002	97	Sociocultural Issues in Maternal and Child Health in the U.S.	Do American Mothers Treat Sons and Daughters Alike?	Son preference is well documented in parts of the developing world, particularly China, Korea, India and South Asia.  In societies where son preference is strong, adverse consequences for girls may be severe, including death.  In the U.S. where the stated norm is gender equality, surprisingly little attention to whether childrearing practices differ by gender.  This absence seems all the more surprising given the evidence of gender bias in the American primary education system.     This paper uses the NLSY to examine gender-differentiated parenting practices (infant feeding, well baby care, child care) in the U.S.  Despite prevailing norms of gender equity, we hypothesize that mothers treat boys and girls differently; however, these differences cause less morbidity and fewer lasting developmental effects, because children in the U.S. generally receive adequate nutrition and medical care and child mortality overall is low.  Therefore, gender bias in the U.S. may be invisible in infancy.	Elizabeth	M. Armstrong	Christopher	C. Weiss
2002	97	Sociocultural Issues in Maternal and Child Health in the U.S.	The Effect of Maternal Nativity on the Health Status of Mexican-American Infants	Many studies have consistently demonstrated that Mexican-Americans have better birth outcomes than do other populations of similar socioeconomic backgrounds, and that these favorable outcomes are more pronounced among immigrants. However, few studies have explored the general health status of Mexican-American infants beyond birth and its association with maternal nativity.     This study investigates the influence of maternal nativity on the health status of Mexican-American infants, while taking into account the intervening effects of independent variables: socioeconomic status, social support, maternal health behaviors and mothering practices, health care use, and birth weight.     The study uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, which provides rich and in-depth information about child health and related factors. The findings from this study reveal that infants of foreign-born mothers are less healthy than are infants of native-born mothers after controlling for intervening factors.	Eunjeong	 Kim	Samuel	 Echevarria
2002	97	Sociocultural Issues in Maternal and Child Health in the U.S.	Maternal and Infant Health of the Mexican-Origin Population in Chicago: A Study of the Effect of Acculturation on Health in the United States	This paper investigates the mechanisms influencing maternal and child health through an examination of the epidemiological paradox: the empirical finding that health outcomes of infants born to Mexican-origin women are better than or equal to the health outcomes of infants born to U.S.-born white women.  The paper focuses on the less-studied finding of the epidemiological paradox: the health outcomes of the Mexican-origin population deteriorate with increased duration in the United States.      Data analyzed comes from a study of recently pregnant Mexican-origin women of single and multiple parity from South Chicago.  The study contains survey and medical record data on maternal and infant health, socioeconomic, and behavioral variables.  This paper provides a longitudinal analysis of change in maternal and infant health over the duration in the U.S. through a comparison of health during the sequential pregnancies and the infant health of siblings during the first year of life.	Miguel	 Ceballos
2002	98	Public Policy and Children's Economic Well-Being	Returns on Investments? Public Expenditures on Children and Child Outcomes across the Fifty U.S. States	Our paper examines how public expenditures on children affect child outcomes across the fifty U.S. states. The diversity across U.S. states in public investments in children and child outcomes provides the ideal setting for comparative analysis. A cross-state analysis is particularly important since the 1996 welfare legislation transferred more autonomy to states in devising social policies. Our analytical framework borrows from cross-national studies of welfare states and child outcomes. We test the relationship between public expenditures on children (compiled from state budgets) and a wide array of indicators of child wellbeing. We explore relationships between state expenditures on children and child outcomes and consider whether this relationship is weakened when controls for state capacities and state racial and age composition are included. Our analysis disaggregates spending into areas such as health or education to determine which types of investments are most beneficial for children.	Kristen	 Harknett	Irwin	 Garfinkel	Jay	 Bainbridge	Nancy	 Folbre	Timothy	 Smeeding
2002	98	Public Policy and Children's Economic Well-Being	Food Stamp Benefits and Child Poverty in the United States: An Examination of Food Stamp Efficacy in Alleviating Child Poverty	In 2000, 8.8 million children received food stamps, making the Food Stamp Program a crucial component of the social safety net. Despite its importance, little research has examined food stamps' effect on children's overall well-being. Using the Current Population Survey, we consider the impact of food stamps on three measures of poverty-the headcount, the poverty-gap, and the squared poverty-gap. These measures portray the incidence, depth, and severity of poverty. With these measures, we first compare the effect of food stamps, before and after welfare reform, on the poverty of households with and without children. Policymakers have proposed two changes to the Food Stamp Program-targeting more benefits to the poorest households and increasing the participation rate among eligible households. We simulate these policy changes and examine their effect on the three poverty measures and compare their relative effectiveness in alleviating poverty in all households and households with children.	Dean	 Jolliffe	Craig	G. Gundersen	Laura	 Tiehen	Joshua	 Winicki
2002	98	Public Policy and Children's Economic Well-Being	Accounting for Recent Declines in Child Poverty: Effects of Changing Family Structure and Parental Employment since PRWORA	Changing family structure, especially the growth in the proportions of children living with single parents, accounted for a large share of the rise in child poverty during the 1980s. Since the mid-1990s, and after the passage of the 1996 welfare reform legislation (i.e., Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act), poverty rates among American children have plummeted to their lowest levels since the late 1970s. Welfare reform has also coincided with significant increases in maternal employment and growing shares of children residing in married-couple families, especially among the low-income population. In this paper, we decompose recent changes in child poverty rates, both pre- and post-welfare reform, into rate and composition effects (i.e., parts dues to family structure and maternal employment). We also consider variations across racial and ethnic groups. The analyses are based on concatenated files from the 1988-to-2001 March Supplements of the Current Population Survey.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Martha	L. Crowley
2002	98	Public Policy and Children's Economic Well-Being	Social Security Receipt and Children's Economic Well-Being	When most people think of Social Security (also known as Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance, or OASDI), they tend to focus on benefits paid to retirees, or to people unable to work because of a disability. But the Social Security system is a family insurance program that also extends benefits to the spouses and children of retired, disabled, or deceased workers. This paper utilizes Social Security Administration records matched to the 1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation to examine the distribution of child benefits and their importance to children's financial well-being. The incidence of child benefit receipt is examined according to children's age, sex, race, ethnicity, and family income level. The impact of these benefits is measured by their effect on family income and child poverty among beneficiary families and for the population as a whole.	Chad	 Newcomb
2002	99	Economic Models of Demographic Behavior	Does Economic Uncertainty Have an Impact on Decisions to Bear Children? Evidence from Eastern Germany	Nowhere in Central and Eastern Europe was transition as abrupt as in Eastern Germany, due to its immediate reunification with West Germany. The post-unification period was marked by a sharp fall in fertility rates in Eastern Germany, suggesting a link between childbearing decisions and uncertainty. To date, there is neither a theoretical model that distinguishes between the various kinds of uncertainty nor an empirical test of the effects of any such form on fertility in the East German context. This paper develops a theoretical model that distinguishes between alternative sources of uncertainty in their effects on fertility, and takes advantage of the East German segment of the GSOEP for various years in the 1990s to test the implications derived from the model. The empirical results indicate that employment related uncertainty had significant and detrimental effect on the childbearing decisions of East German women.	Sumon	 Bhaumik	Jeffrey	 Nugent
2002	99	Economic Models of Demographic Behavior	Social Network Influences and AIDS Risk Perceptions: Tackling the Causality Problem	Understanding the determinants of individuals' risk perceptions about AIDS is an essential step towards curtailing the spread of this disease. We develop a theoretical model of learning and decision-making about AIDS with a focus on uncertainty, and argue that social interaction is an important determinant of risk perceptions and behavioral change. Using longitudinal survey data from rural Kenya, we test this hypothesis and investigate whether social interactions - and especially the risks perceptions of social network partners - exert causal influences on respondents' risk perceptions and spousal communication about AIDS. The study explicitly allows for the possibility that important characteristics, such as unobserved preferences or community characteristics, determine not only the outcomes of interest but also the size and composition of networks. The most important empirical result is that social networks have significant effects on risk perception and the adoption of new behaviors even after controlling for unobserved factors.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2002	99	Economic Models of Demographic Behavior	An Empirical Study of Children Quantity and Quality Tradeoff in Rural China	This article studies the children quantity-quality tradeoff in rural China, examines existing theories and explores frameworks to fit current situation. The data are from a survey concerning married women's fertility behavior and preferences in rural Henan in mid-2001. By defining children quality as the combination of children's sex and education, while children quantity as the number of children, the article uses logistic regressions and other descriptive statistics, concludes that despite the widely accepted opinion that rural China cannot display this tradeoff for its underdevelopment, children quality substituting for quantity in rural Henan has been found considerably popular, stable, and independent. The tradeoff phenomenon has demonstrated the prospective in population transition of rural China. Although the results show certain agreement to the western theories, there are still many specifications in rural China ignored in those frameworks. It is to develop a new framework to better fit the specifications in rural China.	Jianlin	 Niu
2002	99	Economic Models of Demographic Behavior	Murphy Brown Revisited: Human Capital, Search, and Nonmarital Childbearing among Educated Women	Nonmarital childbearing among college-educated women has received little attention, despite substantial increases over the past thirty years. Existing models cannot provide explanations for nonmarital childbearing among women at the top of the educational distribution. I develop a search model of marriage and fertility decisions that can explain nonmarital childbearing at all levels of education. This model predicts that nonmarital first births should increase with age among women with high levels of human capital. It also suggests that worsening marriage market conditions should affect nonmarital birth probabilities for all groups of women.    For women with low levels of education, my results, consistent with existing research, confirm the importance of worsening marriage market conditions. Unlike previous work, the model also captures key features of nonmarital childbearing among educated women. Among this group, my results suggest that the finite nature of fertility is crucial, leading to increases in nonmarital childbearing propensities among women over the age of 35.	Lucie	 Schmidt
2002	100	Gender Differentials in Child Health in Developing Countries	Effect of Parent-Child Relationship on Children's Well-Being in China	Recent studies suggest that child abandonment and adoption increased in the 1980s with the tightening of family planning programs in China. However, little is known about whether adoptive relationship influences children's well-being compared to biological relationship. Using data from the 1992 China Survey on Situation of Children, we investigate the effect of parent-child relationship on children's well-being, measured by education status and health indicators (including immunization status, morbidity and nutritional status). Only children from one-child families were studied. Results indicate that adoptive children had significant higher odds of being never immunized and not enrolled in schools than biological children. Unexpectedly, adoptive children were not worse off than biological children in nutritional status and biological children had even higher odds of reported illness than adoptive children. Results also show that sons were more likely to be enrolled in schools than girls while no other gender gaps were found in other well-being indicators.	Jihong	 Liu
2002	100	Gender Differentials in Child Health in Developing Countries	Gender Differentials in Child Nutritional Status in Kenya	It has long been recognized in demographic literature that female children have health disadvantages as compared to their male counterparts in most developing countries. The current study examines the gender differentials on child nutritional status for children in Kenya. This study used the 1998 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey (KDHS) data. The sample of children used in the current study was limited to those aged 12-59 months who were living with their biological mothers at the time of interview.     The results show that there was a significant relationship between the child's gender and nutritional status, everything else being equal. The male children were more likely to be stunted than female children in Kenya. These results were not expected and may indicate biological differences between male and female children, as male children are said to be more susceptible to infection and malnutrition than female children (U.N., 1996).	Florence	 Nyangara-Marwanga	Gretchen	 Cornwell
2002	100	Gender Differentials in Child Health in Developing Countries	Sex Differences in Child Health in More Developed and Less Developed States in India--Analysis of NFHS-2 (1998-99) Data	This paper examines sex differentials in child health in various states of India, which are at different stages of development and demographic transition by analyzing NFHS-2 data for India. Relationship between mother's background characteristics (education, standard of living etc.) and sex differentials in child health is examined on the basis of data regarding women from three more development low fertility states (12,032 women from Punjab, Gujarat, Maharashtra) and three less developed high fertility states (23,129 women from Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan). Data on children pertains to two most recent births to these women during the three years preceding the survey (10,076 children).	Sumati	 Kulkarni	Nizamuddin	 Khan
2002	100	Gender Differentials in Child Health in Developing Countries	Consanguinity, Gender, and Infant Survival in South India	India is one of several societies where marked favoritism gives boys an edge over girls in surviving early childhood. However, consanguineous marriage of a bride to her mother's brother or nephew, a common practice in South India, is thought to raise the status of women within their marital families and perhaps to strengthen the prospects of their daughters' survival.    These possibilities were examined with recent data from four South Indian states. Boys born into consanguineous unions had higher odds of dying during the neonatal period than did boys born into exogamous unions. Girls reaching the post-neonatal period were as likely as boys to die before the first birthday, regardless of the form of parental marriage. These data did not suggest that consanguineous marriages reduced infant mortality or lengthened life for girls more than boys.	Manisha	 Sengupta	Nan	 Johnson
2002	101	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	Demographic Techniques of Decomposition: A New Approach and Comparing It to Previous Methods	The focus of the paper is on how and why demographic measures change over time and over populations. The decomposition techniques deal with this questions by finding the additive contributions of the differences in the overall rates in two populations.     The paper compares the different general methods of decomposition to a new developed technique. The answers, to how and why demographic measures change, are still internal explanations based entirely on demographic characteristics. How the structure of populations effects the dynamics of populations and how the dynamics of populations effects the structure of populations.     The innovation of the new decomposition is the use of differential calculus instead of arithmetic manipulations. The new formulation of the decomposition of the change in time can be further decomposed by age groups.	Vladimir	 Canudas Romo
2002	101	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	The Momentum of Mortality Decline	In Keyfitz' classical definition, population momentum is the growth that would occur in a previously growing stable population if fertility were immediately reduced to replacement level. Since population momentum is associated with an abrupt change in fertility while mortality rates remain constant, it is not well recognized that mortality itself can play a significant role in the value for the population momentum. This paper shows that population momentum is not only due to the disparity between actual and replacement fertility. It is also due to the fact that if mortality has been previously declining in a population, cohort mortality will continue improving even after period mortality reached constancy. An equation for estimating the population momentum directly attributable to mortality decline is developed and applied to various populations.	Michel	 Guillot
2002	101	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	A Dynamic Model of Amniocentesis	Medical Practitioners have clear advice on amniocentesis for women as they age. Doctors advise women to be tested for Downs Syndrome and other genetic disorders after age 35. Prior to age 35, these tests are discouraged as it can cause a miscarriage. The logic appears compelling. The rate at which amniocentesis causes miscarriages is age-invariant while the rate of genetic disorder rises substantially over  a woman's reproductive years. Hence the potential benefit (by terminating an unwanted fetus with a genetic disorder) from testing rises as well. This paper argues that this logic is flawed. We develop a dynamic model of a couple's timing of births, decision to have an amniocentesis and have an induced abortion.  We show that under reasonable parameters for the growth rate of chromosomal abnormalities, fertility rates and the rate of miscarriage following amniocentesis, optimally chosen amniocentesis can imply a falling rate of amniocentesis as women age.	V.	Joseph  Hotz	Seth	G. Sanders
2002	101	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	How Many Parameters Are Necessary--or Sufficient? A Comparison of the Brass and Lee-Carter Mortality Models	This paper compares the Brass model lifetable system and the Lee-Carter system.  It is a  comparison in a literal sense, because the effort is not to determine, e.g., which one minimizes squared error for some arbitrarily-chosen modeling task.  Rather, we determine how the two systems' parameter spaces relate to each other.  An easily-visualized graphical relationship of one model to the other is used to bring down-to-earth the complex high-dimensional problem of modeling human mortality.    The innovation is to compare these two systems graphically.  At low levels of mortality (life expectancy above 80), the Lee-Carter projection can be viewed as having an equivalent projection in the (ostensibly simpler) Brass system.  However, no single model in the Brass framework can represent the changes the Lee-Carter  projection undergoes as it progresses through lower values of e(0). This is clearly illustrated in the graphs accompanying the extended abstract.	Andrew	 Noymer
2002	102	Issues in Aging Research	Reemployment and Retirement of Displaced Older Workers	Most unemployment studies focus on displaced workers of primary age. Retirement studies focus on older workers who retire from work. This study investigates retirement and reemployment of older displaced workers. The effect of UI benefits, private pension, and social security on older displaced workers' search effort, reemployment hazard, and retirement are examined. Dynamic programming technique is employed to model job search after displacement. The theoretical analysis predicts that UI benefits decrease reemployment and retirement probability and pension incomes increase retirement probability.    Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) data are used to test the theoretical predictions. A competing risk model is developed with employment and retirement as two competing risks. Pension and social security benefit value are calculated. UI benefit amount are imputed based on earning history and state of residency. The exogenous variation of state UI benefit formula is used to identify the impacts of UI on reemployment and retirement.	Wei	 Chi
2002	102	Issues in Aging Research	The Effects of Subjective Survival on Retirement and Social Security Claiming	This paper uses four survey waves of the Health and Retirement Study to examine the relationship between mortality risk and retirement and mortality risk and the propensity to take early and reduced Social Security benefits. We examine the predictions of a life-cycle model, and specify a statistical model that accommodates a sequential decision: retirement and, conditional on retirement, the take-up of Social Security benefits. Using a reduced form probit equation, we model the probability of retirement as a function of subjective survival probabilities, controlling for socio-economic status and health status. Among retirees we estimate the probability of taking early Social Security benefits as a function of wealth, income, personal characteristics, health and subjective survival probabilities. We find workers with low survival probabilities retire earlier than those with high survival probabilities and retired workers with low survival probabilities are more likely to claim early benefits than those with high survival probabilities.	James	P. Smith	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos
2002	102	Issues in Aging Research	The Effects of Medicare Eligibility on Participation in Social Security Disability Insurance	Access to Medicare is a valuable benefit for people in the Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) program. Previous research has shown that access to health insurance is a major determinant of labor force behavior, yet no prior study has empirically evaluated the effect of the Medicare benefit on DI application or exit decisions.      We examine these issues using data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey and the Health and Retirement Survey.  We begin by estimating the distribution of Medicare spending for DI beneficiaries, and their distribution of out-of-pocket costs for health care.  We then estimate the value of the Medicare benefit to DI beneficiaries, relative to alternative sources of insurance.  Finally, we examine the extent to which the Medicare benefit affects DI application rates, using variations in the value of the Medicare benefit created by the opportunity cost of alternative sources of health insurance.	Michael	 Schoenbaum	Jay	 Bhattacharya
2002	102	Issues in Aging Research	Widow Poverty and Out of Pocket Medical Expenditures in the Last Years of Life	The aging of the population is putting financial pressure on government transfer programs. At the same time, the Medicare program has been criticized for providing inadequate benefits such as prescription drugs or long-term care.     In this paper we study out of pocket medical expenditures (OOPME) for prescription drugs, long-term care, and other health services in the last years of life. This focus allows us to examine the consequences of OOPME on the financial well-being of the surviving spouse.    Using the Asset and Health Dynamics Study, we find that OOPME in the last 2 years of life are substantial, totaling $11,000 on average. For lower income families, OOPME are large relative to income. Furthermore, we find that OOPME in the last years of life can partially explain why poverty is so pervasive among widows; widows had to spend a substantial share of their wealth on health care of their dying spouse.	Robert	 Schoeni	Kathleen	 McGarry
2002	103	Demographic Perspectives of Household Time Use	The Changing Role of Father in Europe	The roles of the parents in the contemporary families are gradually changing. The social-economic characteristics of the members of the family, the availability of public services and cultural norms can influence the spreading of new parents roles arrangements. This paper analyzes the sharing of care activities between the parents in Europe. Data from the Fertility and Family Surveys (coordinated by UNECE in selected countries in the 90s) and from the Italian Multipurpose Surveys of the 90s are utilized.    The activities taken into account are the instrumental ones (preparing children's meals, getting them dressed, looking after them when ill, helping them with the homework, playing with them). Finally, we consider social-economic characteristics of both parents and of the family, as determinants of father's participation in parental roles, by means of a multivariate analysis.	Simona	 Carrozza	Paola	 Di Giulio
2002	103	Demographic Perspectives of Household Time Use	Child Socialization and Gender Roles: Early Household Labor as Gendered Work?	Gender socialization of young girls and boys are studied through reports of the type of household work they do. The data used is the Child Survey of the Swedish Level of Living Survey 2000, which consists of a nationally representative sample of youth between 10 and 18 years of age and their parents.    Results show that girls and boys in two-parent families are more prone to engage in gender atypical work the more their parent of the same sex engages in this kind of work. Although girls work more in households where the household work burden is great, this does not seem to foster them into a traditional family role as anticipated by White and Brinkerhoff (1981). Instead, both boys and girls tend to think that it is more important that women and men share equal responsibility for housework and children, the more they help out at home.	Marie	M. Evertsson
2002	103	Demographic Perspectives of Household Time Use	The Effects of Family Structures and Environment on Adolescent Girls' and Boys' Time Use	Recent research has shown that major demographic changes including increased rates of divorce, remarriage, and maternal employment influence the gender-based division of household tasks in families, and specifically, children's household contributions.      This research examines variation in time use by family structure characteristics, such as family size, parent's marital status and maternal employment status, as well as family environment in terms of levels of work/family stress, evaluations of parent/child relationships and time spent together, all of which should influence the division of labor in the home.      We address gaps in previous literature by analyzing data from the Survey of Parents and Youth,  a new national survey of children's after-school time-use.  Our most important contribution is looking at time-use in families, in the context of the family atmosphere, i.e. levels of stress and parent and child evaluations of the quality of their relationship.	Constance	T. Gager
2002	103	Demographic Perspectives of Household Time Use	Marital Stability and the Allocation of Time: The Market Work, Housework, and Leisure of Married Couples	This paper uses both waves of the National Survey of Families and Households to examine the impact of future marital stability on the current time allocation decisions of married couples. My analysis, in part, revisits Johnson and Skinner's (1986) finding that married women's labor supply increased with an increase in divorce probability. I examine the time allocated to market work, housework, and leisure by both spouses. The nine household tasks in the NSFH are grouped according to whether the task is viewed as traditionally-female, traditionally-male, or gender-neutral.  The division of nonmarket time into housework and leisure components and the inclusion of men provide a more complete picture of the couple's response to changes in marital stability. The predicted divorce probability is obtained from the estimation of a reduced-form first-stage probit. The hours equations are estimated using a seemingly-unrelated regression specification and a fixed-effects specification, which controls for unobservable time-invariant characteristics.	Melissa	L. Koenig
2002	104	Temporary Migration	Temporary Migration to the United States and the Pathways to Upward Occupational Mobility in Mexico	Substantial research has been conducted on the occupational mobility of Mexican migrants in the United States, but very little is known about the impact of time spent working in the United States on the occupational mobility of migrants who return to Mexico.     This paper uses retrospective migration and occupational histories collected by the Mexican Migration Project for a sample of 5330 male household heads interviewed in 35 Mexican communities.     The objectives of the paper are (1) to determine the impact of cumulative U.S. migration experience and the timing of return migration on occupational mobility in Mexico, and (2) to determine whether and how the local structure of investment and employment opportunities in Mexico influences the types and chances of occupational mobility for return migrants. We define six occupational categories and use multistate hazards models to assess the influence of individual and place characteristics on occupational transitions.	David	 Lindstrom	Sunghoon	 Kim
2002	104	Temporary Migration	Transforming Family Enterprise: Investing Behaviors of Labor Migrants in China	Labor migration has a major function in financing housing infrastructure change for rural family enterprises. We argue that the use of remittances on housing complements rather than deters productive investments. Based on an in-depth survey of returned migrants in rural China, we focus on the explanation of investment behaviors of the temporary migrants. The major use of remittances on housing was accompanied by investments on children's education and agricultural production. Skilled migrants who were more prone to financing housing during migration also had a greater investment propensity after returning home. The above findings suggest that home infrastructure change, human capital formation, and productive investments are integral parts of a transformation from familial to commercial production.	Zhongdong	 Ma	Edward	J.C. Tu
2002	104	Temporary Migration	School Enrollment of Migrant Children in Beijing: Practice and Problems	Migrant children in China are facing a difficult situation: where to go to school? Under the National Education Law, children can receive nine-year free compulsory education only in their place of household residence registration (hukou). Moving to the city, migrant children are left with hard choices: (1) public school, which charges high fees for non-locally registered students; (2) migrant children school, which is illegal and subject to closing at any time; and (3) no school.      Using the 1997 Beijing Census of Non-Hukou Population and the 1999-2000 Beijing Survey of Migrant Children's School Enrollment, this paper examines the practice and problems of school enrollment of migrant children in Beijing, and sheds some light on policy implications.	Qian	 Cai	Chenrong	 Duan
2002	104	Temporary Migration	Migration, Remittances, and Elderly Well-Being in Mexico	Demographic change in past decades has brought Mexico the present dilemma of a rapidly aging population and few social services for needy families and individuals. This paper examines social support patterns and family living arrangements of the elderly in Mexico to explore how processes associated with internal and international labor migration affect elderly health and well-being.     We use panel data of households in ten Mexican communities from 1996 to 1999 from the Health and Migration Survey (HMS) to assess shifts in household structure, headship status, and migration over time. These data contain information relating to migrant remittances, elderly health status, and social support and networks that enables us to examine questions challenging most analyses of elderly living arrangements.      This research will provide greater understanding of elderly health and well-being in Mexico and the impact of migration on traditional expectations of family-care for the elderly.	Shawn	Malia Kanaiaupuni	Carey	 Faulkner
2002	105	Work-Family Linkages	Childlessness in the U.S.: Trends, Gender Role Attitudes, and Community Influences	In the last two decades, the U.S. has seen an increase in the proportion of women who are childless. We focus on the temporarily childless because delayed childbearing may be associated with increased infertility problems, higher demand for infertility treatment, pre-term delivery, and low birth weight. The permanently voluntarily childless are also important because their decision is made despite living in a generally pronatalist society. Using the frame work of role incompatibility, this paper first examines trends in temporary and permanent childlessness.  It then focuses on women nearing the end of their reproductive years, and compares those who have children, those who are temporarily childless, and those who are permanently-voluntarily childless. We are especially interested in how these groups of women differ in their gender role ideology, work experience, and the work and family features of their communities. The data used in this analysis comes from the National Survey of Family Growth.	Joyce	C. Abma	Gladys	M. Martinez
2002	105	Work-Family Linkages	Childbearing and Women's Employment: Parity Differences in Job Exits	Childbearing reduces female labor force participation, but most mothers will both return to work and bear another child. Yet, little is known about how higher parity births affect maternal employment. We consider two explanations for the negative impact of childbearing on female employment. First, families compare the gains to female employment to the costs of outside child care. Second, some women have an underlying preference to stay home look at the onset of childbearing as an opportunity to exit the work force. These processes work together to contribute to job exits around a first birth, but the balance of these forces may change as parity increases, as many mothers have left the work force already. To examine these processes, we estimate continuous time event historical models of job exits surrounding first versus higher parity births using data on women from the 1979 through 1998 waves of the NLSY.	Marin	 Clarkberg	Kathryn	 Hynes
2002	105	Work-Family Linkages	Negotiating Gender, Work, and Family: Gendered Consequences of Family Leave Taking	This study examines the gendered effects of leave-taking on wages over time. Classical human capital theory suggests and research indicates that wages decrease as time spent out of the labor market increases. While it is normative for women to take time off from work to care for family needs, men's leave-taking may be more scrutinized by employers, and they may suffer larger wage penalties as a result. On the other hand, if women continue to disproportionately take family leave, wage inequalities will persist as a consequence of normative gendered expectations in the family and in the workplace. This study employs longitudinal data from the NLSY (1982-1998), organized into a pooled cross-section time series. Using a partial-adjustment differential equation model, changes in wage trajectories over time may be estimated as a function of human capital, marital and family status, and tenure on the job. Gender differences are examined, and policy implications discussed.	Penelope	M. Huang
2002	105	Work-Family Linkages	Boon or Bust? Sex Differences in Returns to Earnings for Self-Employment	While sex differences in participation in self-employment are well documented, sex differences in the effects of self-employment on earnings are not. Does self-employment increase or decrease workers' earnings? Do the returns of self-employment to earnings differ by sex? If so, what mechanisms can explain this difference?     Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979-98), I examine how returns to earnings for self-employment vary by sex, family status, and occupation. Fixed effect models include controls for human capital, occupational characteristics, and industrial/occupational sex segregation. Findings indicate that childless professional women receive an equivalent return to earnings for self-employment compared with professionally employed men. However, while all men benefit from self-employment, all mothers, and all women in non-professional occupations, have negative returns to self-employment. Findings are consistent with arguments that women use self-employment to balance work and family demands and this amenity may compensate for the negative returns mothers receive.	Michelle	 Budig
2002	106	Consequences of Welfare Reform	The Impact of the 1996 SSI Childhood Disability Reforms: Evidence from the SIPP	The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 changed the definition of disability used to determine eligibility for disabled children under the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.  The law required the redetermination of eligibility status for children potentially affected by the new definition of disability.  As a result, an estimated 100,000 children were expected to lose SSI benefits.     The goal of this paper is to understand the impact of benefit loss on affected children and their families.  Our analysis draws on data from the 1992, 1993 and 1996 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation to determine the impact of the loss of SSI income as a result of the 1996 legislation on family labor supply, welfare program participation, and income and poverty.  We find evidence of short-run increases in labor supply, use of other transfer programs, and income but no corresponding reduction in poverty.	Lynn	 Karoly
2002	106	Consequences of Welfare Reform	Dynamics of Children Poverty and Health Insurance Coverage: An Evaluation on the Impact of Welfare Reform	In this study, I document changes in expected childhood years without health insurance, under poverty, or both by using the longitudinal data from the Census Bureau's Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). In order to estimate dynamics of poverty and uninsured childhood together, I apply multi-state life tables. Semi-parametric Cox models will be used to identify net effects of changes in social policies, demographic factors, and business cycles on the odds of being uninsured, and being poor. Preliminary results based on pooled 1985-1996 panels of SIPP data confirmed previous findings on a substantial drop in health insurance coverage during that period. While the decline in insurance was not more serious for children under poverty, the decline in Medicaid after welfare reform reduced the opportunity for poor children being insured.  Empirical evidence also shows that children of low educational achievement parents are facing more economic disadvantage after the welfare reform.	Hsien-Hen	 Lu
2002	106	Consequences of Welfare Reform	The Effects of Welfare Reform on Income, Earnings, and Poverty	Labor market outcomes of welfare recipients have been the subject of a large and growing literature in recent years. Much of the previous research on labor market outcomes has focused on aggregate caseload levels or on randomized social experiments. A third strand of papers examines the relationship between welfare reform and various outcomes  using national survey data. Our research builds on this literature by using data from the CPS to analyze the effects of recent welfare reforms on labor market outcomes, income, and poverty status of households and families with women and/or children. In addition to examining the effects of welfare reform on income (personal, family, and household), we examine the number of earners (male and female) as well as the sources of income. By looking at samples with children as well as those with women, we  can see if there are different effects of welfare reform on these subgroups.	Marianne	 Bitler	Jonah	B. Gelbach	Hilary	W. Hoynes
2002	106	Consequences of Welfare Reform	Alternative Measures of Economic Well-Being and Hardship: Evidence from Early TANF Recipients in Wisconsin	In this paper we consider the income and economic well-being of women who entered Wisconsin's TANF program in its first year and identify which ones might be considered successful. We analyze alternative measures of success including, for example, poverty status, welfare dependency, and economic hardship and consider measures of the level, change over time, and stability of economic status.    Administrative data are drawn from the TANF, child support, and Unemployment Insurance programs. Survey data are from the Survey of Wisconsin Works Families, a two wave panel study of a stratified random sample of 3,000 mothers included in these administrative data. The survey provides information on experiences of economic hardship, support of friends, family, and charitable institutions, and employment skills and experiences. The analysis documents the extent to which estimates of the number and characteristics of successful families are sensitive to a range of alternative conceptualizations of success, and different data sources and related measures.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2002	107	Biodemography and Reproduction	Sexual Reproduction and Male Parental Investment in Offspring	Sexual reproduction evolved as a means of increasing variability among offspring through the sharing of genetic material. A secondary effect of sexual reproduction is the divergent evolution of the two sexes. Sex is defined by gamete size; females produce larger gametes, reflecting their greater initial energetic investment in offspring. With increased investment beyond the energy supplied in gametes, the divergence between the two sexes becomes exaggerated.     Females provide all investment to offspring in 97% of mammalian species. Human paternal investment is highly variable, but is often high.     This paper presents an evolutionary model of differential investment by sex. It proposes that complementarity in the benefits of each sex's investments and mating market characteristics determine the relative investments of the two sexes. The model is applied to variation across and within human societies in paternal investment, marital stability, and the incidence of single parenting and sexual transmitted diseases.	Hillard	S. Kaplan
2002	107	Biodemography and Reproduction	Evolutionary Model of Pubertal Maturation and Adult Reproductive Behavior in Human Males	The timing of male adolescent maturation is hypothesized to be the critical link between male reproduction and other physiological systems. The hypothesis is developed with reference to the Turkana, pastoral nomads of Northern Kenya among whom male puberty comes late (at 16 years) but boys continue to grow into their early 20s.     Two separate physiological mechanisms are implicated. Lower fat stores alter the adrenal gland toward cortisol rather than DHEA, delaying the onset of puberty. Low caloric intake also blocks the development of secondary sexual characteristics and leads to slow though continued bone growth. One consequence of high cortisol is behavioral inhibition, possibly in social interactions with females, contributing to less promising adult reproductive strategies. Over the course of human evolution, better nutrition has led instead to earlier puberty, giving some males an edge in interactions with the opposite sex and eventually in fertility.	Benjamin	 Campbell	Kenneth	 Campbell
2002	107	Biodemography and Reproduction	The Genetics of the Relation between Late Reproduction and Longevity: Findings from the European Royalty (1650-1939)	Studies of human females - but less so of males - confirmed experimental findings of a direct correlation between longevity and late reproduction in animals. Still, the direction of causality remains unclear: whether people with a potential of longevity reproduce later, or whether late reproduction makes life longer. Here, vital data of relatives, are indispensable in order to control for genetic influences. Only very few studies have such information.    Here, we present findings from an own dataset of all live births in the European Royalty between January 1, 1650 and December 31, 1939 (n=1766). Completeness and quality of demographic information is excellent. The genetics of the relation between late reproduction and longevity has not been studied yet in nobility data sets. We found, that, although a common genetical basis for both traits is likely, the event of a first child late in life indeed makes the life of parents longer.	Ulrich	 Mueller	Klaus	 Erdt
2002	107	Biodemography and Reproduction	Cross-Fertilization of Demographic, Evolutionary, and Genetic Approaches to the Study of Human Reproductive Behavior	How relevant are findings from genetic and evolutionary research for demographic understanding of human reproduction? What key genetic and evolutionary questions for demographic research on human reproduction are not being answered yet?     This paper evaluates the insights available from the evolutionary perspective for understanding human reproductive behavior.      Recent progress in genetic research is very rapid. Therefore, this review is selective, beginning with recent research using twins to estimate a partitioning of variation in human reproductive behavior into genetic and environmental components. Beyond this, there are issues relevant to mate selection, contraceptive risk-taking behavior, fecundity, and coital frequency that involve complex interplays of genes, often mediated through brain, and environment that need an integrated approach drawing on the natural and social sciences.    This paper considers these issues starting from a demographic agenda, posing questions relevant for our understanding of human reproduction that may benefit from genetic or evolutionary research.	John	 Hobcraft
2002	108	Fertility Transition in the Middle East and North Africa	The Changing Demography of Kinship in the Arab Region: A Microsimulation Analysis	This paper examines the impact of demographic change on the structure of lateral kin relationships (siblings and cousin) in the Arab region. Lateral kin relationships are important in all societies, perhaps especially so in Arab society. Using the method of microsimulation, with demographic survey data providing input distributions, kin sets are generated for three Arab countries (Egypt, Morocco, and Yemen) for cohorts born in the period since 1930. The sib sets and cousins sets are analyzed in terms of size, composition, and density. The emphasis is on change over the life course and across cohorts. As expected, fertility has a powerful effect on sib and cousin configurations. But effects of mortality are surprisingly large, and country-specific nuptiality patterns also show an impact. One outcome, often unnoticed, of demographic transition is a more rigid age-segregation of the generations, which in turn may have important social, economic, and political repercussions.	John	 Casterline	Laila	 El-Zeini
2002	108	Fertility Transition in the Middle East and North Africa	Perceived Benefits and Costs of Children and Fertility in Kuwait	Kuwait has been a high fertility country where the average number of desired children still exceeds 5. However, fertility behavior is beginning to show a major change and the current TFR is close to 4 children. In order to understand the decline in fertility, we analyze the impact of perceived costs and benefits of children on Kuwaiti women's desired and achieved fertility. Data from a nationally representative survey of Kuwaiti households held in 1999 are used. Multiple regression results show that the mean desired number of children is significantly higher among those who rank higher on the perceived value of children. Achieved fertility (children ever born) is significantly lower among those more highly concerned with costs of children. Furthermore, wife's age at marriage, her education, and non-Bedouin ethnicity have a negative association with desired as well as achieved fertility.	Nasra	M. Shah	Constance	A. Nathanson
2002	108	Fertility Transition in the Middle East and North Africa	Spatial Patterns as Predictors of Fertility in Cairo, Egypt	We use data from the 1996 census of Egypt to show that spatial location is an important predictor of fertility levels in Cairo, Egypt. In an ordinary regression equation, it appears that levels of female education and the percentage of women married in a shiakha (equivalent to a census tract or enumeration district) are the principal correlates of fertility. However, that model is misspecified because it ignores the substantial spatial autocorrelation that exists in the data. Using both the Getis/Ord spatial filtering approach and the Fotheringham et al. Geographically Weighted Regression approach, we show  that nearly two-thirds of the variability in fertility in Cairo is accounted for by where people live, and about one-third is accounted for by sociodemographic characteristics independent of location. We then show that these spatial patterns of fertility are highly correlated with variability in the urban scene as classified from remotely sensed images. Implications for further demographic inquiry using these techniques are explored.	John	R. Weeks	Arthur	 Getis	Douglas	A. Stow	Tarek	 Rashed	Xiaoling	 Yang	Saad	 Gadalla
2002	108	Fertility Transition in the Middle East and North Africa	Modeling Fertility Transition in Egypt	A model is estimated to approximate the relationships among three related fertility desires, namely future fertility desires, current use of contraception and current employment status, as reported by married females. The model is used to identify the position of fertility transition in Egypt within societies. The study uses the 1995 Egypt Demographic and Health Survey and the probit maximum likelihood method to estimate the model. The findings indicate that future fertility desires and contraceptive use are becoming endogenous to each other. The relationship between female employment and fertility desires is not in the expected direction for a country undergoing its fertility transition, and not typical of a country at post-transitional stage of fertility. The dynamics behind such relationship is not yet that of the wife's opportunity cost. The idea of rational choices and shifts in fertility is not yet valid in Egypt. One should not expect further dramatic decline in fertility.	Hassan	H.M. Zaky
2002	109	Wealth Inequality	The Size and Composition of Wealth Holdings in the United States, Italy, and the Netherlands		Arie	 Kapteyn
2002	109	Wealth Inequality	Who Becomes a Stockholder		Robert	 Willis	Gabor	 Kezdi
2002	109	Wealth Inequality	Expected Bequests and Their Distribution		James	P. Smith	Michael	 Hurd
2002	109	Wealth Inequality	Wealth Dynamics: Reducing Noise in Panel Data		Dan	 Hill
2002	110	What Demographers and Epidemiologists Can Learn From One Another	Strengthening the Dialogue between Demography and Epidemiology		Maxine	 Weinstein
2002	110	What Demographers and Epidemiologists Can Learn From One Another	Epidemiology's Traditions and Obsessions That May Benefit Demography		David	A. Savitz
2002	110	What Demographers and Epidemiologists Can Learn From One Another	Fertility/Reproduction: Where Epidemiology and Demography Converge?		Allen	 Wilcox
2002	110	What Demographers and Epidemiologists Can Learn From One Another	Biologic Measurement in Support of Demographic and Epidemiologic Research		Ronald	H. Gray
2002	111	Social Characteristics and Health Outcomes	The Health Impact of Marital Disruption on Men and Women in Mid-Life	Prior research suggests that marital dissolution increases risk of poor health compared with remaining married, and that health effects may be concentrated in period immediately following marital dissolution (at least for widowhood). Previous work suffers number of limitations, including failure to statistically test for gender differences, applying bereavement effect hypothesis to divorce, and accounting for differential mortality selection. This paper examines 2- and 4-year health effects of divorce and widowhood on mid-life men and women using 4 waves from the Health and Retirement Survey. I regress W3-W4 change in health outcomes on W1-W2 and W2-W3 change in marital status. Preliminary work is inconsistent with bereavement (applied to widowhood) effect for men and women. Divorce within the past 2 years is advantageous to men's (but not women's) health; these effects are not seen for divorce 3 to 4 years. I test the robustness of these findings when considering for mortality selection.	Megan	 Beckett
2002	111	Social Characteristics and Health Outcomes	A Comparison of the Health Effects of Marriage and Cohabitation	The health effects of marriage are well documented and the research consistently shows that marriage positively affects mental and physical health.  Because cohabiting couples do share some of the same characteristics of married couples, it could be assumed that cohabiting couples have comparable health status with married couples.  However, the findings for the relationship between cohabitation and health are not as consistent as those for marriage.      Using data from Wave 1 of the National Survey of Families and Households, this paper will explore the health benefits of cohabitation as compared to marriage.  The central question of this examination is whether or not cohabitation offers the same health benefits as marriage.  Secondarily, this analysis will examine the health effects of marriage and cohabitation across age, race, and gender.	Cassandra	A. Logan
2002	111	Social Characteristics and Health Outcomes	Cohort and Life Course Patterns in the Education-Health Relationship: A Hierarchical Approach	The relationship between education and health is well-established. Recent medical sociological research has examined whether the relationship is dynamic across age, while recent demographic research has examined whether the relationship varies across cohorts. In this study, I unite these literatures by considering that the influence of education on life course health trajectories is structured by birth cohort. At the cohort level, change in formal education makes cohort differences in the effect of education probable. At the life course level, the effect of education likely varies across age, because the mediators of the education-health relationship vary in their relevance to health over the life course. In this research, I develop a hierarchical model that simultaneously considers cohort and life course patterns, using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Preliminary findings suggest that the effect of education strengthens across age, and that this pattern is becoming stronger across cohorts.	Scott	M. Lynch
2002	111	Social Characteristics and Health Outcomes	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health Outcomes and Health Behavior in Los Angeles	This paper is an examination of health disparities and health behavior among adults and children in one of the largest urban areas in the United States, Los Angeles County, based on the new Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (LAFANS).  The paper seeks to answer several questions.  First, do poor neighborhoods differ from other neighborhoods in ways which may affect health outcomes?  Second, how are immigrant status, ethnicity, and social class related to health outcomes and behavior?  Third, are there neighborhood level differences in health outcomes by socioeconomic status, once individual socioeconomic differences are health constant?  Finally, which neighborhood-level characteristics appear to mediate the relationship between individual social characteristics and health outcomes, and are these relationships causal?	Anne	 Pebley
2002	111	Social Characteristics and Health Outcomes	Education and Physical Status Transitions among American Adults: Examining Onset and Progression of Physical Disorder	This study employs transition analyses to determine whether and how education impacts on physical status across two waves of the Americans' Changing Life survey.  Physical status is defined two ways: function and daily limitation. Individuals are separated into three originating states (no, mild and severe problems), and five outcome states (originating states plus dying and loss to follow-up). Multinomial regressions determine education's impact on these outcomes. The first procedure treats originating samples separately. The next pools samples and tests for interactions between originating state and education. The latter is employed to determine whether the consequences of education are a function of originating state. Results appear consistent with the notion that onset and progression of physical status disorder depend upon different sets of characteristics. Education's impact on mortality is also found to differ across originating states. Findings help explain mechanisms driving an education - health relationship that has proven to be robust.	Zachary	 Zimmer	James	S. House
2002	112	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	All in the Family: The Impact of Family Events on Health in Midlife	In this paper, we address the extent to which events in other family members' lives affect the health of persons in mid life? In these years, individuals are well established and are often providing support to others. Often, this support is due to crises or difficulties in the other person's life. Although most adults in this age group are healthy and function at high levels, a substantial fraction is beginning to show signs of health impairment. Thus, understanding the health implications of offering support to family members is critical. We base our analysis on data from Waves 1 to3 of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a longitudinal survey of a nationally representative sample of the 1931-1941 birth cohorts. We examine health in three dimensions: self-reported health, symptoms of depression, and incidence of chronic conditions. We also explore the impact of family events on health behaviors.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes	Linda	 Waite
2002	112	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Excess Mortality following Conjugal Bereavement: Does Having Children Buffer the Effects?	Social support literature identifies adult children as an important source of support.  From this it can be expected that widows and widowers lacking the support of adult children are at greater risk of poor bereavement outcome.  Young children and adolescents, however, are not considered a primary source of support.  Their impact on bereavement outcome is unclear.    Surprisingly, the impact of parenthood on survival following widowhood is not systematically assessed. We assess mortality among approximately 180,000 bereaved aged between 30 and 89 and an equal number of matched controls not experiencing widowhood, based on a linkage of the Belgian census of 1991 with the death registration records for the subsequent five-years.     Our results indicate that excess mortality is highest among childless men and for childless younger adults. Having children seems to make no difference, however,  for women in general, nor for older persons. Possible reasons for these differences are discussed.	Patrick	 Lusyne	Neelke	 Vernaillen	Hilary	 Page	John	 Lievens
2002	112	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Marital Status and Health: New Evidence Using Data on Twins	One of the most heated debates in demography is whether marriage is protective of health. Numerous studies have shown that currently married individuals enjoy improved health status compared to unmarried peers. However, this research has suffered from the criticism that marriage selects against frail individuals, yielding an association between marital status and health that stems purely from the confounding effect of health selection.    Using data from the Minnesota Twin Registry, we explore the association between marital status and self-reported health for matched monozygotic twins. Unlike previous research, our design controls not only for current conditions but also genetic endowment and shared early-life environment. Results show that currently married twins report higher levels of health when compared with their never-married or formerly married twin. We then elaborate upon this linkage by exploring evidence that marriage improves health-related behaviors, such as discouraging smoking and alcohol abuse, and encouraging physical fitness.	Mark	E. Hill	Valarie	 King
2002	112	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	The Effect of Marriage on Mortality: Selection or Protection? Evidence from Danish Twins Using Fixed-Effect Survival Models	A robust finding in the demographic research is that married people have a lower risk of death as compared to divorced or single individuals. Two main hypotheses have been proposed to explain this relationship between marriage and mortality - marital selection versus marital protection. In this paper I investigate this interdependence between marriage and mortality by proposing new statistical methods and data. My analyses are based on the Danish twin register. I focus on MZ twins that share the same genetic determinants of mortality and same socioeconomic background during childhood. I develop fixed-effect survival models that to my knowledge have not been applied to the analysis of mortality and twin data. My fixed-effect survival model allows the estimation of the parameter of interest, which measures the impact of individual characteristics on the level of mortality, without imposing the assumption of independence between the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity and individual characteristics.	Iliana	 Kohler
2002	113	Differential Fertility	Changing Fertility Rates in Developed Countries: The Impact of Labor Market Institutions	The institutional features of labor markets affect not only the size of the opportunity cost of childbearing but also how it varies with age at childbirth and labor market attachment. I used a panel of 23 OECD nations for the last 35 years to study how labor market institutions can account for the recent sharp decrease in fertility and the positive correlation between participation and fertility across developed nations. On the one hand, labor market instability induces women to reduce and postpone fertility to lower lifetime income uncertainty and the risk of unemployment. Unemployment and both the share of self-employment and fixed-term (unstable) contracts, common in Southern Europe, depress fertility for the 20-24 and 25-29 year group. On the other hand, a large share of public employment, such as in Scandinavia, and generous maternity benefits, mostly linked to employment, boosts fertility for all groups, but especially for 30-34 year olds.	Alicia	 Adsera
2002	113	Differential Fertility	Gender and Differential Fertility in Developed Countries	Studies on differential fertility use the characteristics of the women or a mix of the characteristics of the woman and her partner as possible influencing factors, rarely considering only the characteristics of men. The opportunity to use women, men, or couples' characteristics to explain fertility behavior has not been seriously discussed. Changing gender roles, with greater  involvement of women in the labor market and of men in domestic tasks and child rearing, make it necessary to reconsider the factors of differential fertility trying to find the best mix of variables to use. Moreover, institutional factors helping to reconcile work and family have to be considered. I applied a mixture model on FFS (Fertility and Family Survey) data of countries with different institutional arrangements for the two genders separately and for the couples, trying to find the best mix of the characteristics of both partners to explain fertility in developed countries.	Antonella	 Pinnelli
2002	113	Differential Fertility	Variations in Stepfamily Fertility Related to Coresidence with Woman's or Man's Pre-Union Children: A Comparative Analysis of Fertility and Family Survey Data of Finland and Austria	Earlier studies have shown that children born before a union influence a couple's fertility. We hypothesize that the woman's pre-union children and coresident children of either partner influence couple's childbearing behavior more than children of the man and nonresident children of either partner, because the couple is more involved in rearing the former. We use data of the Fertility and Family Surveys in Finland and Austria. They represent different regimes in provisions for childcare and gender equality. We use aML software to estimate hazard regression models of the risk of a conception that leads to a live birth. In Finland nonresident children and the man's children both have an effect on the couple's fertility, and only in certain parity configurations are these effects smaller than those of coresident children and the woman's children, respectively. In Austria the role of nonresident children in explaining a couple's fertility is weak.	Andres	 Vikat	Elizabeth	 Thomson
2002	113	Differential Fertility	Bearing Children in Unstable Times: Psychological Traits and Early Parenthood in an Extremely Low Fertility Context, Rostock 1990 - 1995	How can psychological research and the application of extensive micro-level measures contribute to our understanding of fertility differentials? In this paper, we analyze a unique longitudinal data set from Rostock in eastern Germany. Data collection began in the communist era and has been followed up until after German re-unification, after which fertility has declined to exceptionally low levels (TFR=0.77 in 1993). Employing Cox proportional-hazard models, we use individual-level measures (such as personality traits, social and cognitive resources, coping styles, perceived action control, values, attitudes, wishes, and fears) at age 20 as determinants of subjects' subsequent transition to parenthood.     We show that personality traits, wishes, and personal resources all have a significant influence, sometimes in a surprising and counter-intuitive way. We conclude that psychological individual-level data are important for an understanding of childbearing decisions and differential fertility in a population, especially during times when society faces massive and incalculable upheavals.	Holger	R. von der Lippe	Olaf	 Reis
2002	114	Private and Public Sources of Reproductive Health Services	The Private Share in Contraceptive Provision	The paper investigates the reasons why private services and retail outlets provide proportionally more contraceptive coverage, in comparison to public services, in some developing countries than others. Specific contraceptive methods are distinguished, particularly pills, injectables, and condoms. Case studies are summarized for five countries - Egypt, Indonesia, Pakistan, Peru, and the Philippines - focusing on levels and trends in the private share and factors that may affect it: market potential, supply factors, competition, business strategies, and government regulation. Cross-national regressions to predict the private share are also reported. Finally, attention is paid to the effects on the private share of social marketing programs.	Rodolfo	A. Bulatao
2002	114	Private and Public Sources of Reproductive Health Services	Franchising Reproductive Health Services	Although family planning (FP) and reproductive health (RH) services have historically been the domain of the public sector, shortcomings in quality and accessibility have heightened interest in franchising these services.  To date there is little evidence of the added value of RH franchises.  Using 2001 data from probability sample surveys of 2,694 health facilities and 13,904 clients in three countries - Pakistan, India, and Ethiopia - this study comparatively evaluates the role of reproductive health franchises in improving delivery and increasing use of FP and other RH services. Preliminary analysis indicates that franchises are located in underserved areas and serve low to middle income clients. Providers benefit from franchise participation, both in technical support and clinic business. Franchises compete well with government in the provision of FP/RH services, although given the low proportion of clients seeking FP/RH services (      	Sara	 Sulzbach	Phil	 Bardsley	Rob	 Stephenson	Getachew	 Bekele	Tewodros	 Melesse	Rehana	 Ahmed	Shejo	 Bose
2002	114	Private and Public Sources of Reproductive Health Services	Leveraging the Private Sector: Franchising Clinical Reproductive Health Services in Developing Countries	This study reports on four franchises in Kenya, Pakistan, and India.  We hypothesize that the incentives offered to member providers (direct subsidies, clinical training, ongoing technical support, and brand value) are linked to providers' attitudes towards the franchising organization.  Furthermore, franchise structure is related to the organizations' ability to differentiate their brand and member providers from other health professionals, and to offer an increase in client-load and increased profits to member providers.    In each of the franchises 100 providers was interviewed, along with two FP clients / site and two women from households with 1km of the clinic.      Clients and non-clients valued 'quality' above other provider attributes, however the association of quality with the specific franchise brand varied.  Providers showed great variation in appreciation of franchise benefits depending on the franchisor structure.  Training was considered a central benefit in all, although in some cases increased client load was also important.	Dominic	 Montagu
2002	114	Private and Public Sources of Reproductive Health Services	Improving Reproductive Health through Operational Policy Reform	National reproductive health (RH) policies provide the broad vision for the action of governments, and set forth the priorities and roles of different groups. Moving from national policies to local programs requires the implementation of operational policies which, in turn, influences services. Operational policies are the rules, regulations, codes, guidelines, and administrative norms that governments use to translate national laws and policies into programs and services. The consequences of faulty operational policies are found in every clinic, health post and hospital. This paper shows that RH initiatives must include attention to the policy roots of operational barriers and also to show workable ways to address operational policy issues. The paper defines operational barriers and related policies that constrain implementation of RH initiatives. Finally, we discuss a methodology for addressing operational barriers through policy reform and include examples of activities that have been undertaken to address operational policy barriers.	Harry	 Cross	Norine	 Jewell	Karen	 Hardee
2002	115	Gender and Couple Perspectives on Demographic Outcomes	The Full Story: Women and Men Discuss Gender Relations in Rural Malawi	Through proximate questions about women's situation, the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change (MDIC) household survey (Watkins and Zulu, 1998), adds to demographic research on gender. The quantitative data, however, are limited conceptually and in scope. As with many demographic surveys that focus on women's attitudes about gender relations and fertility, this survey restricted these questions to the women's questionnaire. Although it makes sense to ask women about their own situation, only gauging women's attitudes skews researchers' perceptions of gender relations.     In order to fully understand gender dynamics within communities, it is vital to learn about men's attitudes as well. We conducted 91 depth interviews with a sub-sample of MDIC respondents - women and their spouses. In this paper, we compare how these couples qualitatively discuss and portray gender relations in rural Malawi - producing a fuller story than the quantitative data. In addition, we suggest future quantitative measures for men's and women's questionnaires.	Enid	 Schatz
2002	115	Gender and Couple Perspectives on Demographic Outcomes	Wives' Employment and Marital Happiness: Assessing the Direction of Influence Using Longitudinal Couple Data	We investigated the relationship between marital happiness and wives' full-time employment using the 1987-88 and 1992-94 waves of the National Survey of Families and Households. In the first analysis, we sought to predict wives' employment between the two waves using marital happiness and other Time 1 characteristics. The results showed a significantly higher level of wives' employment when the wife was not happy at Time 1. In the second analysis, we examined whether, controlling for Time 1 happiness and other factors, wives' employment between Times 1 and 2 influenced marital stability and marital happiness at Time 2. We found that wives' employment increased marital stability, but had no effect on the happiness of intact couples. Unhappy wives are more likely to work and unhappy couples are much more likely to dissolve their marriages, but contrary to frequently invoked social and economic theories, wives' employment plays a positive not a negative role in marital stability.	Robert	 Schoen	Stacy	 Rogers	Paul	 Amato
2002	115	Gender and Couple Perspectives on Demographic Outcomes	Men's and Women's Attitudes and Couple Agreement regarding Pregnancy Wantedness in the Philippines	In this study, we aim to extend understanding of the influence of men in fertility decision-making by focusing on an issue rarely examined in such analyses-pregnancy wantedness. We employ a framework for analyzing men's reproductive attitudes laid out by Biddlecom, Casterline, and Perez (1997) that suggests comparing men's and women's attitudes as well as exploring couple agreement on fertility issues. Focusing on the Philippines, a country where relatively high levels of unintended pregnancy persist, we examine men's and women's views and couple agreement regarding the timing and occurrence of their most recent pregnancies. We use both survey and in-depth interview data from a 1993 research project on contraception and fertility in the Philippines to explore several factors that influence couple agreement regarding pregnancy wantedness, including equality of spouses in terms of age and decision-making authority, and frequency and effectiveness of discussing fertility preferences, sex, and family planning issues.	Teresa	 Sobieszczyk	Lindy	 Williams
2002	115	Gender and Couple Perspectives on Demographic Outcomes	Many Wives, Many Children: Fertility by Age, Sex, Rank, and Number of Wives in Rural Senegal	The fertility of polygyny is usually investigated with survey data where sample size restricts the analysis to a man and two wives; wives past the childbearing ages are not included, even though their presence may affect the fertility of younger co-wives. This paper examines all co-resident polygynous households in two regions of Senegal in the 1988 census. The data includes information on the household, the polygynous coresident unit, and each of its members; more than 10,000 polygynous marriages have been identified, including wives of rank up to 6. This file is analyzed with standard regression techniques, to investigate the determinants of fertility for both men and women. Covariates include ages of wives, husbands and other wives, wealth indicators, resident status, and education of the partners. The dependent variable consists of births during the previous year. Comparisons of fertility rates are made with monogamous pairs and with non-coresident polygynists.	Etienne	 van de Walle	Solene	 Lardoux
2002	116	Schooling,  Engagement, and Achievement	The Demography of School Disengagement	We use the 1997 wave of the National Survey of American Families to study the social patterning of school disengagement among children in grades 1-7. This provides an early view of the patterns of school dropout and later socioeconomic success to be expected from very recent birth cohorts. Net of other variables, Hispanics are less engaged in school than are African-Americans, and African-Americans are less engaged in school than are Whites. Also net of other variables, boys are less engaged in school than girls. School disengagement for Whites increases at higher grade levels, but this does not occur for African-Americans and Hispanics. Thus, the relatively high school disengagement rates for African-Americans and Hispanics are present in the earliest grade levels. Higher parental education increases school engagement among all groups.  With parental education controlled, family structure and family poverty have relatively weak effects on school engagement.	George	 Farkas	Denise	 Wallin
2002	116	Schooling,  Engagement, and Achievement	Do the Human Capital Investments of Young Mothers Affect Their Children's Educational Outcomes?	Existing literature finds that highly educated mothers tend to have children with superior educational outcomes. However, little work has been done on the effects of human capital investments undertaken by women while they are mothering small children. A simple model of household time allocation would suggest that time spent on human capital investment would reduce time spent with children, and thus negatively impact the child outcomes. Alternatively, maternal time in education and training activities may have positive spillover effects on investment in children, including role model effects and improved ability to help with homework. This paper examines the relationship between human capital investments of young mothers and their children's educational outcomes using data from the Children of the NLSY. Preliminary results suggest that the positive spillover effects on child outcomes dominate the negative effects of time trade-offs.	Quinn	 Moore	Lucie	 Schmidt
2002	116	Schooling,  Engagement, and Achievement	Gender Differences in Intellectual Growth during the High School Years	Using the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS), we investigate gender differences in test scores in reading, math, history and science.  Using multilevel growth models, we find gender gaps in 8th grade test scores that grow during high school.     Female students have a growing advantage in reading during high school, while male students have growing advantages in math, science and history.  Differences in parental expectations and involvement do not explain the observed gender gaps, and placement in advanced courses does not explain the gender difference in test score growth.  Interactions between gender and family effects will be considered, as well as school level characteristics that might affect testing outcomes.	Gary	 Sandefur	Mary	 Campbell
2002	116	Schooling,  Engagement, and Achievement	Education's Effect on Mental Ability	I use novel methods to estimate the effects of additional high school and college education on respondents' mental ability. Using the NLSY, I construct synthetic cohorts of individuals with different years of final schooling. I then use longitudinal methods to estimate what their mental ability as measured by the AFQT would have been if they had remained in school an additional year. Surprising results are obtained. For individuals in 12th grade, an additional year of schooling would increase their AFQT scores by .208 standard deviations, consistent with previous research. However, 60% of this effect is due to being presently in school, whereas on 40% is permanent. I conclude that mental ability, at least as measured by the AFQT, appears to be like some kinds of music and athletic ability - there are large innate differences, training is critical to performance, and being in shape has a substantial effect on performance.	Christopher	 Winship
2002	117	Challenges of Changing Population Age Structures	The Dynamics of Children's Schooling during the Demographic Transition in Brazil: Increasing Cohort Size versus Decreasing Family Size	We analyze the effects of changing age structure and family size on schooling in Brazil. We show that the size of cohorts entering school peaked in 1990, a peak which coincides with the onset of increases in school enrollment rates in the 1990s. We also examine the role of changing family size.  During the 1980s there was a tradeoff between cohort size and family size for children entering school, with decreasing numbers of siblings helping offset the effect of the increasing school-age population. Cohorts born after 1982 experience both decreasing cohort size at the population level and decreasing numbers of siblings at the family level. Using household surveys from 1977-99, we analyze the extent to which these two demographic effects, one at the population level and one at the family level, help explain both the poor performance of Brazilian education in the 1980s and the substantial improvements in the 1990s.	David	 Lam	Leticia	 Marteleto
2002	117	Challenges of Changing Population Age Structures	The Effects of Age Composition on Income Inequality: The Brazilian Case	The Brazilian scenario presents three issues motivating the investigation of the effects of demographic changes on income inequality. First, since the late 1960s, Brazil has been experiencing one of the most impressive fertility declines among the developing countries and, as a consequence, it has been facing an accelerated aging process. Second, several studies debate the unequal distribution of wealth, power, and privileges. Third, the country has one of the worst and most persistent unequal income distributions worldwide and it may be directly related to changes in the country's the age structure.  Using data from repeated cross-sections of a large Brazilian household survey (PNADs) from 1977 to 1999, this study analyzes the effects of a changing age structure on income inequality and the importance and effectiveness of public policies designed to reduce such inequality.	Andrea	B. Simão	Claudia	Julia Guimaraes  Horta	Simone	 Wajnman
2002	117	Challenges of Changing Population Age Structures	Swings in the Economic Support Ratio and Income Inequality	This paper examines the impact on household income inequality of swings in the economic support ratio due to changes in population age structure and increases in female labor force participation. Analysis is based on household survey data for Taiwan (1978 to 1998) and the Philippines (1985 to 1997), two countries with very distinctive economic and demographic histories. Preliminary analysis shows that the rise in the share of women's earning has reduced the log variance of income per earner in both countries. The log-variance of the support ratio is high and stable in the Philippines; low and declining in Taiwan. The co-variance between income per earner and the support ratio is strongly negative but trending towards zero in both countries. In both countries changes in the support ratio have reduced per capita income inequality.	Andrew	 Mason	Sang-Hyop	 Lee
2002	117	Challenges of Changing Population Age Structures	Epistemological Foundation for Treating Population Aging as a Causal Variable with Known Effects	Using population aging as an example, it is argued that a central challenge of changing population age structures is to construct adequately defensible bases for claims concerning the effects of such changes. Validating such claims requires widely supported criteria of validity. With regard to the claim that population aging is a causal agent with specific effects, such criteria of validity are rarely discussed in the literature. This paper examines how claims about effects of population aging have been supported in the literature, and it uses the results of that examination to try to construct part of the foundation of an epistemology of the causal influences of population aging. It also discusses the issue of how to isolate what population aging has uniquely contributed to deemed 'societal effects' because of the way it is embedded a complex of variables that have causal influences, illustrating with the case of cohort succession.	Leroy	O. Stone	Alexandre	 Genest	Jacques	 Légaré
2002	118	Youth Employment and Schooling in Developing Countries	Schooling Dynamics in a Low-Income Setting	This paper examines schooling dynamics using the longitudinal information in the first and second Indonesian Family Life Surveys.  Our interest is in how individual and household characteristics, economic resources, and school access and quality affect the age at which children enter school, whether they advance through school grade level by grade level, and whether they continue from one schooling level to the next.      We estimate a series models that differ in their focus by the stages of the schooling process:  we model age at school entry and grade repetition at the primary level, and grade or level advancement at the junior and senior secondary level.  The models include controls for the child's characteristics, family background, local labor market characteristics, and local school infrastructure.	Lynn	 Karoly
2002	118	Youth Employment and Schooling in Developing Countries	Child Labor and Schooling: Evidence from Sri Lanka, a Developing Country	Although child labor has been continuously observed in Sri Lanka, no comprehensive survey was conducted until 1999. Its findings revealed that 926,038 children in age group 5-17 had engaged in some work, accounting for 21% in the age group; 75% of them worked while attending school. High child labor rate thus observed is contrary to expectations given heavy investments made on social development.    Trends in children's work since 1946 and characteristics by schooling in 1999 were investigated. National censuses and 1999 Child Activity Survey provided the data. Between 1946 and 1999, in the age group 10-14, activity rate declined from 13% to 1.4% while school enrolment increased markedly. But the 1999 child labor rate was high at 21%. A plausible explanation is that the proportion of children combining work and schooling remained stagnant as the school enrolment rate kept on rising at the cost of numbers engaging in work only.	Balasuriya	M. Kiribanda
2002	118	Youth Employment and Schooling in Developing Countries	Child Labor and Schooling in India: Evidence from MICS 2000	The recently conducted Multiple Indicator Survey (MICS-2000) provides us with ample opportunity to analyze the linkage between child labor and schooling in India. The survey was conducted during the year 2000, collected information from about 120,000 households covering all the States and Union Territories. For children aged 5-14 years, the activity, type of activity, and duration of work were collected.    In this study child labor is defined as those who work for someone else (for pay or without pay) or engage in household chores for more than four hours a day or doing other family work. As per the above definition, 14 percent children are engaged in child labor, 10 percent among those attend school and 30 percent among those not attend school. Inter-state variations are substantial. Further multivariate analysis is carried out to understand the relationship between child labor and schooling after controlling different socio-cultural variables.	Jayachandran	 Vasudevan	Chandra	 Sekhar
2002	118	Youth Employment and Schooling in Developing Countries	Work, Study, Both or Neither? Time Allocation of Brazilian Teenagers	Labor force participation among youth is extremely high in Brazil when compared to countries with a similar economic background. On the other hand, the data on school attendance give a more optimistic picture. The percentage of children, between 10 and 14 years old, enrolled in school increased from 79% to 95% from 1981 to 1998. The objective of this paper is to understand the determinants of the time allocation decision of the Brazilian youth during the last twenty years. Using a multinomial logit regression we investigate the conditional effect of various micro and macro variables on the time allocation decision for the 1991 to 1998 period. Our main findings are: working and studying became the most likely allocation among the youngest in the poor rural areas and, in general, to study, whether working or not, became less dependent on family background for the youngest group but not for the older.	Simone	 Wajnman	Maria	Carolina  Leme
2002	119	Network Analysis in Social Demography	Measuring Social Networks Using Qualitative and Quantitative Methods	Previous work in Mali indicates that women's social networks influence a range of health outcomes including fertility and child mortality (Adams et al. 2001; Madhavan et al. 2001). To what extent is it possible and/or advisable to include network measures in routine maternal child health surveys? In this paper, we critically examine the feasibility and validity of quantitative and qualitative methods for gathering network data. Using field data from Mali, we assess the reliability of perceived networks of support elicited by questionnaire survey at two points in time. Results indicate remarkable consistency in network size and composition. Qualitative assessments involving the direct observation of network interaction capture the routine networks of women that tend to be overlooked by the survey method. Finally, we comment on the myriad challenges in interpreting network data, and deriving culturally appropriate measures that do not obviate opportunities for cross-cultural comparison.	Alayne	M. Adams	Sangeetha	 Madhavan	Dominique	 Simon
2002	119	Network Analysis in Social Demography	Residential Tipping in a Multiethnic World	Researchers documenting regional variation in segregation among large, American cities show that black/non-black segregation is lower and mixed neighborhoods are more numerous in multiethnic areas of the country. This paper uses a computational model to examine the relationship between individuals' tolerance for integrated neighborhoods, the race/ethnic context in which mobility occurs, and emergent patterns of spatial inequality. In particular, we consider whether and how neighborhood tipping occurs in a multiethnic context. First, we describe our model and how it is implemented. Next, we determine what residential patterns emerge when we hold individuals' preferences constant, but change the race/ethnic composition of the metropolitan area. Should mixed neighborhoods in multiethnic cities remain stable over time, this would suggest that tipping operates differently in multiethnic cities. It would also suggest that empirical research that tries to explain variation in overall levels of segregation across urban areas must explicitly consider the demographic context in which mobility behavior occurs.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch	Robert	D. Mare
2002	119	Network Analysis in Social Demography	Do Social Networks Add to the Predictive Value of Traditional Socioeconomic Characteristics? The Bolivia Case Study	This study tests whether the prediction of health related knowledge (correct breastfeeding practices) can be improved by the composition of an individual's personal network above that predicted by his/her socioeconomic or demographic characteristics.     Promotion of breastfeeding practices that enhance child survival are of importance in Bolivia because of its high infant morbidity and mortality.   Data on women and men 15-49 years of age were collected by two cross-sectional probability samples (baseline: 2,256; follow-up: 2,354) from seven urban areas in Bolivia.  Model building and the log likelihood ratio criteria were used to assess the significance of the variables in the model.      Results show that the network variables add significantly to the predictive power of the socioeconomic variables (25.8 with 6 degrees of freedom, p	Fannie	 Fonseca-Becker
2002	119	Network Analysis in Social Demography	Ambiguous Ethnicity? Social Segregation and Racial Assimilation among Hispanic Adolescents	This paper examines social network data drawn from a nationally representative sample of schools in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to pursue two related questions: (1) How much intra-ethnic friendship is there among Hispanics? and (2) Does racial segregation among Hispanics increase the longer they have lived in the U.S.?     To answer the first question, we analyze the degree of intra-ethnic friendship among different Hispanic origin groups. To answer the second question, we use information on the length of time since immigration to the U.S. and the multiple reports of race available in the Add Health data to investigate the process of racial assimilation among Hispanic immigrants. Although the p-star models depict lower levels of racial and ethnic homophily, a simulation will show that the predicted outcome levels of segregation converge to the logit estimates.	Ted	 Mouw	Eduardo	 Bonilla-Silva
2002	120	Family Structure, Social Networks, and Well-Being	The Determinants and Consequences of Child Care Subsidies for Single Mothers	This paper provides an early analysis of child care subsidies under welfare reform. Previous studies of child care subsidies use data from the pre-welfare-reform period, and their results may not apply to the very different post-reform environment.     We use data from the 1997 National Survey of America's Families to analyze the determinants of receipt of a child care subsidy and the effects of subsidy receipt on employment, school attendance, job search, and welfare participation. We analyze the impact on subsidy receipt of household characteristics such as family size and structure, and past participation in welfare.     Ordinary least squares estimates show positive and significant effects of subsidy receipt on employment, school enrollment, and welfare participation. Two stage least squares estimates that treat subsidy receipt as endogenous and use county dummies as identifying instruments show much less evidence that subsidy receipt affects these outcomes.	David	 Blau	Erdal	 Tekin
2002	120	Family Structure, Social Networks, and Well-Being	The Persistence of Hardship over the Life Course	Social scientists have long known that the elderly are an extraordinarily diverse group - for example, some elderly people are poor and others are extremely well-off.  This paper focuses on one aspect of old-age heterogeneity: the persistence of hardship from middle-age to old-age.  The cumulative advantage-disadvantage model hypothesizes that the effects of early advantages and disadvantages cumulate over the life course. Two implications follow directly from this model (1) heterogeneity increases over the life course, and (2) stratification of economic status over the life course. This study examines the relationship of persistent hardship in middle-age (poverty, welfare receipt, unmarried) to adverse outcomes at age 66 (poverty, welfare receipt, unmarried, poor health and death before age 66).    The data for this study come from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The results show that individuals who experience persistent middle-age hardships are significantly (statistically) more likely to experience adverse old-age outcomes.	Thomas	L. Hungerford
2002	120	Family Structure, Social Networks, and Well-Being	Combining GIS and Ethnography to Explore Social Networks and Neighborhood Resource Use among Low-Income Families	This paper focuses on the use of social networks and neighborhood resources by low-income families. Ethnographic data from the Three City Study of Welfare, Children and Families includes information on residence and employment histories, social networks, and use of family and child-based neighborhood resources. These ethnographic data have been geocoded and linked to secondary geospatial data on demographics, land use, crime and other neighborhood resources and risks. This coupling of ethnographic and geospatial data facilitates a more flexible viewing of families. That is, we can situate families in broader geographic contexts and visualize the different strategies they employ in regard to the use of neighborhood resources and social networks. In this paper we compare and contrast the use of neighborhood resources and social networks in families residing in the same neighborhoods. In doing so we hope to shed an ethnographic light on the complex and reciprocal relationship between families and neighborhoods.	Stephen	 Matthews	Tera	R. Hurt	Linda	M. Burton
2002	120	Family Structure, Social Networks, and Well-Being	Who Should Marry and Whom: Multiple Partner Fertility among Fragile Families	Proponents of using welfare policy to promote family formation have been encouraged by reports that more than half of the young unwed mothers who responded to the Fragile and Child Well-being survey report that they intend to marry their children's fathers. However, about 60 percent have more than one child and parents with multiple children sometimes have children with more than one partner. Multiple partner fertility poses two important challenges to current discussions of family formation policy. First, multiple partner fertility may discourage marriage because the parents of children born outside the present union may want to visit their child. Also, when fathers have children outside the current union, they may have existing child support obligations. This paper explores the extent of multiple partner fertility among fragile families, including race, ethnicity, and residential/relationship status. We draw inferences from these findings for family formation policies.	Ronald	 Mincy	Chien-Chung	 Huang
2002	120	Family Structure, Social Networks, and Well-Being	Welfare Reform and the Living Arrangements of Single Mothers	One potential consequence of the drop in welfare caseloads associated with welfare reform is its effect on living arrangements. If tougher welfare rules have reduced the income of single mothers by limiting access to the program, one consequence may be that more are choosing to share resources by living with others, such as a parent. We have investigated trends in living arrangements using 16 years of data from the Current Population Survey (CPS). In order to separate the effects of welfare reform, economic conditions, and other factors, we used confidential geocoded census data to control for county level employment rates as well as the usual demographics. The study also relied upon three treatment/comparison group strategies: 1) states with tougher or more lenient welfare policies, 2) trends in states with varying falls in the welfare caseloads, and 3) trends in low- and higher-income neighborhoods (census tracts).	Scott	J. Susin	Laura	E. Adler
2002	121	Parental Employment and Adolescent Well-Being	Maternal Employment and Adolescent Risky Behavior	Previous examinations of the impact of maternal employment on children have usually focused on young children. In this study, we examine the relationship between maternal employment and risky behavior by adolescents using the NLSY79 Young Adult Supplement. We analyze the link between mothers' employment measured early in life and during adolescence and the decisions of children to smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, use marijuana, and to engage in sexual activity. Characteristics of the mother that are not measured may affect both employment and her influence on the likelihood that the child engages in risky behaviors. Further, maternal employment will be tied to decisions such as those affecting marital status or spousal employment that may also influence or be influenced by child behavior. We explore three approaches to addressing these econometric issues: (1) inclusion of a wide range of controls for maternal characteristics, (2) instrumental variables, and (3) fixed effects.	Alison	 Aughinbaugh	Maury	 Gittleman
2002	121	Parental Employment and Adolescent Well-Being	Parental Job Loss and Early Adolescent Adjustment	The present study examines the short-term effects of maternal and paternal job loss on early adolescents' academic achievement, school behavior problems, and psychological adjustment in a national longitudinal data set (the NELS). We examine changes in the youth's outcomes between the 8th and 10th grade (1988-1990) as a function of parental job losses that occurred in the intervening years. Multivariate regression analyses controlling for relevant background characteristics are conducted separately for black and white families. Among white youth, fathers' job loss has a small detrimental effect on youth's locus of control. For black youth, fathers' job loss has a substantial detrimental effect on school behavior problems and math test scores. Effects for mothers' job loss are generally small and not statistically significant.	Ariel	 Kalil	Thomas	 DeLeire
2002	121	Parental Employment and Adolescent Well-Being	The Effect of Maternal Employment on Teenage Childbearing	This paper estimates the effect of a mother's employment on her teenage daughter's likelihood of first birth. Maternal employment could positively impact teenage childbearing by reducing the amount of supervision a mother can provide. On the other hand, maternal employment may reduce the likelihood of a teenage birth through either an income effect, a role model mechanism, or a childcare effect. Using data from the National Education Longitudinal Survey of 1988, this analysis shows that maternal employment increases the hazard rate of first sex by 11 percent among non-African American teenagers. It also reveals that maternal employment reduces the hazard rate of a teenage birth conditional on being sexually active by at least 14 percent among non-African Americans. Maternal employment does not appear to affect childbearing among African American teenagers.	Leonard	M. Lopoo
2002	121	Parental Employment and Adolescent Well-Being	Making the Grade: Parental Work-Family Conflict through the Eyes of Teens	The intersection of work and family life has received considerable attention these past few decades. However, relatively absent from this body of research is children's perceptions of work-family conflict.     In this study, we use survey data from a Sloan Study on dual earner families (N=226) to examine the relationship between adolescents' assessments of parental role management and parents' own experiences of role conflict. Further, we examine other key aspects of family life (time together, communication, relationship quality) and how these figure into adolescents' assessments.     This unique opportunity to look at each parent's work experiences, as well as adolescents' perceptions, reveals two things: 1) adolescents look for particular signs that let them know parents are accommodating work to meet family needs; and 2) more then talking or spending time together, adolescents look for supportive family environments and parental closeness when assessing how well parents are balancing work and family roles.	Elaine	 Marchena
2002	122	Wage and Equality: Gender and Structural Changes	The Great Equalizer: Does Education Pay off for Members of Historically Discriminated-Against Groups?	Despite rising educational attainment across social and demographic lines, income surveys show persistent disparities in earnings between men and women, and among members of different races or ethnicities. Yet the same research confirms the relationship between earnings and education. At least some earnings differences between members of different groups arise from residual differences in educational attainment by group members. However, do education differences fully explain earnings disparities?  What might? In light of persistent differences in earnings among people from different social groups, does education really matter? We extend ongoing Census Bureau research to explore these questions.    Using a demographic method, we demonstrate directly how similar educational attainment translates into different life-time accumulations of earnings for members of different social groups. Using regression, we attempt to reveal whether education or social group membership exerts more influence on earnings. We conclude by discussing the limitations of our models and suggest further research.	Jennifer	 Cheeseman Day	Eric	C. Newburger
2002	122	Wage and Equality: Gender and Structural Changes	The Effect of Family Structure on Intergenerational Earnings Mobility	Intergenerational earnings mobility, or the difference in earnings between parents and adult children, is commonly believed to represent equality of opportunity in a society. One factor that is not often thought of as a determinant of mobility is family structure. Using the PSID, this paper examines the effect of family structure - represented by single and step family experience - on mobility. Because there is selection into single and step families, I use family fixed effects in addition to OLS. I find that with each additional year in either a single or step family, biological father-child mobility rises and mother-child mobility falls. However, the fixed effects results indicate no difference in mobility between siblings with different durations in single or step families. This implies that the effect of family structure on mobility is not causal; rather, there are unobservable family characteristics that cause both the divorce and the mobility level.	Angela	R. Fertig
2002	122	Wage and Equality: Gender and Structural Changes	Corporate Restructuring and Rising Wage Inequality in U.S. Cities, 1969-1999	Organizational changes have received little scholarly attention as a cause of rising wage inequality and yet corporate restructuring has been widespread. This paper focuses on the impact of subcontracting on levels and changes in wage inequality in U.S. cities over the past three decades. A multilevel, pooled time series analysis is conducted for a sample of roughly 115 cities across 4 time points-1969, 1979, 1989, and 1999. Preliminary analyses reveal that the share of employment in subcontracting industries explains more of the variance in a key measure of wage inequality (within-group wage inequality) across cities than most other explanatory variables. The effects are also greatest in the earlier years, the very years in which the explanation of wage inequality is least understood, and the years in which these industries grew the most. These results also persist in models with extensive controls for other factors.     	Leslie	 McCall
2002	122	Wage and Equality: Gender and Structural Changes	Was the Great U-Turn an Artifact of the Structural Transformation of the U.S. Labor Force?	The deindustrialization and restructuring trends of the 1970s and '80s prompted debates about a great U-turn in earnings and an increase in inequality.  Concurrent with those changes was a large influx of women into the full-time, year-round labor force.     The deindustrialization and feminization trends had the potential to radically alter the earnings composition of the labor force because (1) many of the high-paying blue-collar jobs in manufacturing lost during the 1970s and '80s were predominantly held by men, (2)  some of the service-oriented jobs gained during that time period paid well, although most did not, (3) the deindustrialization/expansion of services trend intersected significantly with the feminization of the labor force because women swelled the ranks of the service sectors.      A closer examination of those concurrent changes has the potential to alter the  great U-turn debate because the U-turn was most evident only when male and female earnings are combined.	Ritch	 Milby
2002	123	Evaluating Census 2000	Evaluation of Population Coverage in Census 2000: Demographic Analysis	Demographic analysis (DA) is a well-developed coverage measurement and evaluation program. DA has served as the standard for measuring coverage trends in recent censuses and differences in coverage by age, sex, and race (Black and Non-Black) at the national level. DA represents a macro-level approach, where population benchmarks are developed by analyzing and aggregating various types of demographic data. Some examples include administrative statistics on births, deaths, immigration, and Medicare enrollments, as well as estimates of emigration and undocumented immigration. The difference between the DA benchmark and the census count provides an estimate of the census net undercount. The demographic approach differs fundamentally from the survey-based Accuracy and Coverage Evaluation (A.C.E.).    In this paper, we discuss the results of the DA evaluation for Census 2000. We describe the DA estimates of coverage at the national level and compare patterns of coverage in 2000 to patterns measured in previous censuses.	Gregory	 Robinson	Arjun	 Adlakha	Kirsten	 West
2002	123	Evaluating Census 2000	Evaluating Census 2000 Hispanic Data	Census 2000 results indicate that the Hispanic population is the largest and fastest growing racial or ethnic minority group in the United States. Census 2000 has been lauded as the most accurate census in history. Nevertheless, evaluating the quality of Hispanic data in the 2000 census is important considering the political significance of decennial census data and the estimated undercount of Hispanics in 2000 census. We compare the percent total difference and relative difference of the size and characteristics of the Hispanic population counted by Census 2000 with Hispanic data from the 2000 Current Population Survey and the Census 2000 Supplementary Survey. The findings provide the first evaluation of the quality of the Census 2000 Hispanic data as well as the first study to compare federal data sources specifically about the Hispanic population in the United States.	Eileen	Diaz  McConnell	Betsy	 Guzman
2002	123	Evaluating Census 2000	Estimating Illegal Migrants Counted in the Census, 1990 and 2000	As part of the Census Bureau's evaluation of Census 2000 and the determination as to whether the Census 2000 counts should be adjusted, the Population Division has reviewed its demographic analysis and population estimates methodology, and the underlying components of population change, including components of international migration. This report provides an evaluation of the illegal migration component of international migration as it relates to the U.S. resident population on April 1, 1990 and April 1, 2000.  Estimates are calculated by age, sex, race, Hispanic Origin, place of birth, and components of international migration. Assumptions about undercoverage of the illegal population are derived as well. The methods behind these estimates and the estimates themselves are compared with contemporary findings.	Joe	M. Costanzo	Cynthia	J. Davis	Caribert	 Irazi	Daniel	 Goodkind	Roberto	 Ramirez
2002	123	Evaluating Census 2000	The Contribution of Unauthorized and Legal Mexican Immigrants to the Census Undercount in Los Angeles County	This paper employs the 2001 Los Angeles Mexican Immigrant Legal Status Survey (LA-MILSS) data to estimate the contribution of unauthorized and Legal Mexican immigrants to the Census undercount in Los Angeles County. After estimating the number of Mexican immigrants by legal status and whether each individual was enumerated in the 2000 Census, we examine various sources of omission. Logistic regression results suggest that individual demographic characteristics, social network quality, and neighborhood characteristics help explain variation in whether a person was counted.	Enrico	A. Marcelli	Paul	M. Ong
2002	124	Migration and Health	Migration and Infant Health in Mexico: New Evidence and Emerging Patterns	The present analysis aims to link the social epidemiological aspects of infant health with the migratory process. In contrast to past research studies, this analysis will investigate how the relationship between Mexican migration and infant health plays out within Mexico instead of within the United States. We will expand the discussion on migration and infant health to include the way that health and migration interact within the origin country. The analysis utilizes a unique and new data set that comes from a recent postpartum survey administered to 600 women who gave birth in eight different public hospitals in Mexico. We examine the relationship between migration experience and infant health outcomes within Mexico. Furthermore, given the high degree of detail in the survey, this new data set enables us to determine the mechanisms contributing to these patterns.	Reanne	 Frank
2002	124	Migration and Health	Immigrant Adaptation and Mexican Health: The Effects of U.S. Duration	Although they have low socioeconomic status, low rates of health insurance, and receive little preventive health care, Mexicans have lower mortality and fewer chronic illnesses than African Americans and Puerto Ricans of similar SES profiles. To understand this paradox, this study explores health differences among Mexicans with differing migration experiences. We evaluate whether individuals who migrate are selectively healthier than those who do not migrate, or whether and how health varies among those who have spent longer durations in the United States. Preliminary findings suggest that current female migrants are more likely to be at either end of the health continuum, but that current male migrants are more likely to report excellent/good health, than non-migrants. Longer duration in the United States worsens adult health, however.	Katharine	M. Donato	Melissa	 Stainback
2002	124	Migration and Health	Spatial Assimilation and Health Status of Elderly Mexican Americans: Evidence from the Hispanic EPESE	This paper describes the distribution to social contexts of elderly Mexican-Americans by years and generation since immigration, as well as health outcomes for Mexican-Americans in different social contexts. Additionally, it identifies mechanisms linking social context and health. Data are from 3050 elderly Mexican-American respondents to the Hispanic Established Population Epidemiological Survey of the Elderly. Data were linked to Census STF data by tract of residence at baseline, and to data about regional health care resources from the Dartmouth Health Atlas.     I find that immigration generation is weakly related to ethnic and SES composition of tract. Mexican composition of tract is strongly related to tract poverty and unavailability of medical services. Five-year mortality was lower for persons living in tracts with a large concentration of Mexicans. This advantage was explained by superior health status at baseline, in particular, a lower prevalence of stroke, cancer and hip fractures.	Karl	 Eschbach
2002	124	Migration and Health	Migrant Health Selection: Evidence from Mexico and the U.S.	This paper examines healthy migrant hypotheses using data from the new 2000 Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) and the 1998 Health and Retirement Study (HRS). In the first stage, HRS data on Mexican-born migrants living in the U.S. and MHAS data are pooled to reconstruct the mortality-adjusted Mexican population at risk for migration. The right-hand side variables for this logit model are those available in both the HRS and MHAS. This models tests the hypothesis that migrants are a distinct and healthier sub-group in their population of origin. The second stage incorporates information from the first stage equation to estimate the probabilities of domestic and return migration relative to non-movers using only MHAS data. This second stage of the analysis yields predicted probabilities of domestic and return migration conditional on making any move type of move earlier in life.	Beth	 Soldo	Rebeca	 Wong
2002	125	Gender and Work in Developed Countries	Occupational Sex Segregation, Maternity and Job Transitions among Women	Some studies of occupational sex segregation argue that women choose female-typed occupations because they entail lower costs associated with time out of the labor force due to childbearing. This paper evaluates this proposition by examining the effects of occupational sex-type on job exits and re-entrances, with a special focus on interaction effects between sex-type and maternity. We draw on data from 18 waves of the NLSY, estimating continuous-time event historical models. Preliminary results suggest that women in mixed-sex occupations are least likely to make a job exit around the birth of a child. Women in female-dominated jobs are less likely to leave for a birth, but if they do leave, they are the least likely to return to work.	Hyunjoo	 Min
2002	125	Gender and Work in Developed Countries	Was Attainment of the American Dream Gendered? Gender Differences in Occupational Mobility in the Early 20th Century	Was the American dream of upward mobility, achieved through occupational improvement, a reality for women as well as men in the early 20th century? Previous studies of historical occupational transmission have mostly focused on men, examining improvements over generations or for limited father-son pairs. We expand this framework to study occupational transmission from fathers to daughters, comparing the pace of improvement across generations for a variety of different ethnic and race groups.  Data are from the nationally representative 1920 IPUMS Census. A unique contribution of this analysis is our ability to examine immigrant adaptation through four generations. Preliminary results indicate that working daughters' occupational scores were significantly higher than were sons', though less of daughters' attainment was attributable to father's status. Daughters who were gainfully employed may have been selectively different from non-working daughters. Our findings demonstrate the importance of incorporating women into historical mobility frameworks.	Sharon	 Sassler	Leanna	M. Mellott	Christie	D. Batson
2002	125	Gender and Work in Developed Countries	The Structure of Women's Labor Force Participation in Comparative Perspective	One of the most dramatic social transformations of the latter half of the twentieth century involved the massive influx of women into the paid labor force. The large scale movement of women into wage labor after World War II has occurred in every OECD country, although the rate of growth in women's entry into the labor force and rates of part-time employment vary substantially across nations. In this paper we use social survey data, institutional variables, and multi-level methods to provide an integrative assessment of demographic, structural, and institutional effects on women's labor force participation, involvement in part-time work, and occupational segregation. This research provides a comprehensive analysis of both structural and institutional arguments for women's involvement in the paid labor force across countries and helps clarify our understanding of cross-national variation in women's employment.	Becky	 Pettit	Jennifer	L. Hook
2002	125	Gender and Work in Developed Countries	Women, Work, and Motherhood: Changing Economic Penalties for Motherhood in West Germany after 1945. A Comparative Analysis of Cohorts Born in 1934-1971	This paper deals with the effects of motherhood on women's employment dynamics and economic standing. Our analysis is based on the complete lifetime working- and income histories of a 1% sample of all persons born between 1934 and 1971 and employed in West Germany sometime between 1975 and 1995.     We use the records of 130,000 women who were employed before the birth of their first child. We apply a semiparametric hierarchical Bayesian modeling approach simultaneously including and estimating effects of several time scales and further covariates (MCMC techniques).    We investigate short-term and long-term economic penalties for motherhood and their changes across birth cohorts. We study the employment histories and income levels before the birth of the first child and examine their effects on the propensity and timing of re-entry into the labor market. We also explore the consequences of the employment interruption for a mother's subsequent income and employment stability.	Annette	 Kohlmann	Stefan	 Bender	Gerda	 Neyer	Stefan	 Lang
2002	126	Innovation in Health Measurement	Survey Data on Low Birthweight: An Evaluation of Recent International Estimates and Estimation Procedures	An infant's weight at birth is an indicator not only of a mother's health but also the newborn's chances for survival, growth, long-term health and psychosocial development. Reduction of the proportion of infants with low birthweight is recommended in the 'A World Fit for Children' goals of the U.N. for the coming decade. Since facility-based estimates of low birthweight are biased for most developing countries, prior work has focused on the feasibility of using survey data based on mother's recall. While a great deal of data have been collected, little has been done to evaluate its quality or the adequacy of estimation procedures. Using data from approximately 60 DHS and MICS surveys we look for systematic patterns in the estimates and quantify the effect of different adjustment procedures. We make recommendations for the improvement of data collection and provide guidelines for the estimation of low birthweight with survey data.	Ann	 Blanc	Tessa	 Wardlaw
2002	126	Innovation in Health Measurement	TeenWeb: Using the Web to Survey and Inform Urban Adolescents about Health in Nairobi and Mexico City	Worldwide there are 2 billion persons between the ages of 10 and 19.  Many urban youth are vulnerable to a range of health problems.  Ideal measurement of their development requires longitudinal designs, but these are prohibitively expensive in developing countries.  Electronic connectivity with adolescents offers opportunities to investigate development prospectively and dynamically, yet presents multiple hurdles regarding local infrastructure and target population characteristics.      This paper reports progress on TeenWeb, a  collaborative project with four goals:  1) conduct a school-based, longitudinal research study on the reproductive health of urban adolescents in Mexico City and Nairobi; 2) test the feasibility of the Web as a mechanism for repeated measurements; 3) assess the utility of the Web to disseminate information to adolescents; and 4) disseminate information about adolescent health needs that informs public health policy and practice.      The paper describes scientific and ethical considerations, and logistical challenges in project design and implementation.	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern	Janie	 Benson	Ellen	M.H. Mitchell	Jan	 Hendrickson-Smith	Sherry	 Farr	Sarah	 Onyango	Phil	 Bardsley	Loren	 Watterson	Nancy	 Smith
2002	126	Innovation in Health Measurement	Biological and Physiological Measurements in Population-Based Surveys in Less Developed Countries: Recent Innovations in the DHS (Demographic and Health Survey)	Health information needs in developing countries have increased to include data on broad array of diseases, conditions, and risk factors in populations. The Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) has evolved to help meet these needs. The paper reviews recent methodological innovations that have been incorporated into the DHS including the use of biological and physiological measures (biomarkers). Presentation of data resulting from these new efforts includes prevalence estimates of HIV, syphilis, and lead. The paper addresses the issue of criteria for inclusion of biomarkers in national surveys. Interview based estimates based on self-reported disease and estimates of disease derived from biomarkers are compared empirically (kappa scores) and within the broader context of data policy. The paper presents other biomarkers in surveys currently in the field for which data will be available in the near future.	Gregory	 Pappas
2002	126	Innovation in Health Measurement	Combining Prevalence and Mortality Risk Rates: Illuminating the Risks of Cigarette Smoking	Considerable attention has been devoted to the impact of cigarette smoking on U.S. health and mortality. Yet little attention has focused on the interrelations of smoking with other risk factors and on the combined influences of smoking prevalence, population size, and mortality risk on aggregate figures. To calculate this impact, we employ the National Health Interview Survey, linked to the Multiple Cause of Death file. Cigarette smoking is a particularly pernicious behavior because of its high prevalence - with about one-half of the population currently smoking or having smoked in the past - and high risk of death-compared to never smokers, heavy smokers can expect to live almost 14 fewer years. Better knowledge of the prevalence and mortal risk of various cigarette smoking scenarios illuminates the future health and longevity prospects of the entire population.	Richard	G. Rogers	Patrick	M. Krueger	S.	Jay  Olshansky
2002	127	Methodological Issues in Study of Population Movement	Leaving Home: Modeling the Effect of Civic and Economic Structure on Individual Migration Patterns	This research analyzes the effect of community structure upon individuals' probabilities of moving,  between 1985 and 1990. Using the full Census sample microdata for 1990, we re-allocate the 1990 population to their 1985 place of residence. Then, using 1985 community structural variables (derived from the Economic Census microdata) and individual characteristics (from Decennial Census microdata), we develop a two level hierarchical linear model.  In level 1 we construct a logistic equation modeling individual probabilities of moving.  In level 2 we model the contextual effects of 1985 community structure on these models.      These contextual effects fall into two categories: 1) economic conditions that comprise the usual aggregate 'push' factors associated and 2) community social capital factors that act to retain people in their community.  Results specify the relationship between community context and individual migration patterns, and demonstrate effects of local economic structure and local civic structure on these individual probabilities.	Michael	 Irwin	Troy	 Blanchard	Charles	 Tolbert	Alfred	 Nucci	Thomas	 Lyson
2002	127	Methodological Issues in Study of Population Movement	Understanding United States Foreign-Born Emigration: Theory, Methodology, and Underlying Trends	Research on migration in the United States largely overlooks emigration. Consequently, we address the need to understand the theory behind the methodology, historical trends, and policy contexts within which foreign-born transnational migration occurs. We posit that a residual methodology fails to consider inconsistencies between theory and population changes. An evolving concept like emigration requires an evolving methodology to encompass all the forces that affect decisions to stay, to return, and to migrate once again. We compare published estimates to document and discern differentials that currently exist and may arise in the future. Ahmed and Robinson (1994) developed estimates using a residual methodology, which are compared to personal experiences recorded in the Mexican Migration Project to inform the evaluation of the residual methodology, and suggest improvements that better reflect observed trends. Our findings reveal that the dynamic nature of transnational migration requires new and creative thinking in the area of emigration.	Betsy	 Guzman	Tammany	J. Mulder	Nolan	J. Malone
2002	127	Methodological Issues in Study of Population Movement	The Biographies and the Population Movement: An Indian Experience	Addressing the question as to why biography-oriented data is not being used in economic and social science research, this paper describes the general characteristics of life course data. Focusing on a satellite town of Delhi Metropolitan Area in India, our study focuses on the collection of life history data for migration studies of 397 households and the same number of individual biographies of one person from each household.     The paper mainly highlights the methodological issues of survey design, questionnaires, samples, data collection, fieldwork, and the reaction of respondents in the Indian context. The study reveals that people living in the central city of Delhi moved from planned sectors to the urban villages and slums.	Jay	 Prakash	Aslam	 Mehmood
2002	127	Methodological Issues in Study of Population Movement	Multireg - A User-Friendly Software to Project Population by Multiregional Model	The advantages of using a multi-regional model are very well known in case of population projections that take into account various regions of a country (Rogers, 1994). However, one of its inconveniences is the huge amount of data needed as an input (Hakkert, 1988).     The MULTIREG software presented in this paper is intended to be a user-friendly, didactic tool, allowing a simplified entering of data. Data can be introduced in specific screens inside the software or in an EXCELL spreadsheet, which is of general use. Specific fertility, mortality and migration rates can be entered only for the initial and final period, and the software makes the interpolation between the two periods.  Besides that, only gross rates and age patterns can be entered, diminishing the amount of data. One example of a projection for the 27 Brazilian States is presented.	Cláudio	C. Machado	Moema	G.B. Figoli
2002	128	International Issues in Abortion	Knowledge and Opinions about Abortion Law among Mexican Youth	In Latin America, unsafe induced abortions cause significant morbidity and mortality for women. Little is known about public knowledge of abortion law or public opinion towards abortion, however, these factors impact abortion services and abortion policy reform. This paper uses data from a nationally representative survey in Mexico to analyze public knowledge of abortion law and opinion on abortion among 907 study participants, aged 15-24. Logistic regression is used to estimate odds ratios for factors associated with knowledge on abortion law and abortion opinion.    Factors associated with accurate knowledge on abortion law include living in Mexico City, the Pacific North, or the Southeast, college education, urban residence, and liberal opinion towards emergency contraception. Conservative opinions towards abortion are associated with conservative opinion on emergency contraception and low education. Residence in Mexico City or the North Central Gulf and having friends who have used emergency contraception are associated with liberal opinion.	Davida	 Becker	Sandra	 Garcia
2002	128	International Issues in Abortion	Reevaluating the Efficacy of Medical Abortion	We propose a new standard method for evaluating the efficacy of medical abortion. Previous research on the efficacy of medical abortion has followed the conceptual model for the analysis of surgical abortion; the failure rate is computed by simple division and expressed as a proportion. While this method of calculating efficacy is appropriate for the discrete event of surgical abortion, it is inappropriate for medical abortion because it fails to account for the temporal process of medical abortion and allows for only one type of failure. We assert that the conceptual model used to calculate contraceptive efficacy is more appropriate because: 1) Life table procedures incorporate the important dimension of time in success and 2) Both method and elective failures are calculated.  Using data on more than 6,500 women from 6 previously conducted medical abortion studies, we use life table procedures to reevaluate the efficacy of medical abortion.	Allison	A. Hedley	Charlotte	 Ellertson	Abigail	 Norris Turner	James	 Trussell
2002	128	International Issues in Abortion	The Importance of Client Satisfaction for Improving the Quality of Abortion Care	This paper explores client satisfaction with abortion care, looking both at overall satisfaction and at satisfaction with specific aspects of care. The analysis aimed to determine whether client satisfaction was related to the characteristics of the client or to the care received, in order to guide quality improvement efforts. Survey data from abortion clients in three cities in Russia were analyzed using logistic regression.     Information provided to abortion clients was the most important predictor of client satisfaction for abortion clients in these cities. This suggests that improving the information provided to clients, by training providers and other staff, is important in these settings. Client characteristics, in general, did not affect client satisfaction though there were significant differences in overall satisfaction for married and unmarried women. Finally, the characteristics of the abortion visit were not related to client satisfaction with care.  	Elizabeth	 Oliveras	Patricia	 David
2002	128	International Issues in Abortion	Estimating Illegal Abortion Rates Using Survey Respondents' Knowledge of Abortion Cases in Their Social Networks: An Innovative Method Tested in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso	This study tests a new method to estimate illegal abortion rates: the Third Party Information method. The TPI method asks respondents to report abortion incidences in their social networks and infers population level abortion rates from this data. This method was first developed in 2000 for a rural population in Burkina Faso: it is here adapted to the urban context of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.     This study tests two hypotheses: 1) the TPI method yields higher estimates of abortion than two other existing survey estimation methods (the direct questioning and the residual methods); 2) the TPI method can provide reliable approximation of abortion rates. The three survey abortion rates are calculated with data from a survey of 1500 individuals representative of Ouagadougou.     The survey rates are tested for reliability against abortion rates obtained using: 1) an ethnographic approach; 2) hospital abortion complications statistics multiplied by health professionals' estimates.	Clementine	 Rossier	Georges	 Guiella	Abdoulaye	 Ouedraogo	Blandine	 Thieba
2002	129	Family Change in Asia	Do Multigenerational Living Arrangements Affect Household Income Inequality? Evidence from Malaysia	Mutigenerational coresidence is quite common in developing countries, but little is known about how it affects the distribution of household income. Although a number of studies have investigated whether wives' earnings affect family income inequality, we know of no studies that have looked at the effect of the earnings of other adults on household income inequality.    Using data from the first and second Malaysian Family Life Surveys, we assess how the earnings of other adult members affect household income inequality and how changes over time in the extent of multi-generational coresidence have affected changes in the distribution of income. We find that in both 1976 and 1988 the earnings of other adults helped equalize the distribution of household income in Peninsular Malaysia. The presence of other adults living in households declined significantly between 1976 and 1988. As a result, the equalizing effect of other adults' earnings on household income inequality also decreased significantly between 1976 and 1988.	Shahina	 Amin	Julie	 DaVanzo
2002	129	Family Change in Asia	Economic Changes and the Household Division of Labor in China	Highlighting one aspect of the economic transition in China, i.e. industrialization, this paper focuses on how a specific type of employment change, one from an agricultural to a non-agricultural job can change housework arrangements between husband and wife.  Using a longitudinal dataset, China Health and Nutrition Survey, I employed fixed effect models to study how a job change can affect husbands, wives, and the difference between their weekly housework hours. The findings suggested that the changing from an agricultural to a non-agricultural job of either the husband or wife affected the household division of labor. With such a job change, the husband cut back his housework hours, which further increased the difference in housework hours between the couple. If the wife changed her job, the reduction in her housework hours was twice as much. The gender effect is expected because of their different level of housework involvement to begin with.	Feinian	 Chen
2002	129	Family Change in Asia	The Marriage Revolution in Indonesia	Over the last century Indonesia has experienced rapid change in patterns of family formation.  Marriages are more likely to be based on the decisions of the couple rather than their families, and is contracted at later ages than ever before. Divorce and widowhood have declined and the experience of singlehood is taking up an increasing proportion of young women's lives. In this paper the changing patterns of marital status are examined through the application of novel methods to calculate marital status indices. Data are drawn from the decennial censuses between 1961 and 2000. Geographical variations and urban rural differences are highlighted, as is the influence of changing patterns of education and occupation over the last forty years. Of particular interest is the growing class of 'never to be married' women in Jakarta and other major cities. The paper concludes with speculation about future patterns of family formation, and likely influences on long term fertility trends.	Terence	H. Hull
2002	129	Family Change in Asia	School Characteristics and Marriage Timing	One of the most consistent relationships in social demography is the relationship between family behaviors and education. Few studies of family behaviors, however, have examined the school environment in which an individual may have obtained his education, such as the qualifications of teachers, student crowding, and gender composition. School characteristics can determine how an individual is exposed to different aspirations, role models, skills, and ideas. These experiences can be important causal mechanisms that link education to family behaviors.  In this paper, we incorporate measures of school characteristics into an analysis of individual marriage timing. We develop a theoretical framework to hypothesize why these concepts are important for domains other than academic achievement or delinquency. We also suggest how these factors can even influence individuals who do not attend schools. We then test our framework in a setting that has marked differences in school characteristics over time: the Chitwan Valley of Nepal.	Scott	 Yabiku	William	G. Axinn	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	Keith	D. Robinson
2002	130	Children's Education in Developing Countries	Is it Education, Wealth, and/or Family Size? The Effects of Family Size, Parents' Education, and Wealth on School Attainment in a Rural Ghanaian District	Using structural equation models and data from the Navrongo Demographic Surveillance System, this paper examines some of the correlates of school attendance in the Kassena-Nankana district of Ghana. Formal education was introduced in this district more than five decades ago yet current levels of school enrollment, educational attainment, and literacy are very low, raising the question: What factors account for school attendance and non-attendance in the Kassena-Nankana district? In an attempt to better understand this chronic problem, we examined how parental education, household wealth and family size affect children's level of schooling. The empirical findings suggest that parental education, household wealth and family size are all good predictors of school attainment. The findings further suggest that, in addition to having a direct impact, parental education also influences children's school attainment indirectly through its impact on household wealth and family size. Family size was positively associated with school attainment.	Kubaje	 Adazu	Silvana	 Vargas
2002	130	Children's Education in Developing Countries	Household Decision Making about Children's Schooling in Latin America	In Latin America, girls often obtain more education than boys.  For example, in Brazil in 1995, 18-year-old females had completed 6.5 years of schooling compared to 5.6 years for 18-year-old males.  We examine two hypotheses to explain the increasing gender gap.  First, opportunity costs of schooling are higher for boys than for girls.  Second, the rise of single-parent households has had a negative impact on boys' schooling.    This paper uses World Bank Living Standards Measurement Survey data from Brazil, Nicaragua, Panama and Peru to examine the determinants of children's schooling and work.  A unique feature of the data is the availability of mother and father codes.  Children can be matched accurately with their parents.  Data are available at two points in time in Nicaragua and Peru, allowing for an analysis of how the impacts of household structure and labor market opportunities on children's work and schooling have changed over time.	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning	Suzanne	 Duryea
2002	130	Children's Education in Developing Countries	Families, Classrooms, and Educational Engagement in Rural China	Educational research in developing countries often investigates school and family socio-economic influences on children's achievement and attainment. Less research has emphasized factors that engage children in education. Because engagement influences subsequent attainment, the topic is particularly important in developing country settings where early school-leaving remains significant.           Analyzing a survey of 2000 children in Gansu, China, we investigate four dimensions of engagement: aspirations, academic confidence, industriousness, and alienation.  Results show lower aspirations among girls and reduced engagement across measures among low socio-economic status children. Net of standard socio-economic controls, parent-child interactions and the presence of books significantly predict engagement. At school, stable access to classes and peer disruptiveness are significant predictors.  Results demonstrate significant mechanisms linking families and classrooms to the educational outcomes of children -mechanisms that might be obscured within conventional school and family effects research frameworks.	Emily	 Hannum	Albert	 Park
2002	130	Children's Education in Developing Countries	Education of Migrant Children in Urban China: An Origin-Destination Pooled Approach	In this paper, we examine school enrollment of migrant children in China. Using data from the 1995 China 1% Population Sample Survey, we apply a research strategy that incorporates both migration origin and destination. This allows us to estimate school enrollment rates for temporary migrant children, permanent migrant children, local children, and non-migrant children at the place of origin. Two major findings emerge. First, temporary migrant children are much less likely to be enrolled in school compared to local children. Temporary migrants within one year of duration of residence suffer the most. Second, compared to non-migrant children at the place of origin, rural temporary migrant children also suffer a major disadvantage in school enrollment. As education becomes more and more important for socio-economic mobility in the Chinese society, such disadvantages faced by temporary migrant children will have detrimental and long-term consequences for migrant children themselves and for urban society as a whole.	Zai	 Liang	Yiu	Por  Chen
2002	131	Population-Environment in Urban Settings	Demographic Composition and Projections of Car Use in Austria	Understanding the factors driving demand for transportation in industrialized countries is important for addressing various environmental issues (e.g., air pollution and climate change). Although non-economic factors receive less attention, recent research finds that demographic factors are important. While some studies apply a detailed demographic composition to analyze past developments of transportation demand, projections for the future are mainly restricted to aggregate demographic variables. Here we go beyond previous work by combining cross-sectional analysis of car use in Austria with detailed household projections. We show that projections are sensitive to the particular type of demographic disaggregation employed. The highest projected car use - an increase of 26% between 1996 and 2046 - is obtained if we apply the value of car use per household. For a composition that differentiates between household size and age of the household head, car use is projected to decrease by 7% during the same period.	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Leiwen	 Jiang	Brian	 O'Neill
2002	131	Population-Environment in Urban Settings	Impact of Air Quality on Human Health: A Case of Mumbai City, India	Air Pollution is a major environmental problem in developing countries. It has serious health effects as it results in respiratory diseases. This study focuses on Mumbai a mega city (India) where the levels of all air pollutants are significantly higher than the norms of WHO. In Mumbai, there is a considerable variation in levels of pollution as reflected by the 22 pollution monitoring sites to study the impact of air pollution on health, two areas were selected: Chembur (highly polluted), Borivali (less polluted). The health status was categorized into normal, morbidity related to air pollution and morbidity not related to air pollution.      While there was no significant difference between the 2 areas in morbidity not related to air pollution it was found that Chembur had 1.5 times more morbidity due to air pollution than Borivali, while controlling for socio-economic and demographic characteristics as well as other pollution related health indicators.	Garimella	Rama  Rao	Ashok	Anant  Mahashur	Ravi	Shankar  Pitani
2002	131	Population-Environment in Urban Settings	Population Distribution and Sustainability: Urbanization Alternatives in the State of São Paulo, Brazil	This paper develops a framework for evaluating alternative spatial patterns of population distribution in the interior of the State of São Paulo, Brazil. The Piracicaba Basin, with a population of approximately 4 million in 2000, is one of Brazil's most developed regions. Ninety percent of its population live in cities, in a conurbation which extends for more than 100 miles along major state highways (nearly connecting with the fringes of the metropolitan area of São Paulo), and in smaller cities distributed throughout the region. Current migration flows and consequent urbanization patterns reinforce these conditions. Flows have been in the direction of the larger cities and their immediate hinterlands, with acute environmental problems. Within municipalities, a horizontal pattern of growth has produced both conurbation and urban sprawl, reducing vegetative cover, increasing the cost of providing basic sanitary infrastructure and promoting car-use, with increasing air pollution.	Daniel	Joseph  Hogan
2002	131	Population-Environment in Urban Settings	Daily Mobility and Lead Emissions: The Case of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.	The topic of this study is on the links between the personal use of urban transportation and lead emissions in African capital cities. Its objective is: 1) to generate lead emissions at the household level; 2) to measure and analyze the specific impacts of the household's and the individual's characteristics on lead emissions.     A 2000 Mobility survey in the urban district of Ouagadougou, is the main data source. Firstly, the emissions at the household's level are estimated. Then, an operational adapted IPAT multi-level model is defined in which the level of emissions is the dependent variable while the set of explanatory variables characterize the household (residential mobility, duration of formation, type of motorization, dependency ratio, schooling, sector of employment) or its head (gender, age, level of education).     Finally, a research and a policy agendas are defined with respect to this environmental threat and to the local channels of contamination.	Hamdou	R. Wane	Eloi	 Ouedraogo
2002	132	Intergenerational Transfers in Shifting Contexts	The Response of Interhousehold Transfers to Economic Shocks in Russia	This paper uses panel data from the Russian Longitudinal Mortality Survey (RLMS) to examine the response of inter-household transfers in Russia to economic shocks. While the determinants of transfers are important in any society with limited formal insurance mechanisms, they are particularly relevant for Russia, which has undergone a rapid and unexpected shift from formal to informal insurance during an era of economic uncertainty, small family size, and high adult morbidity.      We use detailed panel data on economic activity, household budget, transfers, and specific income shocks to model household receipt and provision of transfers over time. Transfers are modeled as a response to yearly shocks to income or consumption from an overall panel mean.  Conditional on the presence of a shock, models of past or potential future exchange allow us to examine the importance of reciprocal relationships and altruism in the pattern of transfers over time.	Randall	 Kuhn	Steven	 Stillman
2002	132	Intergenerational Transfers in Shifting Contexts	Children and the Elderly in the Economic Life Cycle of the Household: A Comparative Study of Three Groups of Hunter/Gatherers and Horticulturalists	There are many important questions, still not fully resolved, about the economic activities of children and the elderly in the context of the household life cycle. Data to address questions about the direction and magnitude of intergenerational transfers come from previous field work with a group of Maya horticulturalists (Kramer), and with the Piro, and Machiguenga, two hunter-gatherer/horticultural groups (Kaplan). Our analysis first quantifies changes in individual and family labor supply and consumption in response to household demographic pressures, using models with household fixed effects and age-sex interactions with these fixed effects. We then assess the economic value of children in the three populations and the role that children as a group play in the household economic life cycle. Finally, we evaluate the economic activities of the elderly in relation to their number of descendants and household composition. Analysis builds on earlier work by the three authors.	Ronald	 Lee	Hillard	S. Kaplan	Karen	L. Kramer
2002	132	Intergenerational Transfers in Shifting Contexts	Intergenerational Wealth Transfers in Western Ghana: A Study of Gender Differences in Land Inheritance and Schooling Investment	This study attempts to analyze changing patterns of land transfers and schooling investments by gender over three generations in customary land areas of Western Ghana.  Although traditional matrilineal inheritance rules deny land ownership rights to women, they have increasingly acquired land through gifts and other means, thereby reducing the gender gap in land ownership. The gender gap in schooling has also declined significantly over time, even though it persists. We attribute such changes to the declining trend of social discrimination as well as weak parental discrimination.	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Ellen	M. Payongayong	Keijiro	 Otsuka
2002	132	Intergenerational Transfers in Shifting Contexts	The Elderly of Cambodia: Socio-Demographic Conditions, Living Arrangements, and the Implications for Intergenerational Relations	Recently available data are employed to examine the socio-demographic milieu in which older Cambodians live and investigate living arrangements. Results are compared to Thailand and Vietnam to place Cambodia within a regional context. Findings are then used to draw implications for intergenerational relations. Cambodia has a high proportion of women and widows, and this has implications for relations. Living arrangements are similar to neighboring countries - older adults are likely to be living with a child and in diverse family arrangements. Adjustments for Cambodia's sex and marital status structure suggest elders prefer to live with never married children. There is a slight daughter preference. Patterns imply needs are met through intergenerational exchanges within the household. Older adults in Cambodia face challenges due to the past instability and a national policy on aging is necessary. Such policy would be informed by future research examining socio-demographic circumstances and social needs of elders.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Sovan	 Kiry Kim
2002	133	Sexually Transmitted Infections	The Impact of Mass Media Exposure on Knowledge and Use of Condoms for STI and HIV/AIDS Prevention	This paper assesses whether exposure to HIV/STI prevention and condom promotion messages in the mass media influence knowledge and use of condoms for HIV prevention. Data are obtained from two sample surveys of men and women of reproductive age in target districts in 1997 and 1999. Multivariate regression techniques were used to examine the significance of the relationship between exposure to the mass media and knowledge and use of condoms.     We find that women exposed to messages on STI prevention were more likely to know of condoms as a means to avoid STIs/HIV/AIDS, and to have ever used condoms for disease prevention. Men with media exposure were also more likely to have used condoms. A dose response was seen with the number of media types and both knowledge and use of condoms.  Thus, mass media is an effective way to increase knowledge and use of condoms for disease prevention.	Ruth	E. Bessinger	Charles	 Katende	Neeru	 Gupta
2002	133	Sexually Transmitted Infections	Acceptance and Non-Acceptance of STI/STD Check-up Programs in India	In an effort to decrease the transmission of HIV/AIDS, the government of India recently reinforced STI/STD check-up programs. An exploratory study was conducted in six states to evaluate the efficacy of such initiatives. Various factors affect program performance, including the competency of the staff, patients' perception that STIs/STDs are curable, follow-up examinations, social stigmas, low literacy, and poverty. Moreover, many physicians often find it difficult to motivate patients to observe a regular treatment schedule due to fears about confidentiality. Among the treatment seekers, there were several influences, including residing in a city, education, income, and awareness about the risk of HIV.     The research recommends improved implementation strategies, such as placing more emphasis on information, education, and communication. Additionally, the paper highlights the institutionalization of pre- and post-treatment counseling and proper follow-up. Better infrastructure, improved quality of care, and respect for confidentiality are suggested to encourage treatment.	Rajesh	 Nainakwal
2002	133	Sexually Transmitted Infections	Determinants of Joint Choices for Family Planning and Sexually Transmitted Infection Care: Implications for Integration		Valerie	 Paz Soldan	Jessica	M. Edwards	Joseph	 deGraft-Johnson	Thomas	 Bisika
2002	133	Sexually Transmitted Infections	A Cost-Effectiveness Model of Three Protocols for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Sexually Transmitted Diseases in South Africa	This paper evaluates the cost-effectiveness of gold standard, mass treatment, and syndromic management for Gonorrheal and Chlamydial care among South African women.    Using a hypothetical cohort of 20 million women, we model the effects of each protocol on cost per STD cured and cost of overtreatment, develop decision-tree modeling techniques for each strategy using probability data derived from the literature, and run Monte Carlo simulations using probability ranges from our sensitivity analyses.    We find mass treatment most cost-effective with baseline costs of US$130 per case cured (range under sensitivity analyses of US$104-198), followed by syndromic management at US$315 (US$102-508) and gold standard care at US$398 (US$115-644). Overtreatment runs in the same order with mass treatment. Monte Carlo simulations suggest that, while lower costs per case are more likely in the syndromic management and even gold standard case than mass treatment, their probability distributions appear skewed leftwards.	Rebecca	 Woods	Nuriye	 Hodoglugil	Julia	 Walsh
2002	134	New Approaches to Population Forecasting	Stationary Population as Vision for the Future: An Exercise in Normative Projection	The population growth in developed countries is undergoing a demographic deceleration with a distinct possibility of an implosion in the near future. The underlying factor is obviously the sharp and sustained decline in fertility. The fertility has settled at the sub-replacement level, and it seems that it could become a lasting feature of the economically advanced societies.    The concern of 	M.V.	 George	Rejean	 Lachapelle	Anatole	 Romaniuc
2002	134	New Approaches to Population Forecasting	The Contribution of Mexican Immigration to U.S. Population Rejuvenation: A Mexican Birth Cohort Approach	Population projections that address how much immigration and immigrant fertility may slow down population aging in the U.S. suffer from problems associated with estimating immigrant stocks and flows. We propose an alternative method that projects directly the number of births in the U.S. to Mexican-born mothers. The method also takes into account the demographics of the sending country, which often is ignored in projections. The projection uses a U.S. fertility rate for Mexican-born women, estimated from a numerator of birth registrations in the U.S. and a denominator of estimates of zero-year-olds 15 to 44 years earlier in Mexico. This and two alternative projection methods are compared to observed numbers of births in 1999, with favorable results indicated for the Mexican birth cohort projection method. The results also suggest that the future contribution of Mexican immigration to U.S.  population rejuvenation may be greater than has been implied by previous projections.	Stefan	H. Jonsson	Michael	 Rendall
2002	134	New Approaches to Population Forecasting	Stochastic Forecasts of Fertility Based on Quantum-Tempo Decomposition	Forecasting fertility is one of the weak points of population forecasting. One of the reasons for poor performance of forecasts in the past has been the use of period TFR figures as a base for forecasts without consideration of tempo effects. Recent developments in the analysis of tempo effects provide the basis for improved forecasting methods.   In this paper we propose the use of the techniques developed by Kohler and Ortega (2002) to model age and parity specific fertility intensities taking into consideration tempo effects. The use of a multivariate state-space model for modeling and forecasting the tempo adjusted quantum of fertility, the mean age at childbearing and the variance of the intensity schedule lead to stochastic fertility forecasts that capture turning points in fertility better than existing methods. The method is applied to Swedish fertility based on data for the period 1970-2000.	Jose	A. Ortega
2002	134	New Approaches to Population Forecasting	Forecasting the Life Course	The basic question addressed in this paper is: how to use survey data on life histories more effectively in population forecasting? The traditional cohort-component model focuses on numbers of survivors by cohort and on the intercohort variation in demographic behavior.  The proposed method focuses on cohort biographies, a concept introduced by Ryder (1965). Using multistate demography and prospective or retrospective data on life histories of cohort members, it projects cohort biographies into the future. The result is a distribution of cohort survivors over the various stages of life. The method then adds intracohort variation (heterogeneity) using the theory of multistate models with covariates (multivariate survival analysis). The result is a projection of individual biographies, where an 'individual' is carrier of attributes and is defined by a set of covariates. The proposed method encompasses several existing demographic projection models, including LIPRO, PROFAMY and MUDEA, and the compartment models applied by Manton.	Frans	 Willekens
2002	135	Biodemography of Aging	Selection Effects on Geographical Differences in Survival	This paper, by considering longitudinal data, analyses geographical differences in mortality among the old and oldest old accounting for mortality experienced at earlier ages. Our goal is to shed light on the role played by selection or debilitation factors on elderly survival for populations affected differently by mortality at previous ages.     Mortality data of the cohorts born between 1888 and 1892 in four selected Italian regions (Lombardy, Tuscany, Calabria and Sicily), each characterized by a particular intensity or specific age or sex structure of mortality, were analyzed from age 60 to age 95 for both women and men. Preliminary results show very different estimates of the average frailty of the cohorts and the rate of ageing for the four analyzed regions, giving scope to the role exercised by selection and debilitation processes.	Graziella	 Caselli	Elisabetta	 Barbi
2002	135	Biodemography of Aging	Reproduction and Longevity among the British Peerage: The Effect of Frailty and Health Selection	Among the female British Peerage we find a trade-off between the number of children and mortality after age 50.  In the data this relationship is masked by two factors. First, by unobserved heterogeneity, which may partly be the result of mortality selection before age 50. Second, by frailty which influences both parity and late life mortality. Frail women may have fewer children and higher late life mortality while mothers of a large number of children most probably were less frail from their birth on and thus experience lower mortality. Due to these two confounding factors a simple survival analysis does not find a significant relationship between reproduction and longevity.     The study is based on the British Peerage whose genealogies were established in 1962 by Hollingsworth. We use the birth cohorts of 1641 to 1850 which consist of 1854 females and 2202 males.	Gabriele	 Doblhammer	Jim	 Oeppen
2002	135	Biodemography of Aging	Individual Aging and Mortality Rate: How Are They Related?	Using new evidence, we analyze the reasons of change in the pattern of mortality decline during the last century in developed countries. We show that this change may be characterized by the behavior of the slope of the logarithm of the mortality curve. This slope is often associated with the demographic rate of aging. We discuss the relationship between characteristics of demographic and individual aging in humans and suggest a mathematical model, which relates these notions. We fit the model to the period and cohort mortality data in thirteen countries. The results of analysis allow us to hypothesize the presence of a trade off mechanism capable of modulating individual aging rate in a human organism. The mechanism establishes a balance between protection against internal and external stresses. The connection of these results with the aging in experimental model organisms is discussed.	Anatoli	 Yashin	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Serge	I. Boiko	Anatoli	I. Michalski
2002	135	Biodemography of Aging	Biodemographic (Reliability) Theory of Aging and Longevity	The purpose of this study is to develop a comprehensive biodemographic theory of aging, using the systems approach (the reliability theory, see Gavrilov, Gavrilova, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 2001, 213). This theory predicts that even those systems that are entirely composed of non-aging elements will nevertheless deteriorate (fail more often) with age, if these systems are redundant in irreplaceable elements. Aging, therefore, is a direct consequence of systems redundancy. Reliability theory also predicts the late-life mortality deceleration as an inevitable consequence of redundancy exhaustion at extreme old ages. The theory explains why mortality rates increase exponentially with age (the Gompertz law) in many species, by taking into account the initial flaws (defects). The theory also explains why relative differences in mortality rates of compared populations (within a given species) vanish with age, and mortality convergence is observed due to the exhaustion of initial differences in redundancy levels.	Leonid	A. Gavrilov
2002	136	Emerging Mortality and Health Conditions in Developing Countries	In-depth Mortality Patterns for Africa	A collection of mortality data from Africa compiled by the INDEPTH Network and including over 6.4 million person years of exposure is used to identify new mortality patterns. Seven distinct age-patterns of mortality emerge from the data, two of which may result from excess mortality due to HIV/AIDS. The emergent patterns are compared to the model mortality patterns produced by Coale and Demeny and the United Nations and are demonstrated to be substantially different. The principal components technique is used to calculate fifteen principal components that account for all of the variation in the data. The resulting component model is demonstrated through constructing a hypothetical set of life tables that combine the HIV/AIDS pattern of mortality with an underlying pattern of mortality that is not affected by HIV/AIDS. This yields mortality patterns that may prevail if the population described by the underlying mortality pattern were to be affected by HIV/AIDS.	Samuel	 Clark
2002	136	Emerging Mortality and Health Conditions in Developing Countries	Socioeconomic Differentials in Adult Morbidity in Nicaragua: Modeling the Proximate Determinants and Testing the Social Gradient	This paper uses LSMS data and recursive structural models with latent variables to specify and test a proximate determinants framework through which SES affects health among adults in Nicaragua. It builds on previous work in western industrialized countries on socioeconomic differentials in adult health and the proximate determinants framework developed by Mosely and Chen (1984) in an attempt to narrow the research void on adult health between more & less developed countries. I test whether or not proximate determinants associated with an infectious disease etiology have strong mediating effects between SES and adult health outcomes.     The results suggest that the answer is yes for education and indicators of household wealth but no for general household expenditures. I also test for a social gradient effect on health. The findings suggest that there is only a slight social gradient effect of education on health as mediated by the proximate determinants modeled here.	Steven	 Haas
2002	136	Emerging Mortality and Health Conditions in Developing Countries	Health Impacts of Co-Residence with and Care Giving to Persons with HIV/AIDS (PHAs) on Older Parents in Thailand	Earlier work has established that older parents are key care givers for young adult PHAs in Thailand. This paper will explore more fully the duration, frequency, and types of care giving tasks performed by older persons who provide such care; and the extent and severity of a number of physical and emotional outcomes experienced by this group of older care givers. Outcomes include muscle strain, fatigue, head and stomach aches, insomnia, anxiety, general measures of well being, and an open ended category. Contrasts are made among those who give care to their ill child, those who co-reside only, those who live apart, and those who have not experienced the recent death of an adult child (the control group). Analyses are be based upon original survey data collected during 2000 that includes 394 cases and 376 controls. Finally, qualitative interviews of an additional 20 cases are analyzed.	Jiraporn	 Kespichayawattana	Mark	 VanLandingham
2002	136	Emerging Mortality and Health Conditions in Developing Countries	Health Conditions and Adult Mortality in Brazil: Keys and Transitions	This paper examines the health conditions of the adult population in Brazil, exploring the levels, trends and geographical differentials of the main causes of deaths from 1980 to 1995 by age and sex. The 26 states were classified according to the quality of the registry of deaths obtained from the Ministry of Health, and mortality rates were calculated.     The health conditions in the country improved, but the south and southeast regions seem to be in a more advanced step of the mortality transition in Brazil. A sex-gap widened due to a larger decline in female mortality. It was verified an extraordinary increase of the mortality by external causes. The diseases of the circulatory and respiratory system and neoplasm played an important role. For this, socioeconomic indicators were used and lineal regression model was used to analyze the impact of different causes on the health conditions.	Neir	A. Paes
2002	137	Unintended Fertility in Developed Countries	The Local Construction of Unintended Pregnancy among Pregnant and Contracepting Women in New Orleans	Unintended pregnancy has been conventionally defined as pregnancies that are mistimed and unwanted. While this classification has been widely used in survey research, this study explores the utility of these constructs for women themselves. It employs a semi-structured open-ended research guide to explore sexual debut and history, contraceptive knowledge and use, pregnancy history, partner relations and service use.  A total of 77 women were recruited from 2 New Orleans inner-city clinics.    Findings suggest a pattern of inadequate contraceptive use prior to first pregnancy, few family or social barriers to teen pregnancy, and limited partner involvement in decision-making. Few women believe in the efficacy of available contraceptive methods and worry about long duration of use. Service barriers to effective contraception abound as well. These factors permit a wide discrepancy between the expressed ideal timing of childbearing and women's lived experience. They demonstrate the need for comprehensive sexuality education in this population.	Carl	 Kendall	Aimee	 Afable	Ilene	S. Speizer	Alexis	 Avery	Norine	 Schmidt
2002	137	Unintended Fertility in Developed Countries	Intentions and Subintentions: Assessing a New Measure of Pregnancy Intendedness	We test a new measure of pregnancy intendedness based on cognitive (perceived chance taking), attitudinal (pregnancy desirability) and behavioral (contraceptive choice and effective use) dimensions. Developed from analysis of qualitative data, the measure suggests that (1) many pregnancies classified as unintended are more accurately conceptualized as sub-intended (involving subconscious intent), and (2) the intended and unintended categories represent end points of a 5-point continuum: fully unintended, quasi-unintended, no-intention, sub-intended, and fully intended.     To test this scale, we use data from 1362 women in an unintended pregnancy study - implemented as the Third Follow-Up of the Longitudinal Study of Contraceptive Choice and Use Dynamics - to explore the new measure and compare it with the NSFG measure, including comparison of logistic regression models using the two measures. The panel survey includes socio-demographic, contraceptive and pregnancy histories for women attending public clinics in Atlanta and Charlotte collected in four waves during 1993-2000.	Helen	P. Koo	Christina	I. Fowler	Ellen	K. Wilson	Tzy-Mey	(May)  Kuo
2002	137	Unintended Fertility in Developed Countries	Estimation of Unintended Fertility in Japan	This paper evaluates a model that estimates the number of conceptions during the course of one year by all Japanese women of reproductive age (20-44). Data have been obtained from the Japanese National Fertility Survey, conducted in June 1997 (on reproductive intentions and fertility control behaviors) and from the official statistics on births and induced abortions for the year following the survey. In the model, the process of reproduction involves four stages: (1) intercourse, (2) reproductive intention, (3) conception, and (4) gestation and parturition.      With some assumptions about fecundability and contraception failure, unknown parameters are estimated and the number of unintended pregnancies and unintended births can be calculated by this model. The model was applied to the female population in 1997 and suggested that the amount of unintended births could be between thirty and fifty percent of all births in contemporary Japan.	Miho	 Iwasawa
2002	137	Unintended Fertility in Developed Countries	Male Fertility and the Intendedness Status of Births 1982-1998	In this paper we document the extent and patterns of unintended fertility among adult men and examine the effects of having an unintended birth on the well-being of the father. The specific well-being outcomes considered are alcohol and drug use and depressive symptoms. The consequences of an unintended birth are assessed relative to the consequences of having a birth that was neither intended nor unintended, a birth that was intended, and having no birth during the observation period. We use data from the 1982-1998 rounds of the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY) and the 1994-2000 rounds of the NLSY Young Adult surveys. The NLSY sample we use consists of men who were 14-21 years of age when they were first surveyed in 1979, and NLSY mothers' male children who were 14-23 years of age in 1994, when they were designated as the Young Adult sample.	Koray	 Tanfer	Penelope	M. Huang
2002	138	Family Change in Africa and Latin America	Adult Children's Homeleaving in Mexico in the Context of Siblings' International Migration	Using nonmigrant children in Mexico as the unit of analysis, the objective of this paper is to determine whether U.S. migration by one's siblings mediates one's own characteristics,  like marital status and employment status to predict departure from the parental household.      We hypothesize that these traditional predictors of home-leaving will be weakened where one has migrant kin if nonmigrant children are expected to remain in the parental household to compensate for the absence of siblings.      We test this hypothesis using household roster data and retrospective data on migration from the Mexican Migration Project. The research adds to the literature on homeleaving by attempting to establish causality between siblings' migration and some forms of homeleaving, and by introducing measures of other individuals' behavior to explain individual decisions.	Paula	 Fomby
2002	138	Family Change in Africa and Latin America	Nuptiality Trends in Africa during the Past 50 Years	Statistical tables on marital status were gathered for about 250 census and national surveys  to describe nuptiality trends over the past 5 decades in Africa. Male and female ages at first marriage and time spent out of union as ever-married are analyzed to identify changes in African marriage, in particular, in regional differences and in sex-specific patterns of nuptiality.     While trends in male nuptiality are balanced, results confirm the general and sustained increase in female age at first marriage. As a result, the gap between male and female age at first marriage has declined. Changes in the time spent out of union during adulthood are less important but they confirm that the main features of African nuptiality regimes are weakening. However, there are regional differences in the magnitude and speed of the changes, dramatic in the Northern and the Southern parts of Africa but slight in the Sahelian countries.	Véronique	 Hertrich
2002	138	Family Change in Africa and Latin America	Union Dynamics and Effects on Childbearing in Brazil: A Use of the DHS Calendar	In the past two decades there has been an increase of union instability in Brazil, and due to the high incidence of consensual unions in Brazil, it is important to examine the effect of union dynamics on fertility. Women with more than one union are reported to have a higher level of fertility, and it is not uncommon for Brazilian women in unstable unions to use pregnancy to increase the stability of their relationship. Using the 1996 DHS calendar this study will examine the union histories of women aged 15-49.     The analysis considers the modeling of the hazard of union status change as a single effect and the simultaneous model of union status change and conception outcome using Lillard's model (1993). It demonstrates that there is a positive correlation between fertility and union instability.	Tiziana	 Leone	Andrew	 Hinde
2002	138	Family Change in Africa and Latin America	Parental Survival and Residential Patterns in South Africa	The increasing incidence of HIV/AIDS is having profound consequences on household and family structure because most of the deaths are concentrated among the most productive segments of the population. When young adults die their parents and other relatives often care for their surviving children. Thus, the parents of adults and children are playing a critical role in the social adjustment to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. The proportion of children without a surviving parent in South Africa is becoming an important social problem. This paper examines differences in parental survival and the residential patterns of children by selected variables. Results show a higher proportion of children without fathers compared to mothers. These children are more likely to live with their grandparents when the mother dies than when the father dies. This result seems to speak more to the role of the mother as a main caregiver than the father.	Amadou	 Noumbissi	Tukufu	 Zuberi	Ayaga	A.  Bawah
2002	139	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Educational Careers and Delayed First Sexual Intercourse: The Italian Paradox	In Western countries, age at first intercourse has usually decreased over time. Italy is an exception to this trend. Italy is also at the lower end of the distribution of developed countries by adolescent birth, abortion and pregnancy rates, with the U.S. at the other end.     In this paper, we stress the role of educational careers in delaying first intercourse. While in the U.S. most adolescents have sex before graduating from High School, this is not the case in Italy. On survey data, we apply discrete-time event history models. We show that young adults enrolled in education postpone their first intercourse.     When controlling for educational enrolment, those who have very low level of education postpone first intercourse. The effect of educational level is inverse-U shaped, especially in the case of women. The sex ratio in the educational institutions where young adults are enrolled has the expected effect.	Francesco	C. Billari	Maria	 Castiglioni	Dalla	Zuanna  Gianpiero	Marzia	 Mancin
2002	139	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Why Do Some Adolescents Have Risky Sex? The Role of Family Background, Childhood Behaviors, and Adolescent Relationships	More than half of American youth have had sexual intercourse by the time they turn 18. Despite recent increases in condom use among adolescents, many teens fail to engage in safe sexual practices and hence put themselves at risk of both unwanted pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. Using a life course perspective and data from the NLSY from 1979 through 2000, we explore the question of why some youth engage in risky sex whereas others either abstain from intercourse altogether, or engage in safe sexual practices at various ages between 15 and 20. Drawing on our own previous research findings, as well as the findings of others concerning the importance of romantic relationships to the likelihood of sexual intercourse, we pay particular attention to how relationship profiles in early adolescence might relate to later patterns of sexual behavior, and to potentially important differences in relationship trajectories and sexual practices by race and gender.	Elizabeth	 Cooksey	Frank	 Mott	Darcy	W. Hango
2002	139	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Can Changes in Sexual Behaviors among High School Students Explain the Decline in Teen Pregnancy Rates in the 1990s?	Although teen pregnancy rates declined in the 1990s, no single national data set can explain these changes. We used behavior data from Youth Risk Behavior Survey and method-specific, contraceptive failure rates from the National Survey of Family Growth in attempting to understand pregnancy rates for 1991-1997. This method found an excellent fit to data for black teens, a partial fit for Hispanics, and a poor fit for whites. Sensitivity analyses considering recent sexual activity, behavioral data from 14-16 year old, 1999 behavioral data, or first birth rates to 15-17 year olds did not improve understanding. Limitations to this method include pregnancies to non-students, insufficient power given small changes in behaviors, possible temporal improvements in CFR, changing frequency of intercourse, and possible temporal change in reporting bias. Using several national data sources can compensate for individual limitations and provide a better explanation of adolescent pregnancy trends than each data source alone.	John	S. Santelli	Joyce	C. Abma	Stephanie	 Ventura	Laura	 Lindberg
2002	139	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Japan: Demographic and Policy Dimensions	A newly emerging situation in Japan in which fertility has fallen below the replacement level with higher marrying ages and few cohabitations, while the mean age for first engaging in intercourse is decreasing and the number of induced abortions is increasing among teenage girls, requires a reappraisal of adolescent reproductive health research. In this study I offer a general review of available information, the sources of which include published and unpublished information and analyses of primary data from national as well as smaller scale surveys in the field, and I develop policy agendas to meet needs from the facts and insights. Special attention is paid to adolescent sexual attitudes, motivations and behavior relating to the prevention of unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. The findings imply the importance of promoting sex education in terms of gender equity and equality and forming networks of reproductive health services that focus on adolescents.	Ryuzaburo	 Sato
2002	140	Demography of Disability	Estimates of Prevalence and Trends in Old-Age Disability: Another Look Using Data from the National Long-Term Care Surveys	How prevalent are various levels and patterns of disability among the U. S. elderly population? Has the widely corroborated decline in disability prevalence since 1980 continued, accelerated, or declined in recent years? Are the declines in disability prevalence limited to certain levels of disability and segments of the elderly population? These and related questions have led to a lively scientific literature in recent years. This paper examines these issues using data from the five waves of the National Long-Term Care Surveys: 1982, 1984, 1989, 1994, and 1999. Issues of sample weights for complex sample designs and the treatment of non-response are discussed. Estimates of prevalence of disability and trends therein are produced and compared to published estimates from the NLTCS and other studies. The similarities and differences among the estimates are discussed.	Larry	S. Corder	Kenneth	C. Land	Eric	 Stallard
2002	140	Demography of Disability	Employment of Working-Age People with Disabilities in the 1980s and 1990s: What Current Data Can and Cannot Tell Us	A new and highly controversial literature argues that the employment of working-age people with disabilities fell dramatically in the 1990s. Some researchers and policy makers dismiss these results, arguing that they are fundamentally flawed in that it is based on self-reported work limitations data that captures neither the actual population with disabilities nor its employment trends. We put these criticisms in the context of a broader issue, namely how to define and measure the population with disabilities. Then, using data from the Current Population Survey and the National Health Interview Survey, we test whether the level and trends in employment differ cross alternative empirical definitions. We find that although traditional work limitation-based definitions underestimate the size of the broader population with health impairments, the prevalence and employment trends in the work limitations population and the impairment-based population are not significantly different from one another over the 1980s and 1990s.	Mary	C. Daly	Andrew	J. Houtenville
2002	140	Demography of Disability	Disability Forecasts and Future Medicare Costs	This paper projects how changes in disability among the next generation of elderly will affect future Medicare spending. The model uses a large, representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries aged 65 and older to simulate remaining health status and death. Doing so actually requires two steps: estimating transition models into all possible health and disability states conditional on demographics and current health, and then forecasting health transitions based on the estimated probabilities. The sample is rejuvenated by bringing in a new cohort of 65 year-olds each year.    The model is used to simulate future costs under a variety of scenarios. Our preferred scenario uses trends from the National Health Interview Survey, with the surprising result that the young are becoming increasingly disabled even as the old have become healthier. Medicare expenditures will grow faster than others predict, mainly because previous models fail to account for the divergent trends.	Dana	 Goldman	Jay	 Bhattacharya	Geoffrey	 Joyce	Darius	N. Lakdawalla	Baoping	 Shang
2002	140	Demography of Disability	Education, Race, Gender, and the Compression of Morbidity	We examine racial and educational inequality in active (disability-free) life expectancy for men and women between 1980 and 1990. We calculate age-race-sex-education specific prevalence-based life tables using data from NCHS and the PUMS. Preliminary results show a general pattern of compression of morbidity. Within race, the more highly educated have higher active life expectancies and can expect to spend a smaller proportion of their life in a disabled state than the more poorly educated. However, while the highly educated experience a compression of morbidity over time, for some age and race groups, the poorly educated actually experience an increase over time in the proportion of life spent disabled and a decrease in active life expectancy. There is also evidence of widening gaps in health by race. Men show increasing gaps in active life expectancy over time for all educational levels, with the largest disparities among the highly educated.	Melonie	P. Heron	Mark	D. Hayward
2002	141	Why is U.S. Fertility So High? Comparative Perspectives	US Fertility Timing and Parity Progression: Ethnic Differentials and Comparative Perspective	Recent methodological developments suggest that period TFRs are biased downwards in times of fertility postponement, and are also affected by the parity distribution of women (Bongaarts and Feeney 1998; Kohler and Ortega 2002; Ortega and Kohler 2002). Based on these methods, we study U.S. fertility trends providing a decomposition of the Period TFR in a pure fertility component (the Period Fertility Index), a mean tempo effect, and a parity distribution effect. We also provide projections of Completed Cohort Fertility for different postponement scenarios.    The analysis of ethnic differentials in fertility and the comparison of the United States to several other developed countries with lower fertility levels provides important insights into the determinants of the relatively high U.S. fertility levels. It is based on a new database of fertility rates and childbearing intensities by parity established at the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research and the U.S. Bureau of the Census.	Jose	A. Ortega	Ward	 Kingkade
2002	141	Why is U.S. Fertility So High? Comparative Perspectives	Immigration's Impact on U.S. Fertility: An Exploratory Analysis of Recent Trends	Immigration may be contributing substantially to changes in the fertility profile of the United States. Although approximately 10% of the population was foreign born, foreign-born mothers accounted for nearly one in five American births in 1998.    Analysis of immigration's impact on U.S. fertility requires adequate measures of period fertility, disaggregated by nativity and mother's country of birth. These measures currently do not exist. We estimate period fertility rates for foreign-born women, using alternative methods (some innovative) and several data sources. We assess the consistency of these measures. We then decompose changes in overall U.S. fertility from 1970 to the present, in order to assess how changes in various dimensions of nativity and immigrant composition over the past thirty years have contributed to changes in overall U.S. period fertility over the same time span, and to changes in racial/ethnic fertility differentials.    Extended abstract at   http://mailer.fsu.edu/~schmert/paa02/schmertmann_swicegood_bean_paa_abstract.pdf	Carl	 Schmertmann	Gray	 Swicegood	Michael	 Sobczak
2002	141	Why is U.S. Fertility So High? Comparative Perspectives	U.S. Fertility Trends in Comparative Perspective: Education and Workforce Interactions	Previous research has shown education and female labor force participation to be significant predictors of fertility levels in many countries, as well as significant determinants of differential fertility among ethnic subpopulations in the United States. These factors seem likely to be important in explaining the high fertility exhibited by the U.S. population compared with other developed countries.    This paper employs a detailed database on fertility levels by cohort and parity among ethnic groups in the United States and at the national level in a set of industrialized countries. Trends in parity-specific fertility, including increasing childlessness and postponement of fertility shall be related to changes in educational levels through analysis of data from multiple sources, including Current Population Survey fertility supplements going back at least 20 years.	Ward	 Kingkade
2002	141	Why is U.S. Fertility So High? Comparative Perspectives	A Cohort Analysis of Fertility Change in an Immigrant, Multiracial American Society	The recent and growing literature on levels and trends of fertility in the United States suggests that major shifts have occurred in the patterns of fertility in the past three decades. Most of the shifts are common to low-fertility countries, but fertility in the United States has remained at about replacement levels for the last 30 years.     Some studies seeking to explain this relatively constant fertility observed in the United States have used cross-sectional data for major racial groups, but little has been said about the contribution of the foreign-born population to the American fertility.     This paper seeks to contribute to the existing knowledge by analyzing cohort fertility behavior of foreign-born major racial groups in the United States. The analysis is based on data provided by the National Center of Health Statistics which cover most of the births in the country and include the major demographic characteristics of the mother.	Caribert	 Irazi
2002	142	Risk Factors in Child and Adolescent Development	Low Birth Weight, Race/Ethnicity, and Developmental Outcomes among Children in the United States	Using six waves of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Child Data (1986-1996), we evaluate the dynamic nature of biological and social risk factors from ages 6 to 14.  We find the following: (1) birth weight is positively related to developmental outcomes, net of important social and economic controls; (2) the relative significance of moderately low birth weight status (1,500-2,500 grams) vis-à-vis race/ethnicity and mother's education is quite small; and (3) while the observed differential between moderately low birth weight and normal birth weight children decreases, the black-white differential in test scores increases in magnitude as children increase in age.	Jason	D. Boardman	Daniel	A. Powers
2002	142	Risk Factors in Child and Adolescent Development	Race, Nativity and Gender Differences in Emerging Adulthood during the 20th Century	This paper explores changes in the timing of transitions into adult statuses in the United States over the course of the 20th century for native-born black and white and foreign-born men and women. The process of transition to adulthood has reached an unprecedented duration that some social scientists studying the life course have called, emerging adulthood (Arnett 2000; Furstenberg 2000).     During emerging adulthood, individuals refrain from entering into family roles and instead invest in human capital and personal development. To examine evidence of the emergence of this new life-stage among race, nativity and gender groups, we built a database of synthetic cohorts from the twentieth century U.S. censuses, extracted from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), and the 2000 CPS. In doing so we examine differences between cohorts and groups in early life course experiences, particularly focusing on patterns of and delays in family formation.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2002	142	Risk Factors in Child and Adolescent Development	Birth Weight and Cognitive Development in Adolescence	Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health), I investigate the  relationship between birth weight and cognitive development among adolescents aged 12-17. Bivariate OLS regression models reveal a significant, positive relationship between birth weight and PPVT score (a measure of verbal intelligence). Controlling for demographic, socioeconomic, and other adolescent characteristics modifies, but does not eliminate, this relationship. However, as traditional regression models cannot fully account for family background characteristics (i.e., the relationship between birth weight and PPVT may be spurious, due in part to the poorer SES profile of low birth weight infants), I exploit the sibling subsample of the Add Health data to more adequately control family background effects. Fixed-effects models of non-twin full siblings indicate no significant association between birth weight and PPVT, suggesting that 'traditional' cross-sectional models overstate the influence of birth weight for cognitive development in adolescence.	Bridget	K. Gorman
2002	142	Risk Factors in Child and Adolescent Development	Transformations of Adolescent Fertility in Latin America	In many Latin American countries, fertility has fallen dramatically since 1980. In at least three of these counties, the overall decline has consisted of modest declines in age-specific fertility for all ages over 20, alongside increases in adolescent childbearing, across a variety of sociodemographic characteristics. This paper investigates the causes of this unusual pattern, applying descriptive statistics to sets of DHS data for the Dominican Republic (1986, 1996), Brazil (1986, 1996) and Colombia (1986, 1990, 1995, and 2000). We focus especially on the timing of the first birth, the first birth interval, and entry into marriage, as indicators of the process of family formation, and on age-specific sterilization rates as an indicator of the definitive conclusion of childbearing. We propose that - in contrast to contemporary Europe - childbearing in these Latin American countries is being shifted earlier in the life cycle at the same time as fertility is falling.	Yumiko	 Kamiya	Piedad	 Urdinola	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2002	143	Perspectives on Migration	Multilevel Analysis of Immigrant Wages by Origin-Destination Groups	Why would someone invest in his community rather than himself? Behind such behavior is social rationality that cannot be explained directly by individual economic rationality. If the chance of individual achievement is contingent upon achievement of one's surrounding community, the person will find communal services socially and economically rational. Therefore, I propose that community conditions significantly influence members' behavior.      In this research, I examine how immigrants' wages are influenced by the characteristics of local ethnic groups to which they belong. Taking MSA as a geographic unit, sample of immigrants are drawn from 1990 U.S. PUMS, and analyzed by multilevel random coefficient model (hierarchical linear model). In this model, group characteristics such as clustering, length of residence, educational level, labor and occupational characteristics are used to explain between-group variations in individual-level effects. Hypothetically, individual and group level factors interact in the way in which group stability is maintained.	Yukio	 Kawano
2002	143	Perspectives on Migration	Patterns of Temporary Migration of Rural Women in China	Studies of Chinese labor migration, while beginning to recognize the importance of women, often stereotype their experiences because of data limitations. Our study is based upon a recent sample of 3,186 rural women from two of the major sending provinces of China. One third of these women had migrated, and information was collected on the timing of their migration relative to marriage and childbearing, accompanying family members, and childcare provisions, as well as occupation, earnings, and living conditions in their destinations, for up to six migration episodes. Preliminary analysis shows that the common conception that most young women migrate before marriage and return to their villages to settle down, marry and bear children is incorrect: more women migrate after marriage than before, and half of these migrate with their husbands. Some women become serial migrants, others migrate only once.  This paper explores these patterns and their determinants.	Kenneth	 Roberts	Rachel	 Connelly	Zhenzhen	 Zheng	Zhenming	 Xie
2002	143	Perspectives on Migration	Assessing the Impacts of Mobility Data Collected over Time Intervals of Different Widths on Migration Levels, Spatial Structures, and Age Patterns	In this paper we describe and contrast the age and spatial structures of migration, by focusing on the generation and distribution components of age- and origin-destination-specific migration flows. In doing so, we particularly explore the contributions of primary, return, and onward migration. The data are drawn from various sources: the 1980 and 1990 U.S. decennial censuses, the 1985, 1990, 1993, and 2000 U.S. Current Population Surveys, and the 1996 Canadian census. Differences between the structures exhibited by U.S. and Canadian data collected over one-year, five-year, and lifetime migration time intervals are examined and contrasted.	Andrei	 Rogers	James	 Raymer	K.	Bruce  Newbold
2002	143	Perspectives on Migration	Migration, Socioeconomic Milieu, and Migrants' HIV Risky Behavior: A Theoretical Framework	The link between migration and AIDS has been well documented. But theoretical work seeking to understand the social and behavioral mechanisms underlying migrants' HIV risk-taking behavior is lacking. Most studies did not go beyond the basic epidemiological perspective. There is a general lack of sociological studies of HIV risky behavior, although AIDS epidemic is viewed as much a social as a biomedical problem. This paper presents a sociological framework for the study of migration and HIV risky behavior, paying particular attention to the importance of socioeconomic contexts surrounding migrants in understanding migrant's HIV risk-taking behavior. The underlying thesis is that migration is more than a transporter of HIV; it breeds social and behavioral changes that make migrants vulnerable to socially deviant and epidemiologically risky behavior. It is the confluence of economic marginalization, social isolation, and residential detachment experienced by migrants that is the key to understanding migrants' HIV risk-taking behavior.	Xiushi	 Yang
2002	144	Population and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa	Infant Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Cross-National Study of Social and Economic Influences	This study investigates economic development versus social capital perspectives of declines in infant mortality using World Bank data on 42 sub-Saharan African countries.  Women's education, foreign debt-to-export ratio, and national income level are among the strongest correlates of infant mortality. Cross-sectional multivariate regressions show women's education to be the best single predictor of infant mortality. Furthermore, longitudinal results suggest that female education explains the majority of decreases in mortality, regardless of time. The beneficial effect of income on reductions in mortality decreased from 1970 to 1997. Part of this may be explained by the increasing significance of foreign debt on retarding mortality declines, indicating that economic theories of development could be broadened to consider exogenous income factors. In 1997 the effect of AIDS on infant mortality was small yet significant. AIDS correlates highly with most development indicators, suggesting that increasing rates will impact society on multiple levels.	Elizabeth	 Mogford
2002	144	Population and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa	Transition to Adulthood in Rural Africa: Are Male and Female Experiences Converging? The Case of the Bwa of Mali	Relations between men and women in sub-Saharan Africa are still subject to strong normative rules and social controls, but recent developments point to changes occurring in gender relations, particularly in the stages of the transition to adulthood - decline in the age difference between men and women at first marriage, increased female migrations, and dissociation between sexual initiation, couple formation and  parenthood. This paper analyses this 'time of youth' in a rural population of Mali. Are the timetables and stages that characterize this period the same for both sexes? This question is examined by distinguishing four stages in the transition to adulthood - first labor migration, first marital process, first marriage, and birth of first child. The analysis confirms the convergence in male and female itineraries prior to marriage. But the stages of the transition to adulthood are characterized differently for men and women, leading to the reproduction of gender-specific spheres.	Véronique	 Hertrich	Marie	 Lesclingand
2002	144	Population and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa	Implications of Male Migration on Female Status in the Democratic Republic of Congo	Democratic Republic of Congo has registered negative economic growth that contrasts with a population growth of three percent per year in the last decades. During this difficult period, the populations have developed many survival strategies including male outmigration. This paper examines the impact of male migration on female status, using data from a 1998 survey of married women. The results show that many male migrants now stay longer at place of destination. This separation increases female status as wives take more leadership role; they manage money sent home by their husbands and make all family decisions. However, wives often report conflicts with their in-laws, are overwhelmed by family responsibilities, have difficulties raising children, and they live in continuous fear that their husbands may acquire HIV/AIDS from other women or even marry at place of destination. We discuss these issues under the role conflict theory.	Seraphin	 Ngondo	Yanyi	K. Djamba
2002	144	Population and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa	Livestock Exchange Dynamics in Nomadic Pastoralist Herd Demography: A Case Study among the Ngisonyoka Turkana Herders of South Turkana, Kenya	This paper examines the importance of livestock exchanges in the herd demography of nomadic herders. Nomadic pastoralist demography and health is intimately intertwined with the population structure of their livestock. Despite attention given to social relations in the pastoral literature, the link between social networks and herd demography has been relatively unexplored. Generally, social exchanges are regarded as relatively unimportant contribution of herd size, relevant only when the need for rebuilding arises after major losses.     This paper challenges this assumption through a rare case study among the Ngisonyoka Turkana nomadic herders in northwestern Kenya. The reproductive histories of the female cattle, camels, and goats and sheep of thirteen herders were collected and analyzed (n=1252). The results suggest that livestock exchanges and social networks are crucial to livestock population regulation. Researchers and policymakers are urged to make efforts to support indigenous networks that sustain nomadic pastoralism in arid regions.	Daniel	H. de Vries	Paul	W. Leslie	J.T.	 McCabe
2002	145	Parent-Child Ties	Is Maternal Work Behavior Affected by Children's Health and Behavioral Problems?	In the current policy environment, understanding the factors that may hinder or facilitate the employment of low-income women is important. These factors may include the health and behavioral characteristics of children. Thus, this paper asks: 1) How do the behavioral and health characteristics of children affect maternal employment outcomes? 2) What are the roles of poverty and single parenthood in moderating this relationship? 3) In estimating this relationship, how can we control for the ways in which maternal characteristics affect those of the children?    Data from the Child Supplement of the NLSY are used. Initial results suggest that children's health limitations are negatively associated with a woman's employment status.  Additionally, this relationship is more pronounced for poor women. Detailing instances in which low-income or single-parent women are hindered from economic self-sufficiency due to concerns within their families will allow policy-makers to better understand and predict families' responses to welfare reform.	Rachel	 Dunifon
2002	145	Parent-Child Ties	Predictors of Father-Mother Congruence in Reports of Father Involvement	Currently available data and concerns over the validity of mother reports significantly truncate the ability of researchers to address a myriad of research questions concerning father involvement. This study aims to inform this concern by examining predictors of father involvement and father-mother discrepancies in reports of involvement within a low-income, predominantly minority sample of families with both residential and nonresidential fathers (N = 228). Paired HLM models are used to control for the interrelation between pairs of reporters. Results indicate that although father and mother reports are similar, mothers consistently report lower levels of involvement than do fathers. Parental conflict, fathers' nonresidence, father age, as well as mother education and employment predicted greater discrepancy across father and mother reports. Implications for future research and policy are addressed.	Rebekah	 Levine Coley	Jodi	E. Morris
2002	145	Parent-Child Ties	Differential Use and Benefits of Foster Children for Men and Women in Low-Income Households in Bamako, Mali	Low-income households use many strategies to support themselves.  This study examines the role of foster children in household survival. In 1987-88 in-depth interviews with 32 individuals, the heads of their households (HH), and the  heads of all households (n=53) in their compounds  (n = 16) in Bankoni, Bamako, Mali, a rapidly growing, peripheral  low-income neighborhood of about 50,000.     Only 28% of the HH had any salary income, and 26% reported regular problems in meeting basic needs.  Households averaged 2.8 own children and 1.4 other children. 51% had foster children. Children are extensively involved in helping with trade and income generation activities. Foster children help women earn more, but there is no effect on men.      Gross household income rises in families with foster children. Per capita expenditure-income  gap is narrowed for families with foster children, whose contributions shift per capita expenditures downward, reducing risk in a crisis.	Sally	E. Findley
2002	145	Parent-Child Ties	Adult Children's Financial Support of Older Parents in Asia: (How) Does Family Size Matter? An Examination of the Singaporean Case	Declining fertility levels and population aging in many Asian countries are leading to concerns about their implications for the support of the growing numbers and proportion of elderly, particularly the future cohorts of older parents who are likely to have fewer numbers of children. Using the children's file (n=8,615) from the survey, Transitions in Health, Wealth and Welfare of Elderly Singaporeans, 1995-1999, this paper investigates variations in adult children's financial support of older parents by family size in Singapore. The multivariate findings support the old age security hypothesis and provide evidence for a significant positive relationship between family size and financial support. The association is however curvilinear with the increase in total monetary amount received by older parents at a declining rate with each additional child. Policy implications of this finding is discussed.	Vanessa	 Yong
2002	146	Determinants of Contraceptive Use in Developing Countries	Contraceptive Use in a Changing Service Environment: Evidence from Indonesia during the Economic Crisis	The family planning service environment in Indonesia changed substantially during the first year of the economic crisis that began at the end of 1997. Prices of contraceptives rose and stock outages of some methods increased. Although prevalence and method mix changed little, women did make changes in the types of providers on whom they relied for supplies. Using panel data from two rounds of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, this paper investigates the links between the price and quality of family planning services and women's choices regarding source of supply.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Wayan	 Suriastini
2002	146	Determinants of Contraceptive Use in Developing Countries	Demand and Supply Factors Determining Contraceptive Use in Tanzania	Low contraceptive prevalence rate and unmet demand for family planning services present a challenge for family planning research in Tanzania. The observed situation has been explained by the demand-side variables such as socio-economic characteristics and cultural values that maintain the demand for large families. However, less empirical research has been done on the effect of supply-side factors such as quality of care of family planning services on the demand for contraceptives. This paper presents the effect of supply-side factors on contraceptive use in Tanzania and the magnitude of the impact of supply-side factors relative to demand-side factors such as socio-economic characteristics of women. This paper uses Tanzania Service Accessibility Survey (1996) and Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey (1996) data sets. The results show that some supply-side factors are important determinants of contraceptive use in Tanzania even after controlling for demand-side factors.	Flora	L. Kessy	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning
2002	146	Determinants of Contraceptive Use in Developing Countries	Access as a Factor in Differential Contraceptive Use between Mayans and Ladinos in Guatemala	Previous studies consistently have demonstrated that the Mayan women of Guatemala have a far lower level of contraceptive use their ladino counterparts (e.g., 50 percent versus 13 percent in the 1998 DHS). Most researchers have attributed this to social, economic, and cultural differences between the two groups that result in Mayans having a far lower demand for family planning than ladinos. This paper tests an alternative hypothesis: that the contraceptive supply environment may be more limited for Mayans than ladinos. This analysis uses an innovative approach of linking household level data from the 1995/6 Guatemala DHS and with facility-level data from the 1997 Providers Census for four highland departments.     The analysis determines that the FP supply environment differed little for the two groups. However, access may not be the determining factor in contraceptive use, given that less than 8 percent of users obtained their (last) contraceptive from the nearest facility.	Eric	 Seiber	Jane	T. Bertrand
2002	146	Determinants of Contraceptive Use in Developing Countries	Contraceptive Use under the One-Child Policy: An Analysis of Institutional Effects	This paper takes an institutional approach to study the impact of population policies on the contraceptive behavior of currently married women in China. The analysis is based on data from the 1991 and 1993 waves of the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), sponsored by the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine. We focus on three types of institutional factors: the strength of local population control policies; the strength of policy disincentives; and the tightening up of local population policies between 1991 and 1993. We expect that women in communities with strong population control regulations, strong disincentive measures, and a greater tightening of population control are more likely to use contraception, to choose more effective methods, and if they discontinue use during the period, to do so because of method failures. Logistic and multinomial models are used to test these hypotheses.	Lijuan	 Wu	Joan	R. Kahn
2002	147	Infant and Child Health in the U.S.: Effects of Income and Social Programs	Income Changes and Cognitive Stimulation in Children's Home Environments during the Preschool and Early Elementary School Years	Although prior research has shown that family economic resources are strong predictors of the level of cognitive stimulation provided by children's home environments, methodological concerns suggest that omitted variables may bias these estimates. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (N=2174) this study examined the influence of household income on cognitive stimulation in children's home environments during the transition to school. Cross-sectional regressions and longitudinal fixed effects models are estimated to examine the robustness of income's effect on children's home environments.  Household income was positively related to the level of cognitive stimulation in children's home environments across both sets of analyses. The home environments of children in low-income households are particularly sensitive to income changes over time. The implications of this study for researchers and policy makers are discussed.	Elizabeth	 Votruba-Drzal
2002	147	Infant and Child Health in the U.S.: Effects of Income and Social Programs	Welfare Programs and Infant Mortality in the United States: 1995	The Infant Mortality Rate in the United States is relatively high, compared to rates in many other industrialized countries. This could be due to weaknesses in our social welfare system. Although national in scope, there are actually 51 different welfare programs in the U.S., due to state variations in the benefit level and the percent of the poverty population enrolled in the various programs (coverage rate). Using multi-level analysis, this paper examines the effect of four key components of the U.S. welfare system (AFDC, Food Stamps, Medicaid, and WIC) on the risk of infant mortality. I hypothesize that, after controlling for a set of standard demographic variables, the risk of infant mortality is lower in states with more generous welfare programs, as measured by the benefit level and coverage rate of these four welfare programs. Further, the effect of welfare program variables is hypothesized to be greater for those infants already at risk of death during infancy.	Theodore	 Fuller
2002	147	Infant and Child Health in the U.S.: Effects of Income and Social Programs	Medicaid Managed Care and Infant Health: A National Evaluation	In this study, we use information from vital statistics and a unique survey of state Medicaid programs to examine the effects of Medicaid managed care on prenatal care utilization and infant health. Our analysis of infant health is particularly germane given the relative scarcity of such research and the heightened public concern with this particular issue. A second contribution of our analysis is that we differentiate between types of managed care models. Specifically, we obtain separate estimates of the effect of primary care case management, managed care plans, which are usually less than fully capitated, and HMO managed care programs, which are usually fully capitated, on prenatal care utilization and low birth weight. We also differentiate voluntary models from those that mandate participation in managed care.	Robert	 Kaestner	Lisa	 Dubay	Genevieve	 Kenney
2002	147	Infant and Child Health in the U.S.: Effects of Income and Social Programs	The Effects of WIC on Pregnancy, Birth, and Infant Health Outcomes	The Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children or WIC program is a federally-funded, state-run program to provide direct nutritional supplements and nutritional advice to pregnant women, postpartum women, infants, and children who are nutritionally at-risk and low-income. Numerous studies have concluded via ordinary least squares, ANOVA, two-stage least squares, and other selectivity-corrected analysis that the WIC program is beneficial for infants because it reduces infant mortality, cuts incidence of low birthweight, and increases caloric and micronutrient intake. However, these studies have been criticized for failing to control adequately for unobserved characteristics of mothers that might explain both WIC participation and better birth outcomes. Also, few studies have used national samples. This paper uses both state variation in WIC generosity and federal standardization of WIC program rules in 1998 as sources of variation with which to examine the effect of WIC on birth  outcomes.	Marianne	 Bitler	Janet	 Currie
2002	148	Women's Empowerment, Men's Authority, and Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Women's Empowerment and Fertility Decline among the Pare of Kilimanjaro Region, Northern Tanzania	This research explores the connection between the empowerment of women and fertility outcomes, through an ethnographic study, a community-based survey and in-depth interviews. The study tests the relationship between a fertility decline and the status of women in a rural area of Kilimanjaro Region, Tanzania. Research was conducted in two villages - Masumbeni and Kisanjuni - located in the Ugweno Division of the Pare Mountains in the Eastern part of Kilimanjaro Region. Findings show that in this population age at first birth increased and the progression from having one birth to the next child declined. This pattern was evident during the 1980s, it is stronger in the 1990s. The factors associated with this phenomenon are those related to the status of women, particularly, free partner choice, women's education and wealth of the family.	Ulla	 Larsen	Marida	 Hollos
2002	148	Women's Empowerment, Men's Authority, and Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Rural West African Women: Will Empowerment Reduce Their Fertility?	Rural Burkina Faso is among the last regions to show little signs of fertility decline. This paper examines what may be changing in the institutional factors sustaining high fertility. An ethnographic approach with in depth immersion is used in one village, where change is evident. The first set of changes affects the forms of marriage. This is linked to new patterns of sexual behavior and potentially new forms of reproductive decision-making.     The second set of changes is the system of production, the women's position in the sexual division of labor and their access and control over resources. This improvement in women's status could lead to a reduction in the fertility.  These changes can potentially induce a first step in the fertility transition. But until the value of children changes, it seems difficult to consider a high reduction of the fertility level in rural Burkina Faso.	Christine	 Ouedraogo
2002	148	Women's Empowerment, Men's Authority, and Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Women's Authority, Couple Agreement, and Reproductive Outcomes in Nigeria	This paper examines the role of women's authority in shaping wives' and husbands' reproductive attitudes and behavior. We look at these issues for husbands and wives in 5 Nigerian ethnic groups. Typically women's authority is based on women's self reports but we measure it as couple agreement on wife' authority. Couple agreement on wife's authority and on reproductive issues vary. For instance, couple agreement on reproduction is relatively high on demand for children but lower on family planning approval and contraceptive use. Our analysis shows that among couples who disagree about family planning, women's authority influences whether they are likely to use it. If husbands disapprove of family planning, they are significantly more likely to be contraceptive users if the wife has household authority. That finding holds at the ethnic group level and provides strong support for the idea that women's household authority makes a difference for reproductive outcomes.	Mary	M. Kritz
2002	148	Women's Empowerment, Men's Authority, and Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	Men's Influence on the Onset and Progress of Fertility Transition in Africa	Our previous work showed that during the first decade of fertility transition in Ghana (1988-1998), husbands' influence over wives' fertility intentions increased significantly (but not the reverse). We argue therefore that the onset of fertility transition in Ghana is probably explained better by changes in men's fertility desires than in women's reproductive autonomy. In this paper, we extend our past work in two ways. First, we explore differentials in increasing male control within Ghana according to lineage system and place of residence. Even if women's reproductive autonomy does not trigger fertility decline, it may emerge later and may appear first in urban areas. The extent of male dominance may also vary between matrilineal and patrilineal ethnic groups. Second, we repeat our analysis on data covering the second decade of fertility transition in Kenya (1989-1998) to explore shifts in relative spousal power later in the transition process.	Laurie	 DeRose	Alex	 Ezeh
2002	149	Union Dissolution	The Legacy of a Grandparent's Divorce: Consequences for Ties between Grandparents and Grandchildren	This study assesses the implications of divorce in the grandparent generation for grandparent-grandchild relationships. The sample of 538 grandparents comes from a study of rural families, the Iowa Youth and Families Project. Overall, the results indicate that many aspects of grand-parenting are negatively associated with having ever experienced a divorce. Some of the negative effects of divorce can be explained by the ever-divorced grandparent's greater distance from, and weaker bonds to, their adult children. The negative effects of divorce are stronger for grandfathers and paternal grandparents. Furthermore, a good grandparent-parent relationship can compensate for the negative effects of a grandparent's divorce on the relationship between grandparents and their grandchildren. The implications of these findings are discussed in the context of the rising levels of divorce in the population.	Valarie	 King
2002	149	Union Dissolution	Changes in Marital Status and Poverty Dynamics among Young Mothers in the United States	How do changes in young mothers' marital status relate to the likelihood of exiting from and reentering into poverty? Does marrying get them out of poverty as strongly as being unmarried puts them back into poverty? Using two-way transition models from event history analysis and a sample of young mothers who experienced poverty from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 data, we will address these questions.     We expect to find that getting married in a year is associated with the increased likelihood of exiting poverty in the year and with decreased likelihood of going back into poverty. Being unmarried is hypothesized to be associated with an increased likelihood of reentering poverty and decreased likelihood of exiting from poverty when other conditions are kept equal. We also expect that the economic benefit of marrying for young mothers is smaller than the negative economic consequences from being unmarried.   	Teresa	 Mauldin	Yoko	 Mimura
2002	149	Union Dissolution	Do Parents of Girls Really Have a Higher Risk of Divorce?	We re-examine the Morgan et al. (1988) finding that sons reduce the risk of marital disruption more than do daughters. Using pooled CPS data, our results replicate earlier findings. However, we are able to show that the effect has declined across time. The effect of having girls, while modest in size, was clearly visible for those who married in the 1960s but is quite small and statistically insignificant for those marrying after 1975. We describe these results and again stress that the import of this finding was substantive - i.e., the suggestion that parental involvement by husbands is stability producing. The fact that the effect of sex-of-children has waned in the past several decades is entirely consistent with our earlier arguments. Specifically, the changes in gender structure over the past several decades are expected to weaken the connection between a child's sex and the father's involvement with his child.	S.	Philip  Morgan	Michael	S. Pollard
2002	149	Union Dissolution	Unemployment, Job Insecurity, and Union Dissolution: Evidence from France	This paper analyzes the impact of unemployment and job insecurity on French couples' dissolution risk. First, it explores how unemployment could affect couples' stability, by distinguishing three types of effects of unemployment: an outcome effect, a surprise effect, and a marital capital effect. The originality is that the study separates the impact of unemployment at the beginning of the union from unemployment happening later.    Methods are duration analysis on the period from the first cohabitation (semi-parametric model with timing varying covariates). Results show that engaging in a union with an unemployed partner only increases men's risk of dissolution. If unemployment comes later, while a couple's investments are higher (child, marriage), couples facing unemployment (man's or woman's) seem to resist separation. Negative effect on couple stability of the loss of one partner's income is compensated by the marital capital. Surprise effect is not significant.	Anne	 Solaz
2002	149	Union Dissolution	Stability of Marital and Cohabiting Unions following a First Birth	This paper investigates factors that might account for the apparent greater instability of cohabiting unions, relative to marital unions, during the period following a first birth. We hypothesize that some of this observed gross differential will reflect preexisting differences between cohabiting and married couples. For example, union stability is known to vary with duration, age, and educational attainment, with women in marital unions tending to have first births at later durations, older ages, and higher levels of educational attainment than women in cohabiting unions. Similarly, dissolution risks will be higher if a birth was unplanned or conceived prior to the start of the union, characteristics that also vary substantially by type of union. Our analyses model the effects of such observable factors using the 1995 NSFG and continuous-time hazard models. Particular attention is given to the role of multiple clocks, including age, union duration, and duration since first birth.	Lawrence	L. Wu	Kelly	A. Musick
2002	150	New Directions in Applied Demography	Population Estimation for Census Tracts Using Dynamic Models	This article describes how empirical Bayesian techniques and dynamic models can be used to derive postcensal population estimates by race for small areas such as census tracts. Vital rates estimates and their stochastic properties are developed.  Independent of these, population forecasts are developed based on the stage of succession of the racial group. The dynamic population estimator we propose is a weighted average of the vital rates estimate and the forecast. The theory is illustrated by deriving annual estimates of the number of African American women, age 15 to 44, for the census tracts in Chicago for the 1980-90 period, using the 1980 census counts and annual counts of vital events for 1980-90. A comparison between the 1990 estimates and the 1990 census counts is made.	Marie	V. Bousfield
2002	150	New Directions in Applied Demography	Promises, Prospects, and Problems with the American Community Survey	The American Community Survey (ACS) promises to meet 21st Century demographic data needs by providing accurate and timely information throughout the decade for local areas; a video of your community. Current prospects regarding research on the ACS look hopeful. However, methodological and political issues loom large if the ACS is to fulfill its promises.    The ACS represents a potential replacement for the census long form. There is debate over the merits of ACS versus census data. Proponents argue ACS data would be more current and accurate than data collected ten years earlier.  Skeptics are concerned large sampling errors for small areas may render the ACS estimates virtually useless.      This paper assesses the capability of ACS to provide small area data comparable in quality to Census 2000. Examples from Multnomah County, Oregon highlight the promises, prospects, and problems associated with current ACS data and offer direction for future developments.	George	C. Hough
2002	150	New Directions in Applied Demography	New Data Sources and Applications for Population and Household Estimates	As the demand has increased for accurate intercensal population and household estimates for small areas, some companies have begun to use national, compiled household databases as a surrogate for the decennial census. Some applied demographers have also begun to use such compiled databases, as well as delivery counts from the U.S. Postal Service, as inputs to their annual household estimates for small geographic areas. This paper analyzes the utility of three potential data sources for intercensal small area estimates by comparing them against data from the 2000 Census. Frozen files from March/April, 2000 for: 1) A national, compiled household database; 2) A national, population database aggregated from Equifax's Consumer Marketing Database; and 3) A national set of delivery counts from the U.S. Postal Service are evaluated.  Important geocoding issues in aggregating such databases to census geography are examined along with definitional differences in what constitutes a household.	Linda	 Jacobsen	Ken	 Hodges	Fred	 Wilcox
2002	150	New Directions in Applied Demography	Applied Demography in Action: A Case Study of Population Identification	This case study deals with a problem quite different than the typical one facing most applied demographers. It involves the identification of a population using a set of criteria established by a regulatory agency. Specifically, criteria established by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission for purposes of Site Characterization of the High Level Nuclear Waste Repository proposed for Yucca Mountain, Nevada. Consistent with other recent studies, this one suggests that a wide range of skills may be needed in dealing with problems posed to applied demographers by clients and users in the 21st century. As such, budding applied demographers, especially those nearing completion of their graduate studies, should consider adopting a set of skills beyond traditional demography.	David	A. Swanson
2002	151	Ethical Issues in Demographic Research	Concepts, Definitions, and Classifications: Some Ethical Issues in Demographic Research and Policy	As demographers have been concerned with expanding the uses of statistics, less attention have been paid to the misuses of statistics.  An overview of such misuses has led to more systematic analyses of how the misuse of existing population data systems have harmed a variety of vulnerable populations.      The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the ethical implications of the conceptualization and organization of demographic and related social statistics on poverty,  gender equity and minority status in the United States. The ethical issues implicit in some of the persistent statistical shortcomings refer to a single society and its goals and purposes.  This provides an opportunity to note positive developments and changes as well as shortcomings.  As political and ethical considerations often interact, another goal of this paper is to assist in the process of disentangling these two sets of factors.	Mary	G.  Powers
2002	151	Ethical Issues in Demographic Research	Community Confidentiality, Consent, and the Individual Research Process: Ethics in Demographic Research	As many researchers submitting research proposals now may attest, cursory review is rapidly evaporating.  Institutional Review Boards are now increasingly meticulous about informed consent and risks and benefits to the individual.       We argue that for demographers - by definition interested at the phenomena at the population level - concern for individuals as a part of communities is critical to the research process.  When results are given in an aggregated form, do communities have a right to confidentiality?  When research is localized, do communities have the right to informed consent?   Can researchers uphold confidentiality of respondents from small communities?  In short, ethics in research has primarily focused on individual rights and responsibilities.  Is this enough in demographic enquiry?  This paper seeks to extend the dialogue and delineate questions that may not have entered yet in the research calculus of demographers.	Carol	E. Kaufman	Saumya	 Ramarao
2002	151	Ethical Issues in Demographic Research	How Informed? Using Informed Consent Statements for HIV Testing in a Mali DHS	This paper discusses the use of informed consent statements for obtaining blood for HIV testing in survey research. The standard Demographic and Health Survey conducted in Mali in 2001 included a test for anemia and for HIV in adults of one-third of the households. A study of the use of this statement for anemia and HIV testing was conducted through observation, tape recording, and interviews to determine what interviewees understood about the testing and obtaining results from the informed consent statement.    The study found that in most cases the informed consent statement was explained and not read, but that two-thirds had understood that the test was voluntary. The idea of anonymity of results was less well understood. Do we consider that a reasonable and ethnical outcome? The paper discusses ways to proceed in formulating statements, training interviewers, and taking into account the field situation for obtaining better results.	P.	Stanley  Yoder	Mamadou	 Konate
2002	151	Ethical Issues in Demographic Research	Conducting Health and Demographic Research in Settings Where There Are No Ethical Guidelines: Findings Based on Two Anthropological Studies in Nepal	There are no codified ethical guidelines for health and social researchers in Nepal. Between 1997 and 2000, we conducted two small-scale, village-level studies that used anthropological research methods to document the health and demographic profiles of two groups of displaced people: Bhutanese refugees and those displaced as a result of the Maoist insurgency.     The first objective of this paper is to document the moral problems and dilemmas researchers experience in settings devoid of explicit ethical guidelines. Second, this paper suggests a set of ethical principles and guidelines that can be applied to the protection of the human rights of study participants in Nepal. Finally, this paper provides suggestions on the rights and responsibilities of the four major actors in research endeavors: researchers, institutions, sponsors, and gatekeepers.	Debendra	 Karki	Sindhu	 Karki
2002	152	Early Life Conditions and Later Health Outcomes	Early Life Conditions and Later Sex Differences in Adult Lifespan	In this study we tested our earlier hypothesis (and preliminary observations) that early-life conditions may determine in part the later sex differences in adult lifespan.  We found that such variables as (1) father's age at person's conception, (2) parental lifespan, and (3) month of birth, have larger effects on adult lifespan (life expectancy at age 30) in females rather than in males. Daughters born to particularly young fathers (below 25 years) or old fathers (above 45 years) live shorter lives, while sons are less affected by paternal age at conception. The dependence of progeny lifespan on parental lifespan has particularly steep slope for female sex of the progeny. Women born in May or December live longer compared to those born in February, while male lifespan is less affected by the season of birth.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Leonid	A. Gavrilov	Galina	N. Evdokushkina	Victoria	G. Semyonova
2002	152	Early Life Conditions and Later Health Outcomes	Adult Mortality and the Effects of Sibship Size, Birth Order, and Age of Parents at Birth	We examine simultaneously how three distinct but inter-related features of childhood affect the mortality risks of those children in adulthood: sibship size, birth order, and age of parents when a child was born.   We know little about how these childhood characteristics affect adult mortality nor do we know whether their effects are confounded with one another.      We extend this line of inquiry by using data on siblings from genealogical data drawn from the Utah Population Database. We present data and analysis that address three sets of fundamental questions: (1) Do children's sibship size, birth order, and age of parents at birth affect their risk of mortality during adulthood? (2) Do these effects differ by gender of child and, in the case of parental age, gender of parent? (3) How are these effects altered when shared unobserved heterogeneity is taken into account?	Ken	R. Smith	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Lee	 Bean
2002	152	Early Life Conditions and Later Health Outcomes	Do Childhood Conditions Predict Survival to Supercentenarian-Hood?	Is there a link between socioeconomic circumstances experienced in childhood and survival to extreme old age (110+) in the U.S.? This study has two parts: First, to consider which childhood conditions predict survival to age 110. Second, to consider whether those variables retain their predictive importance beyond age 85. Among survivors to age 85, are childhood conditions associated with survival to age 110? What makes supercentenarians distinct from others in their birth cohort in general, and from those reaching age 85?    Using Social Security data, supercentenarians dying between 1980-1999 are searched for as children in the 1880 and 1900 Censuses. Using a quasi case-control approach, successful links are matched by age, race, and sex to controls drawn from the corresponding Census public use samples. Part two compares supercentenarians to members of their approximate birth cohort who reached at least age 85 to explore the strength of associations after age 85.	Leslie	F. Stone
2002	152	Early Life Conditions and Later Health Outcomes	Paternal Age, Maternal Age, and Well-Being at Mid-Life		Hsiang-Hui	Daphne  Kuo
2003	1	Global Changes in Population Aging	Mortality Decline and Economic Growth in Industrialized Countries	The fundamental question of growth theory in economics is why some countries are rich and others poor.  Similarly, when demographers characterize current trends or project into the future, they must ask why some human populations are long-lived and others are not.  The causes of universal, continuous mortality decline in industrialized countries over the past 50 years are numerous and difficult to quantify.  Substantial heterogeneity in the speed and variability of mortality decline across political boundaries suggests that socioeconomic factors and institutions are important in explaining increases in human longevity, as do recent research efforts that uncover evidence of convergence across countries to ``best-practices'' mortality.  This paper investigates the sources of differential mortality decline among industrialized nations over the past 50 years, identifying income inequality and capital investment gradients as key elements.	Ryan	D. Edwards	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar
2003	1	Global Changes in Population Aging	Changes and Challenges of Population Aging in China	The objective of this paper is to project the age structure changes in China, to portray China's aging processes over the first half of the 21st century, and to analyze the potential challenges of the population aging to China's development. The new data from the 2000 national population census will be used to project the population changes. It concludes that both sharp transitions in both the age structures and transitions in the socioeconomic institutions will accompany the aging problems in China in the early years of the century. The combination of these two components-together with the increasing number of elderly citizens, the lack of infrastructure, poverty, and labor outflow-will make the problems of aging more serious in China than in any other country in the world, where such rapid aging and institutional transitions are not occurring as they are in China.	Xiaochun	 Qiao	Chirayath	 Suchindran
2003	1	Global Changes in Population Aging	The Demographic Window: Challenges and Opportunities	In many developing countries, the rapid ageing of the population is viewed as an obstacle to the implementation of significant social policies. A commonly held view is that “faster is ageing, heavier is the burden to the society… Although this is true, the forecasted population ageing in developing countries will remain modest for the next two or three decades compared with the level reached in developed countries. In many developing countries, ageing is accompanied by a substantial decrease in the dependency ratio (young and elderly to adult population) that first declines with the fall in fertility before later increasing with the ageing of the population. This modifies the age structure of the population in favour of young adults. The relatively low social burden, supported by the working-age adults for two or three more decades, creates a rare opportunity to implement social policies founding sustainable development, before an inescapable fast ageing.	Jean	Marie  Robine	Karen	SL. Cheung	Ed	 Tu	Yi	 Zeng
2003	1	Global Changes in Population Aging	Population Aging and Population Decline	Low fertility and improved health and longevity have generated growing numbers and proportions of older people throughout the world.  The current level and pace of population aging varies, however, virtually all countries are experiencing growth in the number of older people.  This growth poses challenges to social institutions which must adapt to changing age structures.    The demographic aspects of population aging have been well documented.   A second, less studied, result of trends in fertility and mortality is population decline.  Over half of the developed countries, and some developing countries, are projected to experience population declines in the future.        In developed countries, population declines are due to a combination of extremely low fertility and mortality.  The developing countries that will experience population declines are typically experiencing increased mortality, usually related to HIV/AIDS.      This paper will use US Census Bureau projections to examine the demographics of global population aging and population decline.	Victoria	 Velkoff
2003	1	Global Changes in Population Aging	The Persistent Near-Linear Increase of Life Expectancy at Birth in Industrialized Countries: Explanation and Prospects for the Future	Recent studies have demonstrated a persistent near-linear increase in life expectancy at birth in industrialized nations over the past 50 years.  Such a pattern stands in sharp contrast to the predictions of most mortality forecasts, which typically anticipate a slowdown in this trend.  Such expectations derive from a key assumption of standard forecasting methodology, namely, a constant age pattern of mortality decline.  Drawing on past evidence about an “aging of the mortality decline,” we build four hypothetical scenarios of future mortality trends.  Two scenarios hold the age pattern of mortality decline constant over time, while the other two assume a gradual shift in this pattern toward older ages.  These calculations illustrate that the aging of the mortality decline could be a key mechanism driving the near-linear increase of life expectancy at birth.  In light of these results, we suggest that a revision of standard mortality forecasting methodology should be considered.	John	R. Wilmoth
2003	2	The Demographic Impact of the HIV Epidemic	Childhood Mortality in Sub-Saharan African Countries: An Examination of the HIV Epidemic Impact	The demographic impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa has been examined in a number of studies.  Among other outcomes, the epidemic has been shown to affect childhood mortality, resulting in reduced rates of mortality reduction or even increases in some countries.  However, HIV is only one among numerous factors that may affect levels of under 5 mortality.    This paper presents results of a study investigating the associations between the HIV/AIDS epidemic and the trends and determinants of childhood mortality, using aggregate country-level data.  Data come from the DHS and the UNAIDS HIV/AIDS Surveillance Data Base.  A total of 54 DHS from 30 Sub-Saharan African countries are used, generating under 5 mortality rates in defined three-year periods.  Independent variables corresponding to each period are used in order to control for three major characteristics - adult HIV prevalence, socio-economic development, and primary health care.	Yoonjoung	 Choi
2003	2	The Demographic Impact of the HIV Epidemic	Orphans and Grandorphans'' in Sub Saharan Africa: The Consequences of Dependent Mortality	In the absence of extended family able to provide foster care, children orphaned by AIDS are at risk of negative developmental outcomes. Under a generalized epidemic, the family structure which can support orphans is strained. Furthermore, because HIV can be transmitted sexually, the infection of one parent is frequently followed by the infection of the second, producing mortality correlations within households.  We present a stylized demographic model incorporating parental AIDS mortality correlations, which allows us to explore the effects of correlated mortality on the structure of the orphaned pool of children.  Not surprisingly, within-household correlations increase the fraction of double orphans, however, they also induce structural changes on households across generations that have profound implications on the care of subsequent generations of potential orphans.  Children born into new households formed by double-orphans lack grandparents, making them vulnerable to abandonment should their parents contract HIV.	James	H. Jones	Martina	 Morris
2003	2	The Demographic Impact of the HIV Epidemic	Assessing the Potential for Spread of HIV/AIDS in China	Concerns about the unfolding of an HIV epidemic in China are based on a characterization of the future course of the epidemic which relies on an UNAIDS model highly sensitive to the specifications given and not responsive to the prevalent regime of sexual relations.  In this paper, we will show the sensitivity of results to changes in model assumptions.  In particular, we will rely on results of simulations that produce different time trends of the epidemics using various regimes of sexual behavior and observe the trajectory of the rate of HIV increase they induce. After comparing results for China with these alternative trajectories, we will fit to Chinese data a curve of the time trend of the epidemic which will resemble that yielded by simulations that rely on a sexual relations regime corresponding to that empirically observed from recently collected data on sexual behavior in China.	Giovanna	 Merli	Bo	 Wang	Sara	 Hertog
2003	2	The Demographic Impact of the HIV Epidemic	HIV/AIDS Effects on AIDS Orphans in Tanzania	This paper has three objectives: 1) to estimate the numbers of Tanzanian orphans; 2) to review the data on human capital attainments by Tanzanian orphans and; 3) to predict the likely impact of AIDS orphanhood on the Tanzanian labor market. Our estimates show that in year 2000 there is an estimated 750,000 to 1 million orphans in Tanzania (comprise 8-11% of children under 15). Orphans in Tanzania have lower school participation rates, higher participation in paid work as compared to non-orphans.  Orphans are significantly more likely to do work only or do work while attending school. Results from a random effects logistic model show that the strongest determinants of current school attendance are the schooling of the household head and the asset index of the household.  Orphanhood independently raises the odds of child labor and raises the odds of dropping out of school.	El	Daw  Suliman
2003	3	Demographic Effects of Poverty	Immigrant Socioeconomic Status and Mortality	A disconcerting fact of U.S. society is a pronounced inverse relationship between socioeconomic status and mortality. To shed light on this issue we analyze the mortality experience of U.S. immigrants.  As other researchers have found, groups with high immigrant representation such as Hispanics have lower than expected mortality given their socioeconomic status. To unravel this paradox, we explore a hypothesis that speaks to the etiology of socioeconomic mortality differentials. It is not education per se that affects mortality.  Rather, education embodies life experiences that promote or dissuade investment in health:  the more educated tend to have more experiences that suggest that human-capital investments pay off. This relationship would, however, be society-specific. Immigrant groups with relatively low education could have lower-than-predicted mortality because their schooling, by source-country standards, is relatively high and conveys more positive experiences relevant to human-capital investment than does the same absolute level of education for U.S.-born individuals.	Harriet	O. Duleep	Daniel	J. Dowhan
2003	3	Demographic Effects of Poverty	Regional Inequalities in Infant Mortality in Vietnam: Patterns and Explanatory Power of Economic Hypothesis	Infant mortality in Vietnam presents an interesting case study since Vietnam has achieved a remarkably low rate of infant mortality compared to other countries at a similar level of economic development.  Moreover, it has lowered infant mortality in the context of dramatic socioeconomic restructuring as a result of political and economic reform. Using data from the 1999 Vietnamese Census and the 1997 Economic and Living Standard Survey, I present an analysis of the relationship between economic development and regional inequalities in mortality. The results show that less developed regions experience higher infant mortality and that the lowest income quintile is the best predictor of infant mortality. Another important finding is that the number of physicians per 10,000 population has a strong and positive association with infant mortality level. This result contradicts to the results from developing countries, but it is consistent with results from developed countries.	Liem	T. Nguyen
2003	3	Demographic Effects of Poverty	Concentrated Poverty vs. Concentrated Affluence: Effects on Neighborhood Social Environments and Children's Outcomes	Ample social theory supports the idea that social environments affect children's development. Nonetheless, the evidence on neighborhood effects is contradictory and often weak. This paper uses new data from the 2000-2001 Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (L.A.FANS) to examine neighborhood effects on two measures of children's growth and development:  (1) reading and problem solving skills (measured by Woodcock-Johnson Revised standardized tests), and (2) social and psychological development (measured by the Behavior Problems Index).  Our analysis is presented in two parts.  First, we examine the relationship of neighborhood level poverty, affluence, turnover rates, ethnic composition, immigrant composition, and crime rates and measures of neighborhood social control, social cohesion, and social interactions among neighbors. Second,   we use both fixed effects and random effects models to examine the effects of neighborhood and family characteristics on children's outcomes.	Anne	 Pebley
2003	3	Demographic Effects of Poverty	Families Coping without a Job or Cash Assistance	Some families with children report living without public assistance or earned income in national surveys.  Questions arise as to whether some of these reports reflect inaccurate survey measurement, and for families reporting their situation accurately, how they cope with limited incomes. It is important to understand  why some families do not have employment or public assistance as we continue to evaluate the effects of welfare reform.  Time limits have eliminated the entitlement to welfare, and many states limit access to welfare benefits.    This paper describes results of qualitative, telephone interviews with families with children that reported little or no income on the 2002 National Survey of America's Families (NSAF).  Results show the extent of discrepencies between the NSAF data and families' current work and cash assistance status, and how families without work or cash assistance get by.	Sheila	 Zedlewski	Sandi	L. Nelson
2003	4	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Race, Ethnicity & Family Wealth Transfers	The aims of this paper is to examine potential differences in family wealth transfer behavior across racial/ethnic groups.  Using all the available waves of Health and Retirement Study (HRS) data, the patterns of inter vivo transfers from parents to children are identified over 7-8 year time period.  A significant difference in family wealth transfer is found across different racial/ethnic groups.  On average, 32.9% of Caucasian Whites, 22.6% of African Americans, 16.1% of Hispanics, and 29.4% of other racial groups made inter vivo transfer in a two-year time period.  Whether and how the determinants of wealth transfers, such as health and wealth status, age, cohorts, and economic, health, and family events differently influence wealth transfers across racial/ethnic groups are investigated.	Jinkook	 Lee
2003	4	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	A Counterfactual Approach to the Black-White Differential in U.S. Marital Trends: The Effect of a “Total Institution”	While “retreat from marriage” rates have been on the rise for all Americans, social scientists have noted an increasing divergence in family patterns between African Americans and Caucasian Americans, with the former experiencing markedly higher divorce, nonmarital childbearing and never-marrying rates.  Explanations generally focus on one of three theories ranging from economic class and race stratification, historic and present cultural differences, and the skewed gender ratio in the African-American marriage market.     My research poses a new, counterfactual approach to the race-family formation question.  I examine what happens to marriage trends for blacks and whites when they are removed from larger society and placed in a structural context that minimizes racial and economic discrimination.  Specifically, I examine nuptial patterns among the races within the US Military, a total institution in the Goffman sense, which serves as a near natural control for many of the arguments presented in the literature on the retreat from marriage.	Jennifer	Hickes  Lundquist
2003	4	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Kin Care of Preschool Children: The Interaction of Race and Marital Status	While overall trends in child care arrangements in recent decades are well-documented, remarkably little is known about race-specific patterns of child care use.  This study examines race-specific trends in one type of non-parental child care arrangement:  care provided by relatives.  Our hypotheses, which are informed by ethnographic and quantitative studies of child care, concern the relative roles of macro-level forces and cultural preferences in shaping the child care choices of white and African-American families.   We test these hypotheses using pooled cross sections from the 1977 and 1982 Current Population Surveys (CPS) and from the 1984 through 1994 Survey of Income Program Participants (SIPP).  Preliminary analyses show evidence of racial convergence in employed mothers’ reliance on relatives for child care.  This convergence is driven largely by a substantial decrease in relative-care among married blacks, although a small upswing among white single women also plays a role.	Irene	 Padavic	Karin	 Brewster
2003	4	Race, Ethnicity and the Family	Racial and Ethnic Variation in Marital Dissolution: A Story of Differences in Culture or Composition?	We use data from the National Survey of Family Growth to investigate recent patterns of marital disruption among non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and Hispanic women, and to determine the role that compositional versus cultural differences across these groups play in explaining large racial disparities in dissolution rates. To identify cultural differences in the context of dissolution, we examine how the process of dissolution from first marriages differs across racial and ethnic groups.  We then apply regression decomposition techniques to disentangle the contributions to the racial/ethnic disruption differential made by compositional differences (i.e. variation in average levels of covariates) and by process differences (i.e., the effects of covariates on the risk of marital dissolution) across groups.  This study greatly expands the array of risk factors considered in prior investigations of the racial gap in disruption and is one of a few recent studies to examine explicitly the process of disruption among Hispanic women.	Julie	A. Phillips	Megan	M. Sweeney
2003	5	The Impact of Crises and Long-Term Malnutrition on Child Health	Impact of a Public Program on Children's Nutritional Status in a Low-Income Rural Economy	This paper analyzes the impact of a maternal and child health program on the nutritional status of children. With the help of a natural experiment from Matlab, Bangladesh, this study  investigates the role of the health program, role of mother's education and its interaction with program resources in attaining better health for children. Results indicate that children residing in the treatment area are of higher nutritional status. Mother's education is positively related to children's health. Results show that the treatment improves the long-run health of boys and not of girls compared to boys and girls in the comparison area. Mothers who are less educated are better able to look after their children with the help of the program but there is no gender differential evident here.	Anoshua	 Chaudhuri
2003	5	The Impact of Crises and Long-Term Malnutrition on Child Health	Long Term Consequences of Early Childhood Malnutrition	This paper examines the impact of preschool malnutrition on subsequent human capital formation in rural Zimbabwe using an instrumental variables – maternal fixed effects (IV-MFE) estimator with a long term panel data set. Representations of civil war and drought “shocks” are used to identify differences in preschool nutritional status across siblings. Improvements in height-for-age in preschoolers are associated with increased height as a young adult, a greater number of grades of schooling completed and an earlier age at which the child starts school. Had the median pre-school child in this sample had the stature of a median child in a developed country, by adolescence, she would be 4.6 centimeters taller, had completed an additional 0.7 grades of schooling and would have started school seven months earlier.	John	 Hoddinott	Harold	 Alderman	Bill	 Kinsey
2003	5	The Impact of Crises and Long-Term Malnutrition on Child Health	Crises and Child Health Outcomes: The Impacts of Financial and Drought/smoke Crises on Child Mortality and Birthweight in Indonesia	Short-term impacts of the crises were examined using data from the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS).  We find that the financial crisis had adverse effects on neonatal mortality in both urban and rural areas.  The effects on post-neonatal mortality were felt only by urban infants. In rural areas, the drought/smoke crises had more adverse effects on post-neonatal mortality than the financial crisis. The crisis effects are larger after controlling for community fixed-effects.  Infants of highly educated mothers suffered from the financial crisis in urban areas, while those of less educated mothers suffered from the drought/smoke crises in rural areas.      In both urban and rural areas, neither crises adversely affected birthweight.   However, this result is subject to selection problems in reported birthweights because only half of infants born at home were weighed. We find that some mothers switched from hospital to home delivery during the crises, which causes further selection problems.	Pungpond	 Rukumnuaykit
2003	5	The Impact of Crises and Long-Term Malnutrition on Child Health	Improving Child Access to Health Services during the Economic Crisis: An Indonesian Experience of the Safety Net Program in the Health Sector	Child health has been a serious problem in Indonesia for the past several decades.  The prolonged Indonesian economic crisis in 1997 had a tremendous impact on child health. In 1998, the Indonesian government launched a broad social safety net program. In the health sector, it took the form of the JPSBK.  I examine the extent to which JPSBK contributed to better health services for poor children in four provinces: Central Java, Yogyakarta, East Java, and South Sulawesi. In addition to the data sets from the JPSBK study, I used the Village Potentials data set.  I found that JPSBK programs met their overall targets.  Over one year of the program, the number of poor children experiencing sickness decreased significantly.   When they were sick, the poor likely to visit outpatient care. One crucial determinant of outpatient visits was health card possession, the means by which poor children access services for free.	Eunike	 Suci
2003	6	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Disentangling the Links. Women's Empowerment, Violence and Reproductive Health in Mexico	The role of women’s empowerment as a factor shaping the prevalence of marital violence and its links with women’s reproductive health remain mostly unexplored in the Mexican research agenda.  This paper explores first, the pathways among women’s autonomy, women’s decision making power and the experience of violence and, in the second section, the relationships between marital violence and four adverse reproductive health outcomes: unwanted pregnancies, unwanted sex, miscarriages and sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Logistic regression models were constructed to examine all these relationships.   The data used comes from the Mexican National Survey on Reproductive Health 1998 (Encuesta de Salud Reproductiva con Población Derechohabiente, ENSARE 98), conducted among men and women affiliated to the Social Security system.   Preliminary regression results show that the prevalence of violence is higher among more empowered women. On the other hand, the likelihood of experiencing unwanted pregnancies, unwanted sex, miscarriages and STD are all significantly higher among abused women.	Irene	 Casique
2003	6	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	A Multi-Level Analysis of the Continuation of Female Genital Cutting in Kenya	In this paper, I examine community-level influences on the prevalence of female genital cutting in Kenya.  I first outline the history of the campaign against genital cutting in Kenya.  I then present quantitative analyses using data from the 1998 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey.  The analysis is motivated by a game-theoretical account of the continuation of female genital cutting first proposed by Mackie (1996).  Mackie's convention hypothesis attributes the continuation of genital cutting largely to social pressures.  I address this hypothesis through multi-level modeling of individual and community effects on mothers’ decisions to have their daughters cut.  I find that community characteristics, including the dominant ethnicity and the proportion of women who have undergone genital cutting, strongly influence the probability of having daughters cut.  However, I also find correlations between individual-level characteristics and the decision to carry out genital cutting.	Sarah	R. Hayford
2003	6	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Infertility in Central Africa	OBJECTIVES:  To determine the prevalence and risk factors of primary and secondary infertility in the four Central African countries of Cameroon, Chad, Central African Republic and Gabon.  METHODS:  Primary infertility was approximated by the percentage of women childless after at least five years of marriage.  The percentage with no birth at least five years subsequent to a previous birth was considered to have secondary infertility.  Logistic regression models were estimated to determine the risk factors of primary and secondary infertility.    RESULTS:  The prevalence of infertility was highest in Central African Republic and lowest in Chad. Women married more than once vs. only once and formerly married women vs. women living with their husband had higher odds of primary and secondary infertility.  In contrast, place of residence, religion, education and socioeconomic status were generally not associated with primary or secondary infertility.    CONCLUSIONS:  Infertility is still prevalent in Central Africa.	Ulla	 Larsen
2003	6	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Migration Networks and Modern Contraceptive Knowledge and Use in Rural Guatemala	This paper takes the concept of social networks as it is used in the contraception and migration literatures to explore the impact of out-migration on modern contraceptive knowledge and use in rural Guatemala. Results from regression models indicate that urban migration experience, and social ties to urban migrants at the family and community level are all associated with a greater likelihood of knowing one or more modern method. Social ties to international migrants have weaker effects on contraceptive knowledge, and are only significant at the family level. In the case of contraceptive use, the effects of more distant migrant ties (family outside the country or living in a community where urban migration is common) operate on contraceptive use primarily through the diffusion of information about different methods, whereas, the effects of closer migrant ties (family in urban areas of Guatemala) have a direct effect on the likelihood of contraceptive use.	David	 Lindstrom	Elisa	 Munoz-Franco
2003	7	Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Schooling and Work in Thailand: A Life Course Study of Youth	With tremendous economic change in Thailand since the 1980s, domestic and foreign investments in predominantly export-based industry have resulted in high levels of economic growth with important consequences for individual lives including a growth in non-agricultural employment accompanied by rural-urban migration. Simultaneously, changes in government education policies have led to increasing enrollment especially at the secondary level. Given this context, we analyze retrospective life history data on individuals from Nang Rong district in Thailand to observe changes in youth transition to adulthood focusing on education and employment in the past two decades. We use a life course approach to examine three markers of this transition, first employment, first employment in a non-agricultural activity and first move outside of Nang Rong district for various cohorts of youth. We also make comparisons between the life course employment patterns of these youth with that of middle aged individuals during the same time period.	Soumya	 Alva
2003	7	Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Growing up in Contemporary Pakistan: The Separate Worlds of Boys and Girls	Our paper has two objectives: (1) to characterize the contemporary transitions to adulthood of boys and girls in Pakistan according to key domains such as puberty, schooling, work, engagement, marriage, childbearing and residence and (2) to identify recent changes by comparing the experience of two cohorts (15-19; 20-24). Our analysisis is based on a nationally representative Adolescent and Youth Survey in Pakistan (AYSP) conducted by the Population Council and fielded from October 2001 to March 2002.   The questionnaires for young people include background information, life-event histories and time use profiles as well as information on decision-making, mobility and gender role attitudes. A new feature of this questionnaire is the detailed attention to the process of marriage, including the economic aspects of the marriage arrangements.	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Zeba	A. Sathar	Minhaj	ul Haque	Judith	A. Diers
2003	7	Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	Trends in the Timing of Marriage among Men and Women in the Developing World	Trends in the Timing of Marriage among Men and Women in the Developing World  Barbara S. Mensch and Susheela Singh  	  This paper reviews the literature on the timing of marriage in developing countries and using UN data from 74 countries and DHS data from 51 countries examines trends in age of first marriage of both men and women. We investigate the extent to which the delay in first marriage that has been observed among women in many countries is continuing and whether it is also occurring among men. The focus on men as well as women is a major contribution as the demographic and sociological literature on timing of marriage in developing countries has been limited almost exclusively to women. While the analyses are essentially descriptive, it is hoped that we will provide the basis for hypotheses that will lead to further in-depth research.	Barbara	 Mensch	Susheela	 Singh	John	 Casterline
2003	7	Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries	The Transition to Adulthood in East Asia: An Overview	Using various social surveys and previous literature, in this overview we first provide the descriptions of four aspects of the transition to adulthood in East Asia (Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan) with a reference to American young people. Those four markers of transition to adulthood are: 1) educational enrollment and attainment, 2) labor market outcomes including employment and unemployment, 3) family formation including first marriage and childbearing, and 4) living home. For each of these four aspects, we describe the country-specific patterns and the timings at which each transition event occurs. As far as the data are available, furthermore, we will document how the patterns and timings of the transition to adulthood have changed in each society. Then, we try to understand how institutional characteristics in the East Asian societies are associated with distinctive patterns of transition to adulthood, compared to the American experiences.	Hyunjoon	 Park	Gary	 Sandefur
2003	8	Family, Work, and Time with Dependents	Human Capital of Young Children and Time Squeeze of Their Parents	This paper examines the intra-family resource allocation through children's time diaries collected in the 1997 Child Development Supplement to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.  We examine two types of trade offs parents make in time allocation: (1) tradeoffs between investing time in children and in parents themselves, and (2) that between investing in the market career of the husband and that of the wife. Our analysis focuses on a strategy of work-family balance -- the temporal distribution of time with children between weekdays and weekends. Mothers who have high earnings and education maximize their goals by spending less time in play/companionship activities with their children but attempt to make up for that by spending more time with them on weekends, particularly in activities that enhances children's human capital.  Fathers with high human capital also spend selectively more time with children in achievement related activities, particularly on weekends.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung	Frank	 Stafford
2003	8	Family, Work, and Time with Dependents	Social Class Differences in Parental Time with Children: Cross-National Variation	Parental investments in children are an important indicator of children?s present and future well-being. Research suggests that in the United States higher SES parents invest more and spend time differently with their children than do lower SES parents. The effect of parental SES and time investments in children may vary cross-nationally, however, because of macro-level differences in the provision of state-funded programs designed to equalize resources for nurturing and development children across families. We analyze time-diary data from five Western industrialized nations to determine if the effect of SES on two indicators of parental time with children varies cross-nationally. We strategically select countries to be representative of different types of welfare regimes. The results offer new empirical assessments of the effect of SES on parental time with children and shed insight on relevant policy issues.	Liana	C. Sayer	Anne	H. Gauthier	Frank	 Furstenberg
2003	8	Family, Work, and Time with Dependents	The Impact of Unemployment on the Organisation of Family Life: The Case of Parental Time in France	Parental time is usually the most evenly shared part of domestic time. Does this mean that the time spent by the father or mother is substitutable (either parent could do the task) or complementary (both parents are needed)? We tested these hypotheses in the context of a sudden change in time constraints, such as that caused by unemployment. We established a distinction between leisure, care, homework, transport, using the French Time Use survey (INSEE 1999). Our sample includes 1885 families with at least one working parent. Using a bivariate tobit model, we show that the only substitutable activity between men and women is transportation time. Daily care is also substitutable, but it is only substituted when the woman is unemployed. A partner's participation in parental activities can thus reflect  his or her power of negotiation and desire to contribute to the common good, represented by the child.	Anne	 Solaz	Ariane	 Pailhe
2003	8	Family, Work, and Time with Dependents	Managing Caregivers in Singapore Organizations: Why and How the State Should Become Involved	In Singapore, the State has defined the family as the site for eldercare with the rationale that it promotes filial piety, a cultural value intrinsic to society. In the majority of private- and public-sector organizations, there is an absence of a leave scheme for employed caregivers. This paper examines the urgent need for a more family-friendly work policy for employed caregivers. The author stresses that employers have a significant role to play. Currently, there is little employer support. Employers see no urgency for a provision for employed caregivers under the current Employment Act itself. The author argues that the onus is for the State to act by reinscribing the role of the employer. Furthermore, by adopting an active role in mandating employer support, the State is also reinforcing its own efforts to uphold filial piety.	Theresa	W. Devasahayam
2003	9	Immigrants and the Labor Market	Job Quality and the Assimilation Process of US Immigrants	Job quality and the assimilation process of US immigrants    Maria E. Enchautegui  University of Puerto Rico  Department of Economics  P.O Box 23345   San Juan PR 00931-3345  njgd@isla.net  ABSTRACT  This paper examines the quality of the jobs held by immigrants.  I use data on immigrant households in Los Angeles and New York City which  contain detailed information on immigration status and 12 indicators of job quality.  The most  important predictor of job quality is whether or not the immigrant is  unauthorized. Movement toward better quality jobs with  time in the US,  occurs  slowly.  Failure to account for immigration status on most national surveys  likely over-estimate the assimilation into good jobs. Policies to improve the job quality of immigrants can target the characteristics that make immigrants likely to hold low-quality jobs. Another policy route, however,  is to target the conditions that create low-quality employment in a restructured economy.	Maria	E. Enchautegui
2003	9	Immigrants and the Labor Market	Underemployment across Immigrant Generations	The employment circumstances of immigrants and their children constitute a key dimension along which immigrant adaptation to the U.S. economy and labor market can be evaluated.  The purpose of this paper is to describe and analyze employment adequacy -- defined as underemployment -- among the first, second, and third (or higher) immigrant generations.  We analyze concatenated files from the March CPS for the nine years spanning 1994-2002 to answer the following exploratory research questions.  How does the prevalence of underemployment vary across immigrant generations, and between race/ethnic groups within immigrant generations, and can this variation be accounted for by differences in socioeconomic and demographic composition?  Are there discernible trends over time in the prevalence of underemployment among immigrant generations?  Are there particular forms of underemployment to which immigrant groups are especially susceptible?  Finally, how do first, second, and third generation youth compare in the severity and etiology of underemployment?	Leif	 Jensen	Tim	 Slack
2003	9	Immigrants and the Labor Market	Immigrant-Native Differentials in Multiple-Earner Strategies and Household Poverty	Using data from the Census 2000 Supplementary Survey, this paper addresses poverty at the household level and examines the role of secondary earners in alleviating that poverty.  Descriptive analyses assess the extent of poverty among native- and foreign-born households as well as the prevalence of secondary earners in each household.  Multivariate analyses follow Jensen's (1991) conceptualization of amelioration, that is, the ability of secondary earners (earners other than the householder) to raise household income above the poverty line.  The primary research question posed is, is the ameliorative effect of secondary earners greater in foreign-born than in native-born households?	Alexa	K. Kennedy-Puthoff
2003	9	Immigrants and the Labor Market	Self-Employment among the Portuguese in the U.S.: Can It Be Explained by Class or Ethnic Resources?	This study uses data from the 1990 census (IPUMS) and logistic regression analysis to investigate the self-employment of Portuguese men by comparing them with Italians and other Euro-Americans.  The analysis shows that the frameworks developed to explain the self-employment of ethnic groups in general are of little use in predicting the self-employment of the Portuguese in the U.S.  Overall, Portuguese men have a much lower likelihood of being self-employed than white natives of European ancestry, including Italians. Controlling for human capital and family characteristics reduces group differences to an insignificant level for U.S.-born Italians, but not for U.S.-born Portuguese or immigrants of either group.  Furthermore, living in areas of high concentration of Portuguese, with but one exception, has no effect on the self-employment of Portuguese Americans, indicating that, for the most part, they do not avail themselves of the potential Portuguese ethnic market to go into business for themselves.	Maria	 Mulcahy
2003	10	Methodological Challenges and Advances in Fertility Research	Using the Coale-McNeil Model for the Study of Postponement of First Births	Postponement of births has recently become a significant constituent of fertility change. On the macro-level, it is usually studied by following shifts in the mean age at birth, and shifts in the fertility schedule. On the micro-level, researchers frequently employ hazard models. However, changes in the hazard of a birth potentially confuse tempo and quantum effects.   This report suggests the usage of the Coale-McNeil model. Its parameters (mean, variance, and level) make possible an explicit delineation of effects of covariates on fertility tempo and quantum. These parameters are connected to recent studies of tempo and quantum due to Bongaarts and Feeney whose formula is based on changes in the mean age, and Kohler and Philipov who added the variance effect.   The model is applied for the estimation of effects of covariates. We suggest the usage of the CM model as a baseline distribution in hazard modelling.	Dimiter	 Philipov
2003	10	Methodological Challenges and Advances in Fertility Research	Tempo-Quantum and Period-Cohort Interplay in Fertility Changes in Europe. Evidence from the Czech Republic, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden	Using detailed data on period and cohort fertility in four European countries, this paper discusses various indicators of period fertility, including indicators adjusted for changes in fertility timing. Empirical analysis focuses on the comparison of cohort fertility and corresponding indicators of period fertility; particular attention is paid to the periods of intensive postponement of childbearing. Some period indicators come consistently closer to the completed cohort fertility than the total fertility rates. This pattern of differential period-cohort approximation strongly varies by birth order. Quite high level of approximation is provided by the tempo-adjusted birth probabilities of parity 1 and a combined indicator of total fertility. Two examples illustrate the use of indicators discussed in the paper: the first provides an estimation of the tempo (timing) and quantum (level) components in fertility change in the Czech Republic and the second presents projections of cohort fertility in the Czech Republic and Italy.	Tomas	 Sobotka
2003	10	Methodological Challenges and Advances in Fertility Research	Aiming at an Unobserved Moving Target: A Simple Nonlinear Model of Fertility	Ronald Lee introduced a simple nonlinear model of fertility which could capture many of the characteristic features of US fertility change such as the intensity of the baby-boom and bust compared to cohort fertility. The moving target model described period fertility as a fixed proportion of the gap between a (moving) target fertility, and current cohort fertility.  In this paper we explore an alternative model where the desired fertility level is unobserved and estimated from data. This produces an array of simple nonlinear models of US fertility: fixed proportion, age-specific fixed proportion, time-varying fixed proportion, time-varying age-specific proportion. The different models are presented and estimated using US data and the forecasting performance of the models is evaluated. These models provide an interesting and useful alternative to the simpler models based purely in historical trends, pure cohort fertility, and to the more complex models of parity-specific fertility quantum and tempo.	Jose	A. Ortega
2003	11	Longitudinal Relations between Aspects of Health and Disability	Redefining Substitution: When Does Assistive Technology Take the Place of Personal Care?	By substituting for personal care, assistive technology (AT) may reduce older disabled persons’ dependence on personal caregivers.   Yet, the nature of substitution between AT and informal or formal care is poorly understood and little attention has focused on which groups are most likely to exhibit this behavior.  In this paper we examine these tradeoffs and identify circumstances under which AT takes the place of personal care.  Drawing upon a national sample of older persons with underlying disability, we explore four different definitions of substitution. We then jointly model decisions about AT use, formal care, and informal care.   We find that in some circumstances AT use is associated with fewer hours of informal care; however AT appears to supplement formal care hours.  For two groups – unmarried persons and those with some college education – AT and formal care together seem to offset informal care hours.  Implications for the cost of caring for older disabled persons are discussed.	Emily	M. Agree	Vicki	A. Freedman	Jennifer	C. Cornman
2003	11	Longitudinal Relations between Aspects of Health and Disability	Changes in the Demographic and Economic Characteristics of SSI and DI Beneficiaries	Previous research has studied trends in program costs and changes in the number of Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and Disability Insurance (DI) beneficiaries.  However, those studies do not specifically analyze how the demographic characteristics, sources of income, and poverty status of SSI and DI beneficiaries have changed over time.  We assess these changes using administrative records from the Social Security Administration (SSA) matched to the 1984 and 1996 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).  The matched SIPP-SSA data improves the accuracy of estimates of SSI and DI beneficiaries.  We find substantial changes in the marital status, family size, home ownership, education level, family income, and labor force participation status of SSI and DI beneficiaries between 1984 and 1999.  We discuss those changes in the context of legislative and programmatic changes between 1984 and 1999 and consider the impact of demographic changes in the general population.	Teran	 Martin	Paul	 Davies
2003	11	Longitudinal Relations between Aspects of Health and Disability	Older before Your Time?: Age, Chronic Illness, and Depression in Later Life	Later life is simultaneously a time of psychological maturity and physical decline.  The effects of illness on depression are examined using a large, nationally representative, and longitudinal sample of individuals over the age of 50.  Seven illnesses and three forms of disability are found to substantially increase depressive symptoms.  Most of the effects, however, vary substantially by age.  Respondents who develop chronic but not immediately life-threatening illnesses earlier in life tend to report more depression than do those who develop them later.  Similarly, disability is more depressing when experienced at younger ages.  The implications of the results are discussed with respect to theories of illness, depression, and aging, as well as theories linking life expectancy and morbidity to the burden of depression among the elderly.	Jason	S. Schnittker
2003	12	Migration Consequences in Developing Countries	Post-Migration Fertility Hazards	Migration often is seen as operating on fertility through normative differences between origin and destination.  A competing view is that for successful migrants, fertility decreases are attributable to increased opportunity cost of children.  The two explanations are difficult to differentiate empirically, because women who move to more urbanized areas are likely to encounter both lower fertility norms and higher opportunity cost than in the origin state.  We attempt to disentangle norms and opportunity costs using a model where conception hazards are contingent on past migration.  We use DHS data from the Philippines that contains a large proportion of moves between equally urbanized areas, and so is well-suited to our task.	Eric	R. Jensen	Dennis	A. Ahlburg
2003	12	Migration Consequences in Developing Countries	Fertility and Reproductive Health in Developing Countries: What Is the Urban Dimension?	This paper reports new findings on reproductive health in the cities of developing countries, drawing from the forthcoming U.S. National Academy of Sciences report, Cities Transformed. We first set out a theory of reproductive decision-making in LDC urban environments, giving emphasis to urban socioeconomic diversity, neighborhood effects, social networks, and externalities. We then examine how relative poverty affects reproductive health. Using data from the DHS, we compare three groups: rural dwellers, the urban poor, and the urban non-poor. We find that the urban poor suffer from reproductive health disadvantages that are much like those afflicting rural populations; in some instances, the urban poor are just as disadvantaged as rural residents. Finally, we study the spatially concentrated urban poor---those who live in slums and squatter settlements---whose levels of disadvantage are found often to exceed rural levels. The paper concludes with a discussion of the urban services and program environment.	Mark	R. Montgomery
2003	12	Migration Consequences in Developing Countries	Neighborhood Effects among Migrants: Evidence from Bangkok, Thailand	This paper examines non-nonmarket interactions among migrants in an urban labor market, Bangkok, Thailand, that has experienced large-scale inflows of migrants from rural areas. We test whether or not the labor-market performance of previous migrants has externalities to that of new migrants that who moved from the same origin provinces. Though it has been increasingly argued in theoretical literature that non-nonmarket interactions of agents play important roles in activities such as job search and human capital formation, empirical evidence is still weak. Our empirical results, which control origin fixed-effects, are two-fold: (1)the relative size of the migrants population in the market positively affects employment probabilities of new migrants, and (2)the employment probabilities of previous migrants also raise those of new migrants. Finally, to quantify the non-nonmarket interactions, we simulate the magnitude of the externalities.	Sakiko	 Tanabe	Futoshi	 Yamauchi
2003	12	Migration Consequences in Developing Countries	Impacts of Rural to Urban Migration on the Health of Young Adult Migrants in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam	The rural to urban migration experience is believed to have many health-related effects on the migrants. We employ a widely used health assessment instrument, the SF-36, to attempt a multidimensional study of these potential impacts. This instrument is designed to produce indices for several key dimensions of health status in healthy populations. These health dimensions include physical functioning, role limitations due to physical health problems, bodily pain, social functioning, general mental health, role limitations due to emotional problems, vitality, energy, fatigue, and general health perceptions; all of these are key health outcomes of interest for young adult migrants.      The paper compares the health status of 77 recent migrants living in Ho Chi Minh City with 100 long term urban residents in the city. In addition to the data on health status, we analyze detailed background information on wealth, social status, social networks, occupation, reasons for moving, and remittances.	Mark	 VanLandingham
2003	13	Innovative Applications to Enhance the Use of Secondary Data	The Life Table as a Theoretical Model:Demography in a New Key	The life table is most commonly described as a technique for summarising and standardising [for age] a set of age-specific death rates. Typically the rates are for a calendar year or short period – the ‘ordinary’ life table. This identification of the life table with the ordinary life table has led to considerable confusion. I propose an alternate approach in which the life table is viewed first and foremost as a theoretical model of cohort survival.  This model can be specified or ‘realised’ in myriad ways of which the ordinary life table is only one. It can be used to measure actual experience but also to model hypothetical experience in computer experiments.  This view of life table – and of other demographic ‘techniques’ – enhances the stature of demography as a science.	Thomas	K. Burch
2003	13	Innovative Applications to Enhance the Use of Secondary Data	Census 2000 Coverage Analysis Using Demographic Methods	In this paper we expand the analysis of Census 2000 coverage of young children using demographic analysis techniques.  We look at the coverage differentials for specific race and origin groups (e.g., Blacks, Hispanics, and Non-Hispanic Whites) at the national level, for regions, and for selected States (given size thresholds).  What are the similarities or differences in coverage of Black and Hispanic children?  Do the patterns vary geographically?  Do demographic indicators for Non-Hispanic Whites show much lower net undercounts?  Are these results consistent with the differentials measured heretofore only by survey-based estimates (e.g. PES in 1990, A.C.E. in 2000)?  There are, however, certain difficulties in making demographic coverage estimates by characteristics such as race and origin.  These are elaborated in the paper so that the user is aware of the deficiencies that may be present in the estimates.	Arjun	 Adlakha	Gregory	 Robinson	Kirsten	 West	Antonio	 Bruce
2003	13	Innovative Applications to Enhance the Use of Secondary Data	Calibrating Census Microdata against Gold Standard Surveys: Kenya 1999 (Fertility) and Mexico 2000 (Female Labor Force)	The IPUMS-International project disseminates nationally representative samples of anonymized, harmonized census microdata for Colombia, France, Kenya, Mexico, Vietnam and the USA, totaling, at present, some 50 million records.  Releases for a rapidly growing list of countries are planned.  Aside from the USA, census microdata are difficult to access and are often discounted as unreliable.  This paper compares harmonized census microdata against “gold standard” surveys conducted near the census dates for the 2000 round enumerations in Kenya and Mexico.  Census microdata provide surprising insights at both the national and regional levels on the changing demographic and economic conditions in the two countries.  Strengths and weaknesses of microdata from surveys and censuses are compared.	Robert	 McCaa	Murungaru	 Kimani	Albert	 Esteve	Jose	Rodolfo  Gutierrez-Montes	Gabriela	 Vazquez-Benitez
2003	13	Innovative Applications to Enhance the Use of Secondary Data	Estimating Life Expectancy at Old Ages	Official mortality statistics often report an open-ended interval for ages older than A (e.g., A = 85). The expectation of life for that age, e(A), is estimated as the reciprocal of the death rate at ages over A, 1/m(A+), under the assumption that the population in the open interval is stationary, which cannot be justified by either theoretical or empirical reasons. On the other hand, mortality decline in industrial societies provides opportunities to model mortality at old ages, based on observation at ages younger. In this paper, we suggest use these models to estimate e(A). We show that these models produce similar estimates of e(A) that may differ remarkably from 1/m(A+), the textbook formula for e(A). We conclude that our suggestion of estimating e(A) is more realistic because it is empirically based and does not require the stationary assumption.	Nan	 Li	Zheng	 Wu
2003	14	Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking	Social Networks as Protective Factors for Adolescent Girls in Senegal	This study looks at whether social networks protect adolescent girls in Senegal, West Africa by limiting their sexual behavior and thus reducing their risk for HIV infection.  The mechanisms of interest are social control, which restricts sexual behavior, and social support, which reduces the need to seek partners to survive.  Differences in sexual behavior is one of the proposed explanations for the variation in the spread of HIV in sub-Saharan Africa.  With increasing numbers of girls becoming infected with HIV in Africa, girls who can or do postpone sex have increased chances of avoiding HIV infection.  This paper looks at migrant girls in Senegal who have risk factors for dangerous sexual behavior including their migration status, economic vulnerability and the work many of them do in marketplaces.  This paper documents their sexual behavior and seeks to determine whether and how social support and / or social control limits sexual behavior.	Kristen	A. Velyvis
2003	14	Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking	Parental Factors in Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking in Ivory Coast	Ivory Coast is the country worst affected by the HIV epidemic in West Africa and youth in this country are particularly vulnerable. This paper examines the relationships between parental factors and adolescent sexual risk-taking using logistic regression and survival analysis methods. The three parental factors examined in the paper - living in the same household as the father during childhood, perceived parental disapproval of early and premarital pregnancy, and parent-child communication about sexual abstinence are positively associated with primary sexual abstinence, reduced number of sex partners and secondary sexual abstinence. The findings clearly indicate that parental monitoring and control are critical factors and underscore the need to target parents and guardians in efforts to promote responsible sexual behaviors among adolescents. It is important to promote parent-child communication about sexual issues and empower parents and guardians to communicate effectively with their children and wards about sexual issues.	Stella	 Babalola	Basile	O. Tambashe	Claudia	 Vondrasek
2003	14	Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking	Individual-, Family-, and Neighborhood-Level Effects on Adolescent Childbearing in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: A Multilevel Analysis	This study investigates the effects of individual-, family-, and neighborhood-level characteristics on teenage childbearing among young Black women in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Using the Transitions to Adulthood Study data (2001), the study found that individual-level factors that increased the likelihood of teenage childbearing were age, early sexual debut, single-hood, lower education, secular, and not using contraceptives during first sex. Neighborhoods with comparatively higher levels of physical assets, professionals, employment rates, and education level were associated with lower rates of childbearing among girls coming from wealthier households. High levels of participation in community activities as an indicator of social capital were associated with lower levels of childbearing. However, high levels of another indicator of social capital as measured by community support and cohesion was associated with higher levels of childbearing. The individual-level factors explained the major portion of the explainable variances in childbearing. These findings have programmatic implications.	Ali	M. Karim
2003	14	Adolescent Sexual Risk-Taking	Coming of Age across America: Local Conditions and Risky Sexual Behavior of Adolescents	Despite recent reductions in teen sexual activity and the increased use of condoms and  other contraceptive methods (CDC, 2000; AGI, 1996), the statistics on teen sexual behavior  remain alarming and document that sexual behavior is a significant threat to teen health. While a substantial amount of research has been conducted that examines the consequences of neighborhood  conditions for youth behaviors, these studies predominately target urban youth. Studies of  community conditions and risky behaviors among rural youth have largely been limited to case  studies or comparisons of selected communities. In this research, we extend the analysis of local  context to include rural and urban settings, with special emphasis on local poverty, racial  composition, and rurality. We use the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Udry and  Bearman 1998) and estimate multilevel models of youth risky sexual behavior focusing on local conditions and interactions of local conditions with youth and family characteristics.	Diane	K. McLaughlin	Anastasia	R. Snyder
2003	15	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	A Unified Model of Contraceptive Use Dynamics	It is of programmatic interest to examine how family planning programs affect contraceptive use dynamics. A major problem in analyzing contraceptive use dynamics, however, is the lack of an appropriate way of summarizing use behavior that concurrently explains contraceptive adoption, discontinuation, method switching, choice and failure - all of which may be affected by the quality of family planning programs. In current practice, these interrelated episodes are treated as disjoint events and analyzed independently by different statistical methods. In this paper we introduce a unified model of contraceptive use dynamics. The model is based on the general class of log-linear rate models where events are considered as the discrete-time competing hazards. Using the data from 1996-97 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey, this paper demonstrates the usefulness of model in analyzing the effectiveness of family planning worker visits on contraceptive use dynamics and shows flexibility in incorporating multi-level contexts.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2003	15	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Contraceptive Use Dynamics: A Life Course Approach and an Application to Bangladesh	Contraceptive use varies with age and the stage of the reproductive life. To grasp this variability we have used the life course approach, adopting multistate life table (MSLT) methodology. The MSLT constitutes the dominant methodology to keep tracks of transitions into (increments) and out of (decrements) different states say, from traditional method to short-term method or vice-versa. We use calendar data from the 1993-94 and 1996-97 Bangladesh Demographic Health Surveys and construct a six-state multistate life table. The states are non-use, short-term method, long-term reversible method, traditional method, permanent method and pregnancy. The measures directly available from the MSLT are age-specific state occupancies, transition probabilities, and expected duration of method use. Questions addressed include: What is the prevalence of switching short-term method to traditional method among the teenagers? What is the life time probability of switching to permanent method? What is the expected duration of the episodes of non-use?	Mohsina	 Khatun	Frans	 Willekens
2003	15	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Trends and Determinants of Contraceptive Method Choice in Kenya	This paper uses data from the 1989, 1993 and 1998 Kenya Demographic and Health Surveys to examine trends and determinants of contraceptive method choice in Kenya. The analysis, based on two-level multinomial regression models, shows that, across years, use of modern contraceptive methods, especially the long-term methods is higher in the urban than rural areas, while the pattern is reversed for traditional methods. Use of barrier methods among unmarried women is steadily rising, but the levels remain disappointingly low, particularly in view of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Kenya. One striking result from this analysis is the dramatic rise in the use of injectables. Of particular program relevance is the notably higher levels of injectables use among rural women, women whose partners disapprove of family planning, uneducated women and those less exposed to family planning media messages, compared to their counterparts with better service accessibility and family planning information exposure.	Monica	A. Magadi	Sian	 Curtis
2003	15	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	The Determinants of Contraceptive Use-Dynamics in Kassena-Nankana District of Northern Ghana	Since 1994, the Navrongo Health Research Centre has conducted longitudinal registration of the dynamics of contraceptive use among women served by the Community Health and Family Planning Project, a factorial experiment assessing the determinants of reproductive change in a Sahelian population of northern Ghana. The CHFP examines the fertility impact of two experimental arms of activities: i) marshalling traditional social institutions for community leadership and participation in program operations; and ii) reorienting the Ministry of Health clinical care system to community-based services. Four cells are implied, since arms are launched independently, jointly, and not at all. This paper uses discrete-time hazard regression to examine the impact of experimental exposure on contraceptive use dynamics, controlling for other covariate effects.  Results suggest that contrasting continuity of use explains observed cell differences in program fertility impact.  Furthermore, use of contraception is fragile in all cells and minor disruptions in services produce pronounced disjunctures.	John	E. Williams	Elizabeth	F. Jackson	Isaac	 Akumah	James	F. Phillips
2003	16	Communicating Results to Decision-Oriented Audiences: Practical Approaches and Lessons Learned	One Page, Three Bullets, and So what?		Martha	F. Riche
2003	16	Communicating Results to Decision-Oriented Audiences: Practical Approaches and Lessons Learned	Why Didn't You Write What I Thought I Said? Demographers and the Media		John	 Haaga
2003	16	Communicating Results to Decision-Oriented Audiences: Practical Approaches and Lessons Learned	Blindsided by Politics--An Apolitical Demographer's View of the Culture Wars		Linda	 Waite
2003	16	Communicating Results to Decision-Oriented Audiences: Practical Approaches and Lessons Learned	You Only Have Two Minutes		Samia	 El-Badry
2003	16	Communicating Results to Decision-Oriented Audiences: Practical Approaches and Lessons Learned	Observations on the Media Marketplace for Garbled Demography		Michael	S. Teitelbaum
2003	17	Residential Segregation	Residential Segregation in the Multiracial United States	Most investigations of racial residential segregation study the segregation of whites from African Americans. They report modest declines in black-white segregation in the 1980s and 1990s. The Asian and Hispanic populations of metropolitan America are growing more rapidly than the black and non-Hispanic white populations. Such population growth requires that we pay greater attention to the segregation of these groups.	We analyze the segregation of Asians and Hispanics from each other and from blacks and whites using information from Census 2000.  Data are examined for the nation’s 331 metropolises and 241 cities of 100,000 or more persons. The correlates of residential segregation are examined with special attention paid to population growth during the 1990s.  Additionally, we analyze segregation of the three largest multiple races reported in Census 2000; namely those who identified with both black and white, both Asian and white, and both American Indian and white.	Pamela	R. Bennett
2003	17	Residential Segregation	City-Suburb Differences in Multiethnic Residence and Status		Susan	K. Wierzbicki	Golnaz	 Komaie
2003	17	Residential Segregation	Mapping Social Distance: Ethnic Residential Segregation in a Multiethnic Metro	The increasing diversity of immigrant-receiving countries calls for measures that extend beyond the conventional two-group approach. Our objective in this study is to represent simultaneously the relative social distance occupied by a wide array of ethnic groups. We use census tract tabulations for the Toronto CMA in 1996 and a multidimensional scaling map constructed from the 1,225 pairwise entropy statistics of the largest 50 ethnic groups. We find that African/Caribbean groups and Blacks were highly clustered and shared common patterns of segregation with other groups. There is also evidence of clustering along other regional lines. This study highlights the value of looking beyond broad racial or pan-ethnic classifications in understanding ethnic congregation and residential segregation patterns. Our results point to the value of new methods to provide a more conceptually meaningful way to understand social distance between groups.	Michael	J. White	Jennifer	E. Glick	Ann	 Kim
2003	17	Residential Segregation	Distinguishing the Levels and Dimensions of U.S. Metropolitan Segregation, 1960-2000	We assess trends in residential segregation in the United States from 1960 to 2000 along several dimensions of ancestry, class, and life cycle, presenting a new method for attributing segregation to nested geographical levels. Segregation for metropolitan America is measured using the Theil index which is additively decomposed into contributions of regional, metropolitan, center city-suburban, place, and tract segregation. This distinguishes whether groups live apart because members cluster in different neighborhoods, communities, metropolitan areas, or regions. Segregation of blacks decreased substantially after 1960 largely because neighborhoods integrated, but the foreign-born became more segregated largely because they concentrated in particular metropolitan areas. Class segregation increased after 1970, mainly because the affluent increasingly clustered in specific metropolitan areas and specific municipalities within metropolitan areas. The unmarried increasingly congregated in center cities. The main purpose of this paper is to describe and illustrate this multi-level approach to studying segregation.  (Full text at http://ucdata.berkeley.edu/rsfcensus/wp.html)	Claude	S. Fischer	Gretchen	 Stockmayer	Jon	 Stiles	Michael	 Hout
2003	18	Gender-Based Violence	Women's Health at the Nexus of Poverty and Domestic Violence: Evidence from the Developing World	In this paper, we examine the different linkages that exist between household poverty/wealth status and domestic violence using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Poverty/wealth status of households is measured using an asset-based wealth index that has been shown to be robust. Using the data for a selected number of countries, we analyze both the effect of poverty/wealth on violence and of violence on poverty/wealth within a comparative framework. In addition, we examine selected health outcomes for women at the poverty/violence nexus.	Sunita	 Kishor	Kiersten	 Johnson
2003	18	Gender-Based Violence	Couple Attributes and Attitudes and Intimate Partner Violence in Vietnam	Most research on gender-based violence concentrates on individual-level characteristics.  We recognize that conflict takes place between intimates, however, and use a couple-centered analysis that focuses on the relative attributes and attitudes of spouses as predictors of intimate partner violence.  Our data come from a survey administered to husbands and wives in Vietnam.  Results show that couple attributes are significantly related to violence, where husbands with lower relative status are more likely to have ever abused.  Regarding attitudes, findings indicate that husband attitudes matter the most for the prevalence of violence, independently and in comparison to wives’ attitudes.  Where traditional gender norms are adhered to by men, violence is present—-but more so in couples where men are matched with wives who display equitable attitudes.  We conclude that men threatened by wives’ positions respond with a “backlash” of violence to re-establish their dominant position.	Nancy	 Luke	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Tran	Hung  Minh	Tu	Anh  Hoang	Le	Thuy  Duong
2003	18	Gender-Based Violence	Factors Affecting Repeated Incidents of Intimate Partner Violence by Race and Ethnicity	Relatively little research has explored the ways womens actions following an incident of intimate partner violence relate to their chances of experiencing subsequent assaults. This study takes a step toward filling the gap by examining how help-seeking behavior and employment consequences relate to the likelihood that a victim experiences a future assault by her partner. We are particularly interested in how these responses and effects vary for women of different racial and ethnic origins. We estimate models to evaluate the relationships between immediate help-seeking behaviors, later employment consequences, and the likelihood of repeated intimate partner violence using longitudinally linked National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) data. By recognizing competing predictions (exposure reduction versus retaliation) we plan to determine if women who take actions to reduce their exposure to violence are more or less likely than other victims of intimate partner violence to experience a subsequent incident.	Marybeth	J. Mattingly	Laura	 Dugan
2003	18	Gender-Based Violence	Violence in Intimate Relationships as Women Transition from Welfare to Work	High rates of domestic violence among low-income women are of concern to policy makers, researchers, and advocates as women move from welfare to work in the wake of welfare reform.  This study uses longitudinal data from a low-income sample of women (N=2,128) to examine associations between welfare and employment transitions and domestic violence.  Results suggest that women who remain on welfare are subject to higher rates of abuse overtime, while those who transition off welfare experience reductions in nearly all measures of domestic violence.  Although domestic violence was not associated with women's entry into the paid labor force, increasing rates of domestic violence were linked to women's ability to maintain stable paid employment.  The implications of these analyses for policy and practice are discussed in light of welfare reauthorization.	Elizabeth	 Votruba-Drzal	Brenda	 Lohman	Lindsay	 Chase-Lansdale
2003	19	Social Forces Shaping Very Low Fertility	An Analysis of Fertility Differentials by Religion in Kerala State: A Test of Interaction Hypotheses	In Kerala fertility among Muslims is higher and contraceptive prevalence lower than Hindus and Christians even after controlling for key socio-economic and demographic variables. However, differentials may persist at each level of socio-economic characteristics.  The paper examines the interaction effects using National Family Health Survey 1 data in Kerala state.     The analysis found Hindu-Muslim fertility differences at low level of education do not persist at higher levels. For contraceptive use wider gaps at middle level of education and at medium level of standard of living than at lower and higher levels are found. This indicates that couples at different socio-economic settings make different decisions in spite of belonging to the same religion. The fact that at higher levels of socio-economic status fertility of Muslims is low and not much different than the fertility of other religions suggests that the observed fertility gap between Hindus/Christians and Muslims is a passing phenomenon.	Dr.	Manoj  Alagarajan
2003	19	Social Forces Shaping Very Low Fertility	Social Influence on Childbearing Behavior in a Low Fertility Context	How do social relationships with family and peers affect couples' fertility behavior? Besides providing monetary and non-monetary support, social relations with family members and friends are a relevant source of information about the advantages and disadvantages of reproductive choices. Moreover, they shape norms on “appropriate” behaviors and they embed the formation and evolution of individual attitudes and preferences. We conducted 54 in-depth interviews with women resident in the northern region of Lombardy (Italy). The interviews provide detailed information about women’s network of important others, their fertility and family choices, and about their conceptions of motherhood and gender roles. We have evidence to support the hypothesis that a synchronization of events related to family formation may occur within a dense network of peers. We discuss the consequence of this 'cascade effect' in childbearing timing at the population level. Finally, we argue for investing in the study of social networks in order to better understand fertility dynamics.	Laura	 Bernardi
2003	19	Social Forces Shaping Very Low Fertility	Do Cross-National Differences in the Costs of Children Influence Fertility Behavior?	The compatibility of working and caring for children depends on  (1) flexibility in work schedules, including the possibility of extended leaves of absence to have and care for children, (2) the availability, affordability, and quality of child care, (3) relatively egalitarian gender roles that provide women with a helpmate for child care and housework, (4) economic security provided by own and partner’s labor earnings, supplemented by public policies that facilitate access to and the affordability of education, health care, housing, and secure employment, and (5) the stability of marriages or cohabitations, and the economic effects of separation on the women’s standard of living. Cross-national differences in these factors and their possible impacts on fertility patterns are illustrated with recent data from the US and Western Germany.	Thomas	 DiPrete	S.	Philip  Morgan	Henriette	 Engelhardt	Hana	 Pacalova
2003	19	Social Forces Shaping Very Low Fertility	Impact of Labor-Force Attachment on Childbearing in Finland in the 1990s	Some recent studies have shown that women's labor-force attachment and earnings are positively related with childbearing in the context of a parental-leave system with high level of income replacement. In Finland, public provisions that support childbearing are also relatively generous, but the existing macro-level observations do not suggest such a relationship. This paper investigates the relationship between women's labor-market attachment and childbearing in Finland in 1988-2000 using individual-level data. It also examines the role of this relationship in the fact that fertility level in Finland remained relatively stable throughout the 1990s when the country went through sharply contrasting stages of the business cycle. The analysis is based on a ten-percent sample of the longitudinal register database for fertility studies from Statistics Finland. Individual-level information on the woman's main activity (working, unemployed, studying), level of education and earned income are used as explanatory variables in hazard regression models of childbearing risk.	Andres	 Vikat
2003	20	Health Status and Mortality over the Life Course in Developing Countries	China: Economic Development and Mortality Decline	This paper investigates the driving forces behind the trends and changes in mortality at different ages in China since the mid-1970s.  The econometric results show that economic growth and increased per capita consumption are of key importance in reducing mortality in childhood and especially adulthood, and in raising overall life expectancy.  Declining illiteracy is also significant for reducing child mortality and increasing expectation of life.  The stock of health care personnel particularly affects child mortality.  Fiscal decentralization and a declining share of government expenditure devoted to health and education in some places have tended to slow down adult and overall survival gains there.  The authors emphasize that China’s current policy of promoting the economic development of poorer and disadvantaged areas is also good policy for reducing the higher mortality in these regions.  This paper discusses other policies likely to be effective for further increasing survival chances in China today.	Judith	 Banister	Xiaobo	 Zhang
2003	20	Health Status and Mortality over the Life Course in Developing Countries	A Microsimulation Study of the Effects of Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage on Lifetime Risks of HIV/AIDS in Rural Malawi	HIV/AIDS prevalence is generally observed to be higher among the divorced, separated or widowed than among either the single or the currently married.  In rural Malawi, divorce is coming to be seen as a measure of protection against infection with HIV from a spouse who is believed to be unfaithful.  The probability of divorce has been high and may rise yet higher in response to the epidemic.  We use a microsimulation model incorporating behavioural input parameters from the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project to investigate the following specific questions:  1.	What are the implications for the lifetime probability of infection with HIV of high rates of marital dissolution over the life course?  2.	What are the implications for the lifetime probability of infection of periods between marriages?  3.	What are the implications for the lifetime probability of infection of trade-offs between fidelity in a sero-discordant marriage and divorce?	Michael	D. Bracher	Gigi	 Santow
2003	20	Health Status and Mortality over the Life Course in Developing Countries	Insurance and Other Determinants of Elderly Longevity in a Costa Rican Panel	We followed 900 Costa Ricans aged 60+ in Coronado, a community at the outskirts of the capital city, from 1984 to 2001.  This panel was drawn from the 1984 census. We made follow-up visits to the households in 1985 and 1986, tracked deaths in the national death registry database, and double-checked survival status in the voting registry in 1990 and 2002.  We also contacted all the survivors by phone and household visits in 2002.  Of the 876 individuals in the panel, 67% died by December 2001.  We used Kaplan-Meier curves, life tables, and Cox regression to analyze the panel?s survival. Mortality resulted slightly higher than the Costa Rican average and similar to the US.  Survival was substantially lower among not married men and individuals with no full autonomy at the beginning of the study.  The effect of socio-economic status is weak.  Insurance effects seem to be confounded by selection biases.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	William	H. Dow	Adriana	 Lacle
2003	20	Health Status and Mortality over the Life Course in Developing Countries	Determinants of Old-Age Mortality in Taiwan, 1989 to 1999	Relationships among socio-demographic characteristics, general assessments of health, and old-age mortality have been well established in richer countries.  There is also an increasing focus on early-life experiences and late-life health. This paper tests these associations using a nationally representative survey from Taiwan of the 60 and over population conducted in 1989, 1993, 1996, and 1999.  The study also examines the influence of Taiwan's National Health Insurance Program, instituted in 1995, on old-age mortality and whether this investment in health care benefits elders consistently.  Mortality is modeled using Weibull regression.  Multiple survey waves are employed to construct time-varying covariates.  Education effects are found to diminish after the introduction of health indicators.  Functional and global assessments of health have stronger associations with mortality that do reports of chronic conditions such as cardiovascular disease.  Older adults in the poorest of health are the ones whose mortality improved the most after 1995.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Linda	G. Martin	Hui-Sheng	 Lin
2003	20	Health Status and Mortality over the Life Course in Developing Countries	Education, Gender, and Functional Transitions Among Older Indonesians	Using data on Indonesian elderly from two waves of the Indonesian Family Life Survey, this study first examines the effects of educational attainment on functional health transitions and mortality, then investigates possible gender differences in these effects.  Past studies showing a positive association between education and old-age health are plentiful, but few are based on data from developing countries.  My results show that those who have higher education and are functionally healthy at the time of first interview (1993) are less likely to have a limitation or to be deceased at follow-up (1997).  Education, however, has little effect among those who are functionally limited at the time of first interview.  Tests for gender interactions show that education reduces the risk of functional limitation among men, but the effect is smaller among women.  This gender specific relationship may be partly explained by widely documented differences in social roles and expectations.	Toshiko	 Kaneda
2003	21	Adolescent Fertility	Caring Men: Husbands' Involvement in the Maternal Care of Their Adolescent Wives in Rural India	Whereas much literature describes men’s involvement in family planning among adults, this paper examines men’s involvement in the maternal care among young couples in Maharashtra, India.  Data come from a 2001 quantitative survey of 972 couples and 207 in-depth interviews conducted in 1996-1998.  	Through qualitative and quantitative analysis, we explore men’s knowledge, sense of responsibility, and actual participation in the prenatal, delivery, and post-natal care of their young wives, including characteristics associated with participation.  Participation is analyzed separately for routine care and treatment of complications.  Qualitative data describe the family structures and cultural context surrounding health-seeking.  	Our analysis shows most husbands are knowledgeable about pregnancy-associated care; believe that problems during this period should be treated; and feel responsible for paying for care or accompanying their wives to clinics.  Nonetheless, husbands tend to not accompany their wives for routine care (but do for treating complications), though they do pay for it.	Alka	 Barua	Rohini	P. Pande	Sunayana	 Walia	Kerry	 MacQuarrie
2003	21	Adolescent Fertility	Transitions into Sex, Parenthood and Unions among Adolescents and Young Adults in South Africa	The purpose of this paper is to describe the timing, density and sequencing of transitions for adolescent and young adult females and males in South Africa into sexual activity, pregnancy, parenting, unions, and school leaving.  Analyses draw on detailed life history calendar data from a representative sample in 2002 of 4,359 14 to 22 year olds living in Cape Town, South Africa, a city in the third largest metropolitan area of South Africa.  We use survival analysis techniques to measure median age at first sex, first pregnancy, first birth and first union for males and females.  Data from the 1998 South African Demographic and Health Survey are used to compare patterns to young adults in South Africa overall.  We then describe the density, sequencing and prevalence of “normative” transition sequences for young adults in Cape Town, South Africa.	Ann	E. Biddlecom	Anne	 Bakilana
2003	21	Adolescent Fertility	Determinants of Abortion among Young Women in Edo State, Nigeria	In 2002, a household survey of 10-24 year olds in Edo State, Nigeria registered high levels of abortion.  This survey included pregnancy histories for all women interviewed as well as a rich set of questions about socio-economic status and sexual attitudes and behaviors.  Of 358 pregnancies reported in the survey, almost 50% were terminated.      The determinants of abortion among female respondents will be identified using a two-stage model.  The first stage will  model the probability of pregnancy and the second will be  a logistic regression model that predicts abortion for those women who do become pregnant.       Important covariates include age, ethnicity, residence, access to health services, ever use of contraception, material possessions, marital status, in-school status and level of completed education for those out of school, whether the pregnancy was planned or not planned, frequency of sex and attitudes toward sex including ever receipt of gifts or money for sex.	Nancy	 Murray	William	 Winfrey	Scott	 Moreland	Friday	 Okonofua	Jerome	 Mafeni	Leanne	 Dougherty	Minki	 Chatterji
2003	21	Adolescent Fertility	Early Teenage Pregnancy among Adolescents in South Nyanza, Kenya	This paper analyses data from a recent survey of adolescents in Kenya to examine the determinants and consequences of early teenage pregnancy, as well as experiences with such pregnancies. The data were obtained from individual adolescent and community surveys involving  1247 adolescents aged 12-19 years in 32 communities in the South Nyanza region of Kenya. This is complemented with qualitative information from in-depth interviews involving adolescents who had experienced very early pregnancies before age 16 years. The analysis of the determinants applies a multilevel logistic regression model and examines potential determinants relating to household socio-economic factors, and adolescent’s background characteristics and gender relations /autonomy, as well as sexual relations and reproductive health experiences.  In addition, the effect of contextual community factors, including availability and accessibility of reproductive health services within the communities is explored.	Monica	A. Magadi	David	 Omollo	Alfred	O. Agwanda
2003	22	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth	The Longitudinal Effects of Mother and Father Absence on Adolescent School Engagement	This paper uses a life course framework to examine the influence of family structure throughout childhood on three measures of adolescent school achievement (grades, college expectations, and being suspended or expelled). I use measures of family structure status, duration of exposure to parental figures, and changes in parental roles to model the family structure trajectory. I also investigate whether mother absence or father absence is more detrimental to children’s education. I find that adolescents living without biological mothers are most disadvantaged, but that stepmothers can compensate for the negative consequences of mother loss on adolescent grades. In addition, the time lived without the biological mother and the number of mother changes explain much of the disadvantages faced by adolescents living in households without biological mothers.	Holly	E. Heard
2003	22	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth	Changing Family Structure, Maternal-Adolescent Relationships and Indicators of Distress among Teenage Boys and Girls	We use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to investigate the short term effects of changing family structure on adolescents’ emotional distress, alcohol use, and drug use.  We also assess whether or not maternal-adolescent relationships can explain these relationships.  Our findings suggest that changes in parents’ marital status are related to our three measures of adolescent distress, but the types of changes that affect our outcomes vary by gender.  In addition, while maternal-adolescent relationships have an independent effect on emotional distress, alcohol use, and drug use, they do not appear to mediate or moderate the effects of changing family structure.	Amy	G. Langenkamp	Michelle	L. Frisco
2003	22	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth	Family Structure, Social Support, and Early Child Development among Puerto Rican Children in the United States	The structural arrangements of families have been repeatedly demonstrated to influence the developmental outcomes of children as they age.  However, supportive social relationships can be an important source of social capital, and may be particularly important for child development among minority women in the United States.  Using data from the Puerto Rican Maternal and Infant Health Study, this paper examines how the relationship between early child development and maternal social support varies by family structure.  Maternal support received has important protective effects for development among young children of married parents, and operates both directly and indirectly by buffering the negative effects of maternal stress.  Social support is also important for the children of cohabiting parents, but operates solely by buffering the negative effects of financial stress.  However, for children born to single mothers, measures of maternal social support have no significant effect on development.	Bridget	K. Gorman
2003	22	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth	The Effect of Family Structure and Instability on Mothering Practices	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families Study to explain the effect of family structure and instability on mothering behaviors in the child’s first year of life. Often family structure and change are confounded in cross sectional analysis.  These data provide full life histories of a cohort of children.  To understand the effect of family structure, I compare the mothering behaviors of mothers in stable married, cohabiting, and visiting relationships, as well as mothers with no relationship with the child's father.  To understand the effect of instability, I compare the mothering behaviors of mothers that experience a change in relationship status.  The results suggest that after controlling for the mother's characteristics, there are few differences in mothering behaviors across family structures, and instability has little effect on mothers' behaviors with infants.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2003	23	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in the United States	Single-Parent Families and Their Impact on Children: Changing Attitudes in the U.S., 1900-1998	Survey data indicate that Americans became increasingly accepting of divorce and out-of-wedlock childbearing after 1960.  But little is known about these attitudes prior to 1960 or about beliefs regarding the impact of divorce and out-of-wedlock childbearing on children, which are likely to influence general perceptions of the acceptability of single-parent families. I use primary data I collected to explore changing views of single-parent families and their impact on children between 1900 and 1998. Rather than rely on limited attitudinal survey data, I draw a stratified random sample of articles about single-parent families published in popular American magazines and perform a content analysis. I use logistic and multinomial regression to explore change over time in depictions of the acceptability of single-parent families, the impact of single-parent families on children, and the ways single-parent families harm children. I also consider how the sex and occupation of the articles' authors affect these depictions.	Margaret	 Usdansky
2003	23	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in the United States	Do Attitudes Predict Union Type? Does Union Type Change Attitudes?	It has been established that individuals who have cohabited have significantly different attitudes than non-cohabitors, but it is unknown whether their attitudes were different at the start of the union or if (and to what extent) their attitudes changed during the course of the relationship.  Using waves 1 & 2 of the National Survey of Families & Households, this paper tests whether attitudes towards marriage, family values, and gender roles influence union formation and union type.  Taking advantage of the longitudinal nature of the data, this paper also tests whether union type influences attitudes.  Preliminary results suggest that attitudes significantly influence the likelihood of marriage but have no effect on cohabitation. Individuals with conservative attitudes are more likely to marry than remain single or cohabit.   Additionally, experiencing a cohabitation, nonmarital birth, or divorce appears to encourage more liberal attitudes over time, while a marriage and/or marital birth encourage increased traditionalism.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2003	23	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in the United States	Then Comes Marriage? Religion, Race, and Marriage in Urban America	The last three decades have witnessed a dramatic “retreat from marriage” in the United States, marked by high rates of nonmarital births, nonmarriage among young adults, and divorce. This study focuses on the role that religious institutions, and the cultural norms and behaviors they promote, play in resisting this retreat among new parents in urban America. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we find that religious attendance is strongly associated with being married at the birth of a child among urban mothers, and that urban mothers who have a nonmarital birth are significantly more likely to marry within a year of that birth if they attend church regularly. Moreover, the effects of religious attendance are particularly strong for African American women. These religious effects are mediated in part by the relationship-related beliefs (e.g., sanctity of marriage) and behaviors (e.g., supportiveness to partner) promoted by churches.	W.	Bradford  Wilcox	Nicholas	H. Wolfinger
2003	23	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in the United States	Creating Intimate Equity and Creating Gender Discord: The Early Years of Covenant and Standard Marriages	We present original results from an ongoing panel study of a marriage cohort of Louisiana couples married in 1999(husbands and wives both interviewed in two waves, at 4-6 months after marriage, and at 2 years after marriage). The results for this paper rely on individuals and spouses who completed both waves of interviews. Approximately half are in Covenant Marriages (225 couples, n=450) and half are in Standard Marriages (201 couples, n=402).  The goal of the paper is to examine the trajectories of early marriages and compare the two types of couples.     The results reveal clearly that individuals in Covenant Marriages are moving to a resolution of most typical gender-related problems in American marriages. Those in Standard marriages are much less likely to be moving in the same direction. More generally, Covenant couples appear to be creating more equitable marriages than those in Standard marriages.	Steven	 Nock	Laura	 Sanchez	James	D. Wright
2003	24	Fertility, Reproductive Health, and Public Policy in Developed Countries	Did Welfare Reform Increase Abortion?	In order to assess the effects of national welfare reform on abortion, we collected micro data on abortion from at least 21 states.  These data allow us to compare abortion rates in the periods prior to and following welfare reform among women at high-risk and at low-risk of welfare receipt.  In the states for which we have data, abortion rates among some “high-risk” groups (such as less-educated, single, black women) have increase by 50 percent or more in the period following welfare reform.  There was little change in abortion rates for “low-risk” (i.e., more advantaged) groups such as married women and women with a college education.  Although these results are preliminary and we will be adding data, the evidence we have to date suggests that national welfare reform may have been associated with substantial increases in abortion rates.	Thedore	 Joyce	Robert	 Kaestner	Sanders	 Korenman
2003	24	Fertility, Reproductive Health, and Public Policy in Developed Countries	The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility Expansions on Fertility	Pregnant women and children's eligibility for Medicaid was dramatically expanded during the 1980s and early 1990s with the goal of increasing women's use of prenatal care and children's access to medical care. By lowering the costs of prenatal care, delivery, and child health care, the Medicaid expansions may have increased women's fertility or changed the timing of births. This study uses natality data from 1981 to 1996 and 1995 Current Population Survey data to examine the effect of changes in states' eligibility thresholds for Medicaid on fertility behavior. We use both panel data techniques with state-level data and duration models with individual-level data. Our results suggest that the Medicaid expansions raised birth rates among some groups. They also show the importance of considering exposure by different cohorts to reform in assessing the impact of reforms on birth spacing.	Marianne	 Bitler	Madeline	 Zavodny
2003	24	Fertility, Reproductive Health, and Public Policy in Developed Countries	Access to Family Planning Services in the Era of Welfare Reform – Impact of the California Program	This paper examines access to publicly funded family planning services in California during and after the implementation of welfare reform. As Medi-Cal rolls declined in response to the 1996 Personal Work and Responsibility Act, there were dramatic increases in enrollment in a state-funded program that provided family planning services to low-income women and men who have no coverage for these services. The California family planning program, the Family Planning, Access, Care and Treatment (Family PACT) Program, now serves over 1.25 million per year. This paper presents new estimates based on recent data from the 2000 census and California-specific information on the risk of an unintended pregnancy from the California Women’s Health Survey to characterize the population in need of publicly funded services. We examine unmet need for contraceptive services by ethnic group, age and county in an era of changing family planning service availability for low-income women in California.	Diana	L. Greene	Julia	 Bley	John	 Mikanda	Philip	 Darney	Felicia	 Stewart
2003	25	The Influence of Social Institutions on Health: Family, Religion, and Community	Health and Neighborhood Context: The Reciprocal Relationship between Social Organization and Aggregate Health Status	Features of neighborhood context are increasingly recognized as independent determinants of health and well-being for urban residents.  Studies are now emerging that point to the unique effects of neighborhood measures of social organization on health.  To date, no research has simultaneously examined the inverse causal process-i.e., the effect of aggregate neighborhood health status on neighborhood social organization. We use the 1990 Decennial Census, the 1994-95 Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods-Community Survey, and the 1991-2000 Metropolitan Chicago Information Center Metro Survey to explore the reciprocal association between neighborhood context and health (N=3,272). We use multilevel latent variable models to simultaneously examine the relationships among 1990 neighborhood structural characteristics, 1991-94 neighborhood health status, 1995 neighborhood social organization, and 1995-99 neighborhood health status.  Results indicate that neighborhood health status and social organization are reciprocally related.  This investigation will add to our knowledge of the dynamic relationship between neighborhood context and health.	Kathleen	A. Cagney	Christopher	 Browning
2003	25	The Influence of Social Institutions on Health: Family, Religion, and Community	Family, School, and Religious Capital Effects on Adolescent Health Behaviors: Substitutes or Complements?	Research indicates that family, religion, and school variables independently affect adolescent health behaviors.  Yet research has not developed an analytic framework for exploring how these variables may interact to affect specific risk behaviors.  We propose that certain family, religion, and school variables may serve as substitute or complementary forms of capital in equations designed to predict adolescent risk behaviors. Using data from the 1994-1995 wave of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Heath (AdHealth), we find that certain school conditions interact with family mechanisms to enhance or mitigate the risk of drug use, violent behaviors, and sexual behaviors.  A preliminary set of multilevel models shows that high quality schools substitute for detrimental family relationships in decreasing the risk of violent behaviors.  The final models explore these effects by focusing on other risk behaviors and by investigating the role of religious practices as potential substitutes or complements for family situations.	John	P. Hoffmann	Mikaela	 Dufur	Alice	 Lapray
2003	25	The Influence of Social Institutions on Health: Family, Religion, and Community	Trajectories of Health in Later Midlife: The Impact of Family and Household	Significant heterogeneity exists in the occurrence, timing, and direction of health transitions in later life. In previous research, we identified a short term relationship between household structure and health among persons in midlife.  In this paper, we examine the impact of household and family on health trajectories over an eight year period.  Our analysis is organized around three questions.  First, what is the patterning of health transitions and health trajectories over the eight year period?  Second, how is household structure related to the health trajectories we observe? Third, what is the influence of changes in household structure on health trajectories?  We base our analysis on data from Waves 1 to 4 of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS).  We use Markov chain regression models to analyze the health transitions and trajectories in the HRS.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes	Linda	 Waite
2003	25	The Influence of Social Institutions on Health: Family, Religion, and Community	Neighborhood and Family Effects on Children’s Health in Los Angeles	This paper explores the effects of neighborhood and family factors on child health in one of the largest urban areas in the United States, Los Angeles County.  We use data from L.A.FANS, a new representative survey of neighborhoods and households in Los Angeles County, to examine the association of neighborhood and family characteristics with child health status, access to and use of health care services, and health-related behaviors.  This paper seeks to answer several questions.  First, how are family background factors such immigrant status, ethnicity, and social class related to child health outcomes?  Second, are there neighborhood level differences in health outcomes by socioeconomic status, once individual differences are held constant?  Third, what neighborhood-level characteristics appear to mediate the relationship between individual social characteristics and health outcomes?	Narayan	 Sastry
2003	26	On the Verge of Retirement: Projecting Health and Economic Disparities of the Baby Boom Cohort	Understanding Cohort Differences in the Expected Retirement Income of Future Retirees	We use the Social Security Administration’s Modeling Income in the Near Term (MINT3) data system to compare projections of retirement income and measures of economic well-being for retirees in the baby boom cohort with outcomes for earlier birth cohorts.  We find that most retirees in the baby boom cohort will have higher incomes and wealth than retirees in earlier birth cohorts.  However, several population subgroups are expected to be proportionally worse off in the baby boom cohort – including those with multiple marriages, those without high school degrees, certain groups of working women, and those delaying the start of Social Security benefits.  Our analysis identifies differences across birth cohorts in educational attainment, marriage patterns, earnings and work histories, and pension receipt that may contribute to these findings.	Barbara	A. Butrica	Howard	 Iams	Karen	E. Smith
2003	26	On the Verge of Retirement: Projecting Health and Economic Disparities of the Baby Boom Cohort	Projecting the Health Behaviors & Lifestyle-Related Chronic Conditions of the American Baby Boom: A Lifecourse Perspective	This project utilizes a theoretical framework from the life course paradigm to explore the combined role of historical, structural, and individual-level factors on a variety of midlife health behaviors (e.g., diet and exercise) and lifestyle-related health conditions (e.g., obesity and diabetes).  With a particular emphasis on the American baby boom generation (born 1946-1964), analyses ponder how the boomers' experience of late-life health will be different from that of previous generations (inter-cohort differences) and whether particular subgroups within the baby boom cohort will be more likely to adopt high-risk health behaviors (intra-cohort differences).  Findings offer considerable insight into the health-related needs and preferences of the American baby boom generation, while theoretical discussions illustrate the usefulness of the life course model to organize the multitude of factors associated with midlife health behaviors.	Rebecca	 Utz
2003	26	On the Verge of Retirement: Projecting Health and Economic Disparities of the Baby Boom Cohort	Intergenerational Comparison of Retirement Income	Possible reductions in future Social Security benefits, the lack of widespread pension coverage, and low levels of personal saving all have implications for the amount of retirement income current workers can expect to receive. In this paper, we describe how demographic, economic and legal changes might affect the total amount of expected retirement income and the relative contributions of Social Security, pensions, and personal savings. We use the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances to compare the levels of personal savings and debt of workers in the Baby Boom and in Generation X with those of current retirees at similar ages. We use simulation models to estimate the levels of retirement income that Baby Boom and Generation X workers can expect to receive from private pensions and Social Security.  Our results should be of interest to policymakers concerned about the possibility of inadequate retirement income for current workers.	Barbara	 Smith	Michael	J. Collins	Brendan	 Cushing-Daniels	Janice	L. Peterson	Alicia	P. Cackley	Grant	 Mallie
2003	26	On the Verge of Retirement: Projecting Health and Economic Disparities of the Baby Boom Cohort	Projected Pension Income: What’s in Store for the Baby Boom Cohort? Equality or Disparity	This study sheds light on the magnitude and nature of the disparities in pension participation and income of the Baby Boomers once those non-disabled individuals reach age 62.  Using data from the Modeling Income in the Near Term (MINT) model, this study analyzes the progression of pension participation and pension income within the Baby Boom cohort.  The study summarizes how pension participation and income is highly correlated with gender, race, education, and earnings level.  Despite an overall increase in projected pension participation and income, women, minorities, individuals with lower education, and individuals with low income are less likely to participate in a pension plan and receive less income from a pension compared to their counterparts.  Nonetheless, pension income will continue to be an important source of income for future retirees.	James	H. Moore
2003	27	Health and Mortality in the Former Soviet Union and Central Europe	Causes of Death in Russia : Assessing Trends since the 50s	Many studies are available on  recent mortality trends in Russia but those which deal with long-term trends are scarce. The recent fluctuations hide the fundamental health deterioration which has occurred since the mid-60s. To better understand the present situation, it is very important to discuss the reversal of the cause-of-death trends which occurred at this turning point. In the frame of a collaborative project between CDHE (Moscow) and INED (Paris), it was possible to access unpublished data from Goskomstat’s archives for the years since 1956. After a patient work of reconstruction, the analysis of continuous series of deaths by cause, free from disruptions due to changes in Classification, can now be performed. It appears that the reversal in mortality trends is more a matter of changing cause-of-death weights than specific reversal of cause-of-death trends.	France	 Meslé	Jacques	 Vallin	Véronique	 Hertrich	Evgueni	 Andreev	Vladimir	 Shkolnikov
2003	27	Health and Mortality in the Former Soviet Union and Central Europe	Recent Mortality Trends in Russia: Differences between Younger and Older Generations	This paper analyzes the most recent trends of mortality in Russia across ages, genders and regions using official statistical data for 1991-2001.  During the last decade Russia experienced two mortality crises in 1992 and 1998. Life expectancy in Russia continues to decline after 1998.  Mortality data for 2001 show opposite tendencies for younger and older age groups: mortality of young adults (20-30 years old) tends to decline while mortality among middle-aged and older adults continues to grow after 1998. Our findings suggest that the recent mortality trends in Russia demonstrate increasing level of violence and stress in the society.  However, many negative tendencies can be reversed in the case of more attention to these largely avoidable causes from the society.  This study was supported in part by the grant 98-52206 from the MacArthur Foundation.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Victoria	G. Semyonova	Galina	N. Evdokushkina	Leonid	A. Gavrilov	Alla	E. Ivanova
2003	27	Health and Mortality in the Former Soviet Union and Central Europe	East and West German Mortality before and after Reunification - New Insights from the German Life Expectancy Survey	While mortality conditions in divided Germany have been almost identical in the first 20 years after World War II, the improvements in survivorship rates in the GDR fell back more and more rapidly since 1960.  This process reached its peak at the time of reunification.  From this moment on the overall gap in mortality is narrowing even more rapidly than it had once widened.  Since East Germany's mortality pattern was very unique within Eastern Europe, those living conditions that changed around and before 1990 should be the prime candidates for an explanation.  In the presentation the inner German differences in age-, sex- and cause-of-death-specific mortality will be analyzed.  Based on this, relationships between the relevant mortality related factors on micro and macro level will be shown in the context of past, present, and expected future trends in the development of mortality conditions in East and West Germany.	Marc	A. Luy
2003	27	Health and Mortality in the Former Soviet Union and Central Europe	Mortality Risk and Economic Recovery in Kazakhstan	This paper uses an extremely detailed vital statistics database maintained by the Kazakhstan National Statistics Agency to examine mortality risk by age group, gender, and region for the period 1995-2001. Using pooled data across time and region, we find that mortality risk is much higher for working age Kazakhstanis of European descent as opposed to ethnic Kazakhs. Much but not all of this difference is accounted for by much higher external cause (accidents and violent death) mortality among non-Kazakhs. Mortality risk appears to decline with measures of prosperity, but is greater in industrial regions and boom areas, suggesting that economic recovery will have a limited impact on health recovery -- even though it is clearly linked to declining risk of death from infections and respiratory diseases.	Charles	 Becker	Dina	 Urzhumova	Ai-Gul	 Seitenova
2003	28	Confidentiality, Privacy and Ethical Issues	Ethical Issues Surrounding Data Collection under the Demographic and Health Surveys Program	In survey data collection programs that are primarily based on structured interviews with consenting adults, few or no complex ethical problems arise. However, in recent years, increasing demand for more detailed data needed for monitoring and evaluating population and health programs has led to the collection of biomarkers and geographical information systems data. The collection and storage of these new data have raised issues such as how to address consent, ensuring privacy when working with linked and unlinked data, and making opportunities for follow-up counseling and/or treatment of the survey population when appropriate. This paper discusses these and similar ethical dilemmas encountered in the field, particularly as they relate to collection of serum samples for HIV, syphilis, and anemia testing, for vitamin A screening and the handling of geo-referenced data under MEASURE DHS+. The implications of the results for future collection of survey data in developing countries are also discussed.	Jacob	 Adetunji	Sarah	 Pacque-Margolis	James	 Shelton
2003	28	Confidentiality, Privacy and Ethical Issues	Confidentiality and Ethical Issues Involved in Counselling for HIV Testing among Women of Reproductive Age: An Experience in a PMTCT Site in Mumbai, India	Majority of the Mother to Child Transmission of HIV occurs during labour; breastfeeding increases the risk by 14%. Untreated, about 20-40% of children will become HIV positive. In a recent study conducted at JJ Hospital, NACO-PMTCT Center of Excellance, short regime AZT (Phase-1) and single dose NVP regimen (Phase-2)offered to pregnant women after voluntary HIV testing and counseeling.      In this PMTCT site an attempt was made to explore retrospectively HIV-infected pregnant women's experience with HIV testing, counselling and issues of confidentiality and privacy.A qualitative paradigm using grounded theory approach based on in-depth interviews was adopted. 119 HIV-infected women were purposefully selected along with 26 health care providers. The anaylsis of the paper was mainly concentrated on HIV testing and counselling with its strengths and weaknesses on various issues such as disclosure,pregnancy continuation and termination, infant feeding options, contraceptive advice which are specifically applied in the context of general antenatal care.	Emily	 Das	Rekha	G. Daver M.D.	Naval	G. Daver
2003	28	Confidentiality, Privacy and Ethical Issues	Privacy at What Cost to Health Research? What Demographers Need to Know about the New Privacy Rule	Americans place a huge premium on the right to privacy, particularly about their health information, including genetic information. On the other hand, Americans expect and demand open access to information from the government. Demographers have been among the strongest advocates of data sharing, and have long recognized the multiplier effects from secondary data analysis of expensive data collection efforts. Unfortunately, legitimate concerns about privacy protection of health information has led to a set of rules that may have the unintended effect of discouraging scientific research. This paper introduces the Privacy requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in the context of broader trends. The specific objective is to provide an overview of the implications of HIPAA for the demographic research community, and to outline a series of helpful next steps.	Rose	M. Li
2003	29	Service and Social Influences on Contraceptive Practice	Who Are We Serving?: An Assessment of the Extent to Which Reproductive Health Services Serve Their Local Population in Seven Countries.	Despite large efforts in the past few decades ensuring high class, affordable reproductive healthcare to all sectors of society remains an important challenge througout the world. This paper assesses, in seven countries, the extent to which reproductive health centres which are part of the Marie Stopes partnership are serving all sectors of their local population. In particular it focuses on teh extent to which the Marie Stopes model of financial and institutional sustainability, which provides a new framework for te delivery of reproductive healthcare works. The countries cover all regions in which Marie Stopes works: Bangladesh, Kenya, Malawi, Mexico, Nepal, Tanzania and Yemen. The study integrates four types of data: exit interviews, household surveys, focus group discussions and stakeholder interviews and is based on fieldwork undertaken between June and August 2002.	Jane	 Diamond	Sarah	A.L. Barnett	Martyn	 Brookes
2003	29	Service and Social Influences on Contraceptive Practice	Impacts of a Successful Quality-of-Care Intervention on Client Outcomes Six Months Later	A job aids-assisted Balanced Counseling Strategy was developed to overcome problems observed in family-planning provider-client interactions in Peru Ministry of Health clinics. The Strategy puts client needs diagnosis at the service of method choice, using a set of method-specific cards. The provider sequentially discards irrelevant methods (cards); offers standard information on four attributes per relevant method; and concentrates the remainder of the session on the interactive inspection of a detailed pamphlet on the method chosen. Observational and interview-based indicators showed significant effects of  the Strategy on the quality of care and client knowledge of method chosen. This presentation will be concerned with longer-term effects. It will report findings on 6-month all-method all-reasons discontinuation rate, quality-related discontinuation rate, and rate of attainment of reproductive goals, as well as Pearl rates for each of these indicators. In addition, client satisfaction and knowledge concerning the method chosen will be considered.	Federico	R. Leon	Santiago	 Roca	Alex	 Rios	Adriana	 Zumarán	Susan	E. Adamchak	Ana	R. Feijoo
2003	29	Service and Social Influences on Contraceptive Practice	How Does Participation in Groups Affect Contraceptive Intentions and Use in Rural Malawi? Results from a District-Level Study in Malawi	This study examines whether participation in groups in rural Malawi is  associated with contraceptive intentions and practices.  Women in groups  were more likely to intend to use contraceptives in the next six months  compared to those not in groups, whereas the opposite is the case for men.  Groups provided a forum for discussions on health topics, but these  discussions usually occurred informally and were triggered by gossiping  about someone in their community.  The group’s characteristics, such as  gender composition (for women and men) or age range (for men), affect the  type of discussions that take place, as well as the individuals’  contraceptive ideas and practices.   Discussions about method types and side  effects were more common among women in groups than men in groups, who  instead reportedly “knew” about other group members’ contraceptive use based  on their perceptions of their peers’ family size or the spacing of their  children.	Valerie	 Paz Soldan
2003	29	Service and Social Influences on Contraceptive Practice	Male Involvement in Family Planning in Pakistan: The Impact of Social Marketing	Though contraceptive prevalence increased steadily in Pakistan in recent years, the level of unmet need for family planning remains high.   Besides poverty and lack of access to family planning methods/services, attention has also focused on the role of men in contraceptive decision-making, and men’s opposition to contraceptive use due to socio-cultural reasons.  The literature concludes that increases in couple communication and men’s involvement in family planning would have a significant impact on contraceptive prevalence in Pakistan.    This paper examines this issue using data from a recent survey of a nationally representative sample of men and women in Pakistan.  The paper investigates the relationship between men’s attitudes, spousal communication about family planning and contraceptive use. It also examines the role of social marketing, in particular the Greenstar program, in increasing contraceptive prevalence. A multivariate analysis is presented in the form of a logistic regression model of contraceptive use.	Ibrahim	 Hassan	Kerry	 Richter
2003	30	Women and Migration	Women Left Behind?: Women's Roles in Migration and Residential Arrangements	The young male migrant in search of wage labor has long been the model actor for demographic, economic, and sociological theories of migration. This male-centered focus has often characterized women as either passive followers or left behind wives. Scholars from several disciplines have responded to this neglect of women by emphasizing their mobility. Nevertheless, there remains a tendency to represent female rural stayers as an undifferentiated and non-agentive group.     This village study, conducted in Northern Tanzania, investigates the constraints and opportunities that shape women's decisions to stay or go. I conclude that labeling these female rural stayers as left behind does injustice not only to the ways in which women are involved in migration and migration decisions, but also to the fact that for many women remaining in Ugweno is part of a larger strategy to live meaningful productive and domestic lives while fulfilling cultural obligations.	Caroline	S. Archambault
2003	30	Women and Migration	The Impact of Migration on the Status of Women in Rural China	This study examines the impact of migration on the status of two groups of women in rural China most directly affected by labor migration, returning migrant women and the wives of the male migrants.    Does what they or their husbands have experienced, earned, and learned in the city affect women's status within the family and their gender role expectations?   The data used were collected in 2000 in four rural counties of Sichuan and Anhui and include many questions illiciting the woman's opinion on issues of autonomy and decision-making within the family.  Using a multivariate analysis, we find that having ever migrated sometimes has a significant effect on a woman's views, while being married to a man who has migrated has amore limited effect.   In addition, we find that women's migration has a significant effect on whom women marry but not on their relationship once married.	Rachel	 Connelly	Kenneth	 Roberts	Zhenzhen	 Zheng
2003	30	Women and Migration	The Effects of Status Inconsistency between Spouses on Migration: Analysis of NLSY79 Couples	Using the concept of status inconsistency and family resource theory as the bases, we test the influences of relative educational and income status between spouses on family migration. Panel data from the NLSY79 indicates that only one form of status inconsistency within the couple do affect the probability of migration. The greater educational status of wives decreases the probability of migration, while the wife¡¯s relative economic position does not depress the likelihood of migration.  However, we find that there is the gendered difference in the effect of status inconsistency on the probability of migration. A spouse¡¯s higher status has an impact on a wife¡¯s probability of migration but does not affect a husband¡¯s migration propensity in a comparable situation. It cannot be accounted by both the human capital and the family resource theory, since the asymmetrical power relation between husbands and wives seems to be imposed from outside the family.	Ji-Youn	 Lee	E.	Helen  Berry	Michael	B. Toney
2003	30	Women and Migration	Gender Structures among Recent Latino Immigrant Women: The Case of Durham, NC	Immigrants notions about gender from their communities of origin may contradict prevalent conceptions in receiving communities. The social and cultural processes that determine gender norms and expectations during the process of migration remain poorly understood. This paper uses data from an ethnosexual survey to examine how the structures of labor, power, and cathexis depend on women’s migration history, time in U.S., and differences in context of reception, including family and social networks and connections with local organizations. Results show that migration does indeed affect gender structures facilitating women’s incorporation into the labor market and empowering them vis a vis men with respect to household responsibilities and decision making. However, qualitative analysis shows that this transition is not smooth or without tensions. In-depth interviews show that it is difficult for migrants to distinguish between changes that are positive and empower women from alterations that might lead to “libertinaje” (licentiousness) or decadence.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Chenoa	A. Flippen	Chris	 McQuiston
2003	31	Welfare Reform and Union Formation	Relationship Skills Training and Marriage among Low-Income Couples		Paul	 Amato
2003	31	Welfare Reform and Union Formation	Why Don't Poor Women Get Married, but Have Children They Can't Afford?		Kathryn	 Edin	Liana	C. Sayer	Nathan	 Wright
2003	31	Welfare Reform and Union Formation	Can Social Welfare Policy Increase Marriage or Decrease Divorce? Evidence from the Minnesota Family Investment Plan		Lisa	A. Gennetian	Virginia	 Knox
2003	31	Welfare Reform and Union Formation	The Hand or the Heart: The Adverse Effects of Multiple Partner Fertility on Family Formation		Ronald	 Mincy
2003	32	Welfare Reform and Its Demographic Consequences	Reassessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Female Employment and Labor Supply	The anomalous paper that does not conclude that TANF boosted female employment is Schoeni and Blank (SB).  I determine whether or not, accepting the SB model but examining a different time period or utilizing a different data set, one can uncover evidence that TANF increased female employment.  Examining a shorter time period (1989-2000) or using a different data set (CPS-ORG) than SB, I find employment effects of TANF.                The researchers who do not restrict their attention to some group of single women (Moffitt and SB) run regressions in which they pool women from different education groups into the same sample.  Interacting the reform dummies with the education groups, the authors expect reform effects to be concentrated among dropouts.  They do not, however, interact every independent variable with the education dummies.  Running regressions fully stratified by education group, I conclude that previous results in the literature are sensitive to model specification.	Jeffrey	T. Lewis
2003	32	Welfare Reform and Its Demographic Consequences	Welfare Reform and Health Insurance Coverage of Low-Income Families	We study whether welfare reform adversely affected the health insurance coverage of low-educated single mothers and their children.  We investigate whether changes in the welfare caseload during the 1990s were associated with changes in Medicaid participation, private insurance coverage, and the number of uninsured among single mothers and their children.  Estimates suggest that welfare reform decreased Medicaid coverage, increased employer-sponsored private insurance coverage, and increased the proportion uninsured.  The magnitudes of the effects were relatively small.  For example, between 1996 and 1999, changes in the caseload were associated with a decrease in Medicaid coverage among single mothers of four to five percentage points; an increase in private insurance coverage of approximately two percentage points; and an increase of two to three percentage points in the proportion of low-educated, single mothers who were uninsured.  Among children of low-educated, single mothers, welfare reform had smaller effects.	Robert	 Kaestner	Neeraj	 Kaushal
2003	32	Welfare Reform and Its Demographic Consequences	Welfare Reform and the Uninsured	There has been very little research on rates of health insurance coverage among the population likely to have been affected by PRWORA.  This paper seeks to document trends in public and private health insurance coverage for economically vulnerable women between 1988 and 1998.  It also seeks to determine the impact of welfare reform on those trends.  The data for the analysis come from the annual March income supplements to the CPS; the May 1988 and April 1993 Employee Benefit Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS); and the February 1995, February 1997, and February 1999 Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangement Supplements to the CPS.	Thomas	 DeLeire	Judith	A. Levine	Helen	 Levy
2003	32	Welfare Reform and Its Demographic Consequences	Welfare Work Requirements and Child Well-Being: Evidence from the Effects on Breastfeeding	The central theme of welfare reform is the requirement that welfare recipients engage in work activities.  In many states this requirement applies even to mothers whose children are just a few months old.  Holding a job increases the costs of breastfeeding, which in turn could reduce the propensity of new mothers to breastfeed their children.  In this paper, we examine whether the work requirements adopted as part of welfare reform have reduced the prevalence of breastfeeding.  Given the substantial short- and long-term benefits that breastfeeding imparts on children and mothers, any reduction in breastfeeding would represent an important negative consequence of these work requirements.  We find that if welfare reform had not been adopted, national breastfeeding rates six months after birth would have been 5.6 percent higher than they are today.	Bob	 Schoeni	Steve	 Haider	Ali	 Jacknowitz
2003	33	Sexual Coercion and Reproductive Health Outcomes	Does Violence Aggravate the Risk of HIV?	This paper examines the factors that are associated with the violence faced within marriage and its association with the reporting of STI infections. The results indicate that particular group of women are at elevated risk of receiving physically abuse from their husbands. The women who have faced physical violence from husbands are more likely to report STI like symptoms and perceive the risk of HIV. The strongest predictor is the experience of physical abuse in past six months for the perception of risk and to be at risk of HIV. The data from a slum community of Mumbai, India suggests that even in those cases in which women may perceive themselves to be at some risk of infections, they frequently have no power to negotiate condom use with their husbands. This data shows that there is a clear need to understand the link between the sexual behaviour and wife beating.	Mandar	K. Mainkar	Ravi	K. Verma
2003	33	Sexual Coercion and Reproductive Health Outcomes	Extent of Sexual Coercion among Young Migrant Workers and Their Sexual Health Problems in Nepal	This paper explores the problem of sexual coercion and sexual health problems of young female migrant workers in the Kathmandu Valley. Information is drawn from 23 in-depth case histories and a sample survey of 550 respondents aged 14-19 years. The survey found that one in ten young girls had ever experienced sexual assault and coercion in their lifetime. Perpetrators included co-workers, boy friends, employers and relatives. In-depth interviews revealed that the inability of young working girls to communicate effectively with their peers and sex partners, lack of self esteem, job insecurity and other socio-cultural problems made them vulnerable to these abuses. Similarly, one in seven girls were experiencing signs and symptoms of STIs and an overwhelming majority of them had not sought any treatment for these problems. The results suggest the need for a range of factory-based interventions.	Mahesh	 Puri	John	 Cleland
2003	33	Sexual Coercion and Reproductive Health Outcomes	Sexual Pressure and Violence During Adolescence in Semi-Rural Settings of Cameroon	The extent and correlates of sexual coercion during adolescence in many developing countries remains a matter of conjecture. We use qualitative and quantitative data from repeat community inquiries fielded in 1996-1997 and 2002 in Cameroon to shed some light on the nature of and influences on sexual pressure and violence in over fifty semi-rural areas of Cameroon. Quantitative data analyses demonstrate that adolescents are significantly more likely to be victims of sexual coercion than adults and that girls are more victimized than boys. Qualitative data suggest that female adolescents identify rape and sexual harassment as well as their consequences as their major concerns. Multivariate analyses are conducted to attempt to disentangle the various influences on sexual pressure and violence during adolescence and how these influences are changing over time and contexts. The  implications of this research are discussed within the framework of intervention programs targeted at young people in Cameroon.	Nathalie	 Lydié	Barthelemy	 Kuate-Defo
2003	33	Sexual Coercion and Reproductive Health Outcomes	Violence, Coercion, Trickery and Reproductive Health Outcomes among Nairobi’s Poorest Residents	Cairo's agenda mainstreamed reproductive and social matters including sexual coercion and gendered violence into the population discourse. Yet, inadequate attention has been paid to the linkages between violence, coercion, trickery, and forced sex and reproductive health. This paper assesses associations between these variables and reports of STIs and mistimed pregnancies among females aged 12-24 years in Nairobi's slums.     Our data come from the 2000 Nairobi Cross-Sectional Slum Survey, a representative survey of Nairobi slums. Logistic regressions reveal females who report partner violence are more likely than others to report STIs in the past year, net of controls. Tricked/forced first sexual encounters likewise elevate the odds of mistimed pregnancies. Those who report partner violence are more likely to report mistimed pregnancies.     Our paper fleshes out relational linkages between the variables and suggests future needs in the study of violence, coercion, and force. Violence's significance in reproductive health outcomes merits further attention.	Megan	L. Klein	F.	Nii-Amoo  Dodoo
2003	34	Reproduction, Contraception and HIV Protection	Sexual Behavior, Reproductive Attitudes, and Perceptions of Risk: Sexually Transmitted Diseases among Young Adults in Uzbekistan	Since 1991, contraceptive use has increased dramatically in Uzbekistan, and reliance on abortion has declined. Yet, in spite of improvements in reproductive health, UNAIDS reports identify Central Asia as the fastest growing region for HIV infection. Inadequate sexual education programs, heavy reliance on IUDs, traditional social norms discouraging condom use, substantial premarital and non-marital sexual activity, and growing rates of intravenous drug use in Uzbekistan provide a welcoming environment for the spread of HIV. Integrating state health statistics and reports, DHS data, and the focus groups results from 2002, we find little evidence that recent family planning campaigns have increased sexual education programs, changed attitudes towards condoms, or altered perceptions of risk among urban young adults.  By advocating widespread IUD adoption among all women, regardless of STD risk, government programs may contribute to the transmission and severity of sexually transmitted diseases in the population.	Cynthia	 Buckley	Yakov	P. Asminkin	Jennifer	 Barrett
2003	34	Reproduction, Contraception and HIV Protection	Reproductive Behavior, Contraceptive Use and Risk for Sexually Transmitted Infections in California	California is home to more than one out of eight American women of reproductive age. Despite its size, California’s diverse, growing population is not reflected in national reproductive health statistics. This paper describes risk for pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections among women in California based on the California Women’s Health Survey. Over 8,900 women of reproductive age who participated in this survey between 1998 and 2001 provide estimates of access to care and use of family planning methods in the state.     Preliminary analyses show large differences in patterns of contraceptive use among women at risk of an unintended pregnancy. Statewide 18% of women at risk of unintended pregnancy are not using any method of contraception. We find low rates of contraceptive use among Southeast Asian women, women below the federal poverty level and women with no health insurance. Findings indicate substantial risk for HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.	Diana	L. Greene	Mi	Suk  Kang	Joan	 Chow	Julia	 Bley	Nikki	 Baumrind	Marta	 Induni	John	 Mikanda	Philip	 Darney	Felicia	 Stewart
2003	34	Reproduction, Contraception and HIV Protection	Women's Reproductive Health, Sociocultural Context and AIDS Knowledge in Northern India	The 1998-99 Indian National Family Health Survey addressed AIDS knowledge among a sample of women in the reproductive age group. Two low HIV prevalence states, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh show that only two-fifths of women had AIDS awareness. Knowledge associated sociocultural factors in MP were education and watching television, findings very similar to those in UP. The type and combination of media were strongly associated with the pattern of knowledge of whether or not AIDS can be avoided, which varied between the states. The impact of contact with FP services on knowledge that AIDS can be avoided was non-significant. Implications for public health policy are that single media educational approaches are not likely to be effective in promoting AIDS knowledge; that there is under-utilised potential for the dissemination of AIDS awareness via FP services and that state-specific characteristics of women need to be taken into account in designing interventions.	Saseendran	 Pallikadavath	William	 Stones	A.	A.  Jayachandran
2003	34	Reproduction, Contraception and HIV Protection	Condoms as Contraception versus Condoms as Protection: Obstacles to HIV/AIDS Prevention among Young People Urban Nigeria	Condoms appear to offer young people who are sexually active dual protection from unwanted pregnancy and HIV/AIDS, ostensibly increasing the desirability of condom use. This paper shows, however, that among Nigerian youths, the intertwined understanding of condoms as contraception and HIV/AIDS protection can actually inhibit safe sex. Findings demonstrate an extreme disparity between young people's knowledge about HIV/AIDS and condoms (high and mostly accurate) and actual levels and patterns of condom use (relatively low and extremely inconsistent). In the Nigerian context, part of the explanation for these incongruities lies in understanding the conflicting consequences with regard to partner trust and intimacy that emerge when condoms are interpreted simultaneously as contraception and HIV/AIDS protection. The stigma of AIDS and the consequent denial of personal risk is the outcome  not only of AIDS' fatality, but of moralities of sexuality that are framed in relation to ideas about gender, reproduction, and intimacy.	Daniel	 Smith
2003	35	Language, Poverty, and Living Arrangements of Children of Immigrants	Language Proficiency and the Hispanic Dropout Rate	This paper analyzes the large gap in high school graduation rates between  Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites.  The high school completion rate of Hispanic youth remains roughly 63%, as compared to 88% for both whites and African Americans. Once Hispanic students graduate from high school, however, they advance to post-secondary school at a rate similar to other groups (NCES 1995). Thus, the decision to dropout of high school is key. Using the National Education Longitudinal Survey of 1988—1994, we build on the significant body of work that estimates determinants of high school completion and analyze the effects of student, family and school characteristics to explore why so many Hispanics fail to finish high school.  While Hispanics may dropout for the same reasons as non-Hispanics, we are particularly interested in aspects of the Hispanic experience that are largely unique, such as barriers caused by lower English language proficiency.	Karine	S. Moe
2003	35	Language, Poverty, and Living Arrangements of Children of Immigrants	When Children Speak Different Languages: The Effects of Sibship Ordering and Family Life Cycle Stage on Children’s Minority Language Usage in Immigrant Households	As the concept of mother-tongue shift, which implicitly compares the languages spoken by parents and their children, suggests, family members may have different language repertoires.  In this paper, we consider the possibility that siblings may have different probabilities of using a minority language at home.  Using data from the 1999 Current Population Survey and focusing on the children of immigrant parents, we first show that children’s use of a minority language is strongly predicted by the children’s and their parents’ characteristics. Our analyses then show children’s minority language use is related to sibship ordering and family configuration.   Further analyses, using synthetic cohorts, illustrate how mother tongue shift may vary over time and family life cycle stage as immigrant households mature in the American context. Our results have implications for the understanding of the process of mother-tongue shift; they also hint at how children anglicize households.	Gillian	 Stevens	Hiromi	 Ishizawa
2003	35	Language, Poverty, and Living Arrangements of Children of Immigrants	The Living Arrangements of African American and Immigrant Children, 1880-1990	I compare the living arrangements of African American and immigrant children from 1880 through 1990.  African American children were less likely than foreign-born white children to live with two parents throughout this period, with the gap widening after 1960.  African Americans and the small group of  non-white immigrants exhibited  similar family patterns before 1960.  That difference also increased during more recent decades, as both foreign-born Asian and foreign-born black children were more likely than African Americans to reside with two parents.  Immigrant children from virtually all nationalities were more likely than black children to live with two parents.  My findings reveal that, over time, widowhood declined as a cause of paternal absence for all groups, and the influence of marital disruption increased.  Non-marital motherhood was always greater among African Americans than among immigrants, but its role as a cause of children residing in mother-only families increased for blacks after 1960.	Stewart	E. Tolnay
2003	35	Language, Poverty, and Living Arrangements of Children of Immigrants	One Step Forward, Two Steps Back: The Increase in Immigrant Child Poverty from 1970 to 2000	Prior research on child poverty has focused on family structure and, to a lesser extent, parental work patterns to explain trends over time and differences across groups.  However, immigrant child poverty has increased significantly over the past three decades even though labor force participation is high among immigrants and immigrant families are likely to be headed by a married couple.  We document the levels and determinants of child poverty trends among children of immigrants and children of natives from 1970 through 2000.  Much of the increase in immigrant child poverty can be linked to declining returns to parental education and employment and increasing poverty levels among larger families.  One interpretation of this finding is that the on-going macro-economic shifts from a manufacturing- to an information-based economy may have put in place significant new barriers to immigrant incorporation in the U.S.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Susan	L. Brown	Maxwell	Ndigume  Kwenda
2003	36	Human Impacts on the Environment	Impacts of Demographic and Socioeconomic Factors on Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Panda Habitats	In the Wolong Nature Reserve (China) for giant panda conservation, local households live a rural lifestyle that has caused forest degradation by cutting fuelwood.  Based on field data and an Integrative Model with Agent-Based Artificial Intelligence and GIS (IMABAIG), we simulated the spatio-temporal dynamics of households and their impacts on panda habitat by keeping track of each family member’s life history (including their individual needs, attitudes, and activities) and the dynamics of each household agents when they interact with each other and with the environment through their activities over 20 years. Our preliminary simulations show that among all the demographic and socioeconomic factors under consideration, birth control, emigration, and providing cheaper electricity, and changing the age and gender ratio could increase habitat quantity greatly.  In addition to benefiting local policy-making, this study provides a new approach to studying human-environment interactions from the perspectives of individual needs and decisions.	Li	 An	Guangming	 He	Zai	 Liang
2003	36	Human Impacts on the Environment	Population and Water Resources in Brazil: Water Uses and Conflicts	The paper provides an overview of the implications of certain aspects of demographic dynamics on Brazil's water resources, calling attention to factors such as the spatial distribution of the population and the availability of the water. Also presents an analysis of the main types of water consumption, conflicts among the divergent demands for water, and impacts of the urbanization process on the available water resources.	Roberto	L. Carmo
2003	36	Human Impacts on the Environment	Dynamics of Village Settlement in a Frontier Region: Nang Rong, Thailand	Patterns of village settlement affect land use, but land use and the potential for change also affectsettlement patterns. This paper uses data from a village survey together with spatially referenced data about topography, hydrography, roads, and villages to explore this dynamic relationship over the past fifty years in Nang Rong, Thailand.  In 1950, Nang Rong was a frontier.  Between 1950 and 2000, the number of villages quadrupled through a process of new settlement and administrative division.  The  paper considers topography, proximity to water sources, proximity to the main highway, and proximity to other villages as factors affecting the establishment and siting of villages.  Initially, forest was converted to paddy rice in the lowlands.  Later, because of changed import regulations in Europe, cassava cultivation became profitable, and land was converted to cultivation in the uplands.  We will explore the possibility that patterns of village settlement changed after this exogenous shock.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Stephen	J. Walsh
2003	36	Human Impacts on the Environment	A Cross-Cultural Study of Human Impacts on the Rain Forest Environment in Ecuador	The impact of modernizaton on lowland Amerindians and their land use is of great concern to anthropologists and policy-makers.  This is especially true in Ecuador, which is losing about 1.8% of its Amazon forests per year--the highest loss rate of any Amazon basin country.  In 2001, Richard Bilsborrow and Flora Holt co-led a research project in the northern Ecuadorian Amazon investigating how market integration, proximity to infrastructure, demographic patterns, and socio-cultural characteristics influence land use among five Native Amazonian populations.   Demographic, ethnographic, and socio-economic research was carried out among eight communities encompassing a cross-cultural sample of the Shuar, Quichua, Huaorani, Cofan, and Secoya.  A combination of qualitative and quantitative methodologies were used, from time allocation studies, input-output household dairies and GIS, to participant observation, formal interviews and life histories.  This talk will present our preliminary findings of the factors influencing land clearing across and within these populations.	Flora	L. Holt	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2003	37	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	Better Late than Never? An Examination of Delayed Enrollment in the High School to College Transition	In this paper, we seek to understand the antecedents and consequences of timing in the transition from high school to college.  Using the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988, we find that 16 percent of high school graduates postpone enrollment to more than seven months after completing high school.  These “delayers” are most likely to be white males from low socioeconomic backgrounds, who have low standardized test scores, who have dropped out of school, who attended public high schools, and left high school with only a GED.  We find that after controlling for these selection characteristics, students who delay their enrollment have lower odds of completing a college degree. Additionally, we find that “delayers” are likely to attend less than four-year institutions and to transition to other roles such as spouse or parent.  Accounting for these characteristics, however, does not explain the negative relationship between delayed enrollment and degree completion.	Robert	 Bozick	Stefanie	 DeLuca
2003	37	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	American Women’s Transition to Adulthood in Comparative Perspective	In this paper we compare the transition to adulthood for women in the United States with that of women in countries with contrasting social, economic, and policy contexts. We use simple measures that impose an analytic framework on the data to illustrate differences in the degree of adherence to a “traditional” pattern of family formation between cohorts and nations. We use data from the United States’ National Survey of Family Growth and the Family and Fertility Surveys for Canada, Germany, Italy, and Sweden to compare the experience of two cohorts of women: one that came of age in the 1970s and another in the 1980s. We compare these cohorts in terms of the timing of their acquisition of family statuses (leaving the parental home, cohabitation, marriage, and childbearing), the prevalence of these transitions within cohorts, and the combinations of statuses that the cohort acquires by a given age.	Elizabeth	 Fussell	Anne	H. Gauthier
2003	37	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	The School to Work Transition for Adolescents with Disabilities	Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), we examine the early transition to adulthood among adolescents with disabilities.  The NLSY97 provides an excellent opportunity to investigate the impact of schooling, family background, and community background factors on the transition to adulthood.  The set of data also allows the researchers to compare the experiences of adolescents with disabilities to the experiences of adolescents without disabilities.    In our analysis, we utilize Bayesian model averaging (BMA), a recently developed methodological technique that identifies the best-fitting regression models and then averages results across these models.  The results from the BMA procedure are arguably better than results derived from a single statistical model since they are averaged across a number of models.  This is a very useful approach given uncertainty and variation in results that surround any one particular statistical model.  We utilize the procedure for each transition considered.	Dennis	 Hogan	Thomas	 Wells
2003	37	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	Growing up Too Fast? The Implications of Precocious Social Competence in Young Adults from Disrupted Families	While considerable research has focused on identifying the problems of children whose parents have separated or divorced, surprisingly few large-scale empirical studies have examined the positive, adaptive skills of these children.  This gap exists despite evidence from small-scale  psychological studies suggesting that some youth from maritally disrupted families (especially girls) demonstrate significantly greater amounts of household responsibility and higher levels of social maturity than their counterparts in married families.  Moreover, it is unknown whether precocious social and emotional competence in response to disruption is ultimately desirable or undesirable.  The press for maturity may reverberate as an increased risk of depression in later life and difficulties in making transitions into adulthood . This study addresses these issues using a prospective design and longitudinal data available into young adulthood among the children of the NLSY.  Precocious competence is measured within both socio-emotional and behavioral domains.	Donna	R. Morrison
2003	38	Resource Allocation within and across Households and Generations	Dynamic Intrahousehold Bargaining, Matrimonial Property Law and Suicidal Canadians	This paper develops a dynamic model of household bargaining and uses it to motivate an empirical analysis of the impact changes in Canadian laws regarding the allocation of family assets upon divorce on female suicide. Using time series data, we show that in Ontario, the passage of Canadian legislation that improved women's rights to assets upon divorce was associated with reductions in the rate of female suicide amongst older (married) women while not affecting younger (unmarried) women. As suggested by our model, its impact was asymmetric in that male suicide rates were unaffected by this change. We also exploited a quasi-natural experiment in these data, namely that no comparable legislative change occurred in Quebec.  Here, we do not observe a structural break in the data.	John	 Hoddinott	Christopher	 Adam	Ethan	 Ligon
2003	38	Resource Allocation within and across Households and Generations	Marriage, Cohabitation, and Intrahousehold Bargaining: Evidence from Brazilian Couples	The study of intrahousehold decision-making has received increased attention from the Economics and Sociology literatures. The extent to which members of the same household individualistically pursue their self-interest as opposed to being characterized by a group who share a common goal is an important question for many areas of inquiry in demography. This paper addresses this issue by examining how shifts in the balance of power' within the household affects behavioral choices. Here, the potential endogeneity of power measures is circumvent by exploiting changes in the Brazilian legal system regarding cohabitation as sources of variation. By observing changes in selected outcomes, aspects of the decision-making process can be recovered.   The empirical evidence indicates that (intra-household) empowerment of women reflected into changes in time-allocation and in investments on children that reveal specificities of parental preferences.  The results reaffirm that the unitary model is an imperfect way of representing households' decision making.	Marcos	A. Rangel
2003	38	Resource Allocation within and across Households and Generations	Welfare Design, Women´s Empowerment and Income Pooling	Although there has been a vast literature on the allocation of resources within households few studies have spoken to the issue of whether welfare policies should explicitly conceive operational rules to enhance the status of women in the family.   We analyze PROGRESA, Mexico´s anti-poverty program, to investigate intra-household decisions related to specific welfare design that seeks the empowerment of women.  PROGRESA states that only women are entitled to receive the program's cash transfer.  We show that as the benefit in the hands of the woman increases, more resources are allocated towards girl´s and boy´s clothing and less to male clothing.  Parallel, women with more power tend to allocate more resources towards what they may perceive as an improvement of the dietary condition.  As PROGRESA´s transfer increases, expenditures on staple goods, such as vegetables, tortilla and beans are substituted for purchases of high protein goods (i.e., eggs and meat).	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel	Duncan	 Thomas
2003	38	Resource Allocation within and across Households and Generations	The Life Cycle Saving Behavior of Two-Person Households: Evidence from the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics	The non-cooperative model of household saving for two-person households predicts that household saving rate is positively correlated with wife’s contribution to household earning. This result excludes the ranges where the wife's earning share is so low or so high that one spouse's contribution is high enough for him or her to tend to act as a single decision-maker on saving. This paper finds empirical evidence of this relationship using PSID data. It rejects the assumption of “global income pooling” that household saving is independent of any redistribution across the intra-household earning distribution, maintained in the unitary model, in favor of the assumption of “local income pooling” that household saving is independent of small redistributions only at the tails of the distribution. The policy implication of this result is that, given household income, a redistribution of earnings towards the wife potentially increases household saving rate, in turn increasing total household saving.	Nigar	 Nargis
2003	38	Resource Allocation within and across Households and Generations	The Unequal Division of Household Labor: Gender Roles and the Puzzle of Positive Correlation between Fertility and Female Labor-Force Participation	Complete paper: http://www.econ.brown.edu/~asanz/thesis/genderole.pdf     This paper attempts to reconcile the low fertility - low female labor force participation observed among some industrialized countries with the high fertility – high female labor force participation in others. We develop a theoretical model that sheds light on this puzzle by focusing on the potential for rigidities in the allocation of time within the household.   The data used in our empirical analysis are based on the 1994 survey ''Family and Changing Gender Roles,'' and were collected under the auspices of the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP). Using a principal components index of such attitudes to create an indicator variable, which groups countries into ones whose husbands’ attitudes are favorable to housework and those who are unfavorable, preliminary results provide significant and sizable support for both predictions by our theoretical model.	Almudena	 Sevilla-Sanz	Joost	 De Laat
2003	39	Microsimulation Models and Techniques	Do We Need Agent-Based Computational Demography?	A computational approach to the study of human behavior has developed---especially during the 1990s---through a vast quantity of literature. Agent-based computational models have become more and more used in the social sciences. Different to the approach based on statistical analysis of behavioral data that aim to understand why specific rules are applied by humans, agent-based computational models pre-suppose (realistic) rules of behavior and try to falsify the  validity of these rules by showing whether they can or cannot explain regularities. In this paper, we argue that in order to study human populations, agent-based approaches are particularly useful from various theoretical perspectives. We thus urge demographers and other scholars interested in population studies to look at Agent-Based Computational Demography (ABCD) as a promising stream of research, that can improve our understanding  of demographic behavior. We also shortly present some existing examples of application of agent-based modelling to demographic processes.	Francesco	C. Billari	Fausta	 Ongaro	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz
2003	39	Microsimulation Models and Techniques	Neighborhood Choice and Neighborhood Change	This paper uses a computational model, in conjunction with real-world data, to examine the relationship between the residential choices of individuals and aggregate patterns of neighborhood change. First, we simulate mobility under a series of preference regimes that make different assumptions about how people evaluate neighborhoods. For example, are people willing to live in a neighborhood as long as the proportion of own-group neighbors does not fall below a given threshold? Or is neighborhood desirability a smooth function of proportion own-group? Our results demonstrate that, holding mean tolerance constant, changing the functional form of the utility equation can dramatically alter the observed level of residential segregation. Given that different models of neighborhood choice produce different patterns of residential inequality, which one best reflects how people make choices? In the second section of the paper, we evaluate the plausibility of these different utility equations using data on observed mobility behavior for individuals in Los Angeles County.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch
2003	39	Microsimulation Models and Techniques	Individual Disease Progression Module for Population Event History Simulation	Within Southern Africa there is a fierce debate on issues surrounding treatment and prevention of HIV, in part because the costs and benefits of different treatment protocols are difficult to assess and rationalize.      Because transmission of HIV in Africa primarily occurs between two individuals during sex or at birth, the Individual-level simulation approach is one of the only methods capable of shedding significant light on these debates, because it can model both the behavioural and biological factors governing the transmission of HIV between individuals.    Critical to this approach are good models of ‘within host’ disease progression of HIV.  These parameterize the time course of the critical biomarkers associated with HIV infection and allow them to be manipulated in ways that reflect different treatment protocols.    This work discusses a general individual-level disease progression model capable of rapid reconfiguration to accommodate a wide range of arbitrary disease progression models.	Samuel	J. Clark	Alex	 Welte
2003	39	Microsimulation Models and Techniques	Uncertainty Analysis for Demographic Microsimulation	Demographic microsimulation samples from a future population, first sampling from some baseline population and then sampling from the distribution of future values to which the baseline will evolve. Because microsimulation entails sampling, summary statistics based on its output should be viewed as uncertain, reflecting the inevitable errors associated with sampling. Yet little attention has been paid to this type of variability. Uncertainty about microsimulation-based forecasts arises from several sources, including parameter uncertainty, classical sampling error, Monte Carlo errors, and data imputation errors.    This paper attempts to quantify prediction uncertainty in the context of a simple projection model of kin networks. The approach used permits me to partition uncertainty into several components, with particular attention to the influence of variability in model parameters. Initial results indicate that standard errors grow about 1-10 percent, in most cases, when we account for the various sources of variability uniquely attributable to the microsimulation methodology.	Douglas	A. Wolf
2003	40	Data and Methods in Studies of Immigration	Immigrant Change: Using Taxfiling Patterns to Identify Patterns of Emigration and Mortality of Landed Immigrants	Statistics Canada’s Longitudinal Immigration Database (IMDB) matches landed immigrant information from landing records with taxation files from 1980 to 2000. Once immigrants begin to file tax returns most do so continuously.  Nevertheless, some file intermittently, while others permanently 'disappear' from the database. This paper analyzes persons who disappear from the IMDB and presents new methods using these data for estimating 1) emigration of landed immigrants from Canada, 2) immigrant mortality, and 3) the number no longer required to file a tax return.      The disappearance rates indicate that immigrants with the greatest resources - skills, education and language ability - are most likely to disappear.  Refugees are the least likely of the immigrant classes to disappear.  Approximately 17% of immigrants disappear from the IDMB, and of these, an estimated 16% have died and a further 25% have emigrated, according to estimation methods laid out in this paper.	Heather	B. Dryburgh	Maureen	 Kelly
2003	40	Data and Methods in Studies of Immigration	Foreign-Born Emigration from the United States: 1990-2000	Statistics pertaining to the emigration of US residents, both native and foreign-born, represent a tremendous dearth in immigration statistics and in the ability to understand the overall movement and size of the foreign-born population.  Following the termination of data collection on emigrants by the Immigration and Naturalization Service in the 1950’s, agencies produced estimates of emigration using indirect estimation methods.  Currently, researchers rely on estimates of foreign-born emigration produced in 1994 for the 1980-1990 decade.  This research presents new estimates of foreign-born emigration by country of birth and demographic detail for the 1990-2000 decade.  Estimates of emigration for residents born in Mexico, the largest source country of legal and illegal immigration, are highlighted with comparisons of results from other censuses and surveys conducted in both Mexico and the United States.	Tammany	J. Mulder
2003	40	Data and Methods in Studies of Immigration	Return Migration Trip Progression Ratios: A Period Approach	The purpose of this study is to describe the return dynamics of Mexican labor migrants to the U.S. from 1980 to 1996. I devise a life table application to study 'Return Progression Ratios' (RPR), whose construction is analogous to that of period parity progression ratios in fertility analysis. I use data from the Mexican Migration Project database (MMP71)  to estimate the ratios and their corresponding mean (censored) durations. These measures potentially represent a parsimonious way to assess changes in migratory dynamics. I discuss the limitations and problems of applying these measures to other migrant populations.	Fernando	 Riosmena
2003	40	Data and Methods in Studies of Immigration	Coming to Stay: An Analysis of the U.S. Census Question on Year of Arrival	This paper uses New Immigrant Survey Pilot data to compare immigrants’ answers to the census question on year of arrival with answers to questions asking about dates and durations of first and last U.S. trips, total number of trips, and total amount of U.S. experience.  We find that the census procedure for estimating immigrant experience is inaccurate in approximately half the cases, underestimation is more likely than overestimation, and the size of the error averages just under four years.  The likelihood and size of the error are determined by when the first trip was taken and the number of trips between then and the survey date.  The erroneous estimation of U.S. experience by the census question on year of arrival yields earnings-experience elasticities that are biased upward.  The bias appears to vary across regions, rendering virtually any comparative analysis of immigrant assimilation based on U.S. census data impossible to interpret.	Douglas	S. Massey	Ilana	 Redstone
2003	40	Data and Methods in Studies of Immigration	The Ins and Outs of International Migration	As international migration has been thrust to the forefront of the international agenda, the need for accurate, timely and comparable information and analyses on international migration levels, trends and policies has acquired unprecedented urgency.  But available information and analyses have not kept pace with growing demands.    In an effort to meet these demands, the United Nations Population Division recently compiled the latest available key information on international migration for all countries and regions of the world.  This information include estimates of migrant stock, net migration flows, refugees and workers’ remittances for 1990 and 2000.    The preparation of current and past estimates of international migration raises fundamental conceptual, methodological and policy issues.  Perhaps most significant among these issues are: the definition of migrants; the methods of estimating migration in the absence of data; the appropriate indicators of international migration; and how to reconcile past estimates with new political realities.	Joseph	 Chamie
2003	41	Health Care Policy and Access to Health Care	Medicaid Managed Care in Two States: Findings from Two Studies to Evaluate Effects on Prenatal Care Use, Smoking, and Infant Birth Weight	The past two decades have seen broad expansions of Medicaid to pregnant women and greater reliance on the use of managed care. Few evaluations have examined whether Medicaid managed care affects prenatal care access and birth outcomes. In separate studies of Missouri and Ohio, enrollees in counties that implemented managed care were compared to enrollees in counties that remained fee-for-service before and after implementation. Dependent variables included prenatal care measures, smoking, and birth weight measures. Regression controlled for enrollment, medical risks, demographics, and county fixed effects. Analysis is supported by information from site visits. We found fewer improvements in adequate care, reductions in smoking, and no change in birth outcomes associated with Medicaid managed care in Missouri, and no impact in Ohio, where non-Medicaid cohorts were available for comparison. We identify limitations for improving care and birth outcomes given current Medicaid eligibility policies for pregnant women.	Anna	S. Sommers	Lisa	 Dubay	Genevieve	 Kenney	Embry	 Howell
2003	41	Health Care Policy and Access to Health Care	Racial and Payer Differences in Hospital Obstetric Care: Does Competition Matter?	Racial differences in access to, and utilization of health care in the U.S. have been extensively documented empirically.  Researchers have ascribed these disparities to a number of sources, including group differences in socioeconomic status, acculturation, and health status.  However, few have considered the role of market competition on social disparities in health care.  In this paper, we use hospital discharge data from California to examine the effects of competition on race and payer differences among delivering women in rates of three common obstetric procedures: medical induction of labor, artificial rupture of membranes, and episiotomy .  Preliminary analyses suggest that although White women are more likely than Black, Hispanic, or Asian women to undergo each of these procedures, competition does not appear to affect the magnitude of these disparities.  However, a greater degree market competition does appear to exacerbate payer differences in rates of these obstetric interventions.	Jeanette	W. Chung
2003	41	Health Care Policy and Access to Health Care	Does Context Affect SCHIP Disenrollment? Findings from a Multilevel Analysis	The State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) was enacted in 1997 to improve coverage of low-income children.  Most existing analyses of SCHIP disenrollment ignore variation in time since enrollment, producing biased estimates of disenrollment rates. Moreover, few studies report variation in rates by demographic, socioeconomic or geographic characteristics. We estimate survival models within a multilevel model, using family level data on over 24,000 families enrolled in NJ KidCare and county characteristics from the Area Resource File, Census, and NJ FamilyCare physician roster. Disenrollment was markedly higher in plans involving cost-sharing, particularly among black families. Families with infants or with several children enrolled were less likely to disenroll. These findings were robust to inclusion of a wide variety of county-level demographic, socioeconomic, programmatic and insurance characteristics. Of these, only geographic density of NJ KidCare physicians and population density were significantly related to the overall risk of disenrollment.	Jane	E. Miller	Julie	A. Phillips
2003	41	Health Care Policy and Access to Health Care	Got Health? Advertising, Medicaid and Child Health	Of the ten million children without health insurance in 1996, nearly half were eligible for Medicaid but not enrolled.  Little is known about the reasons low-income families fail to enroll in public programs that involve no out of pocket costs, such as Medicaid, or the consequences of failing to enroll.  I examine the factors affecting Medicaid enrollment and the potential benefits of increased enrollment using an exogenous change in local outreach efforts in California that lowered the information costs and administrative hassles associated with enrollment.  I find that information and administrative costs are significant deterrents to enrollment, with the former limited to new families, and that these costs are greater for those with language and/or immigration concerns.  Furthermore, enrolling children early in Medicaid leads to a more efficient allocation of health care resources by promoting primary ambulatory care over more expensive hospital based care resulting in fewer avoidable hospitalizations.	Anna	 Aizer
2003	42	Family and Households in Developing Countries	Initial information and successful marriage: Evidence from Chinese Couples	Using a unique survey of 10,000 Chinese couples in 1991,  this paper evaluates the impact of marriage market on  marriage quality. Unlike previous studies, we characterize  marriage market by matchmaking means rather than sex ratios.  Specifically, we compare four matchmaking means --  self match, parental arrangement, parental introduction, and  friend introduction -- and associate them with various  economic outcomes after marriage. Since individuals may  intentionally choose the matchmaking means before marriage,  we instrument it by the typical matchmaking methods used by  the similar age group in the same local area. We find that  couples matched by self or friend introduction have the highest  family incomes and fewest domestic conflicts, while couples  married by parental arrangement experience the worst marriage  quality. This finding can be explained by a high agency cost in  parent matchmaking and a beneficial market expansion effect from  friend introduction.	Ginger	 Jin	Lixin	Colin  Xu
2003	42	Family and Households in Developing Countries	Marriage in Transition: Evidence on Assets, Education, and Age at Marriage from Six Developing Countries	This paper examines the determinants of human capital and assets at marriage of husband and wife and conditions surrounding marriage in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Mexico, the Philippines, and South Africa.  We estimate similar regressions for all countries:  (1) regressions on levels of age, human capital (education), and assets at marriage, separately for husband and wife; and (2) regressions on differences in age, human capital, and assets at marriage.  Both parental background and time trends are important determinants of age at marriage and resources at marriage.  In most countries, education and age differences are narrowing over time, but asset differences remain the same or increase.  In most countries, husbands bring more assets and education to marriage if the husband’s family is wealthier (or more educated) than the wife’s family, indicating that inequality between families is reproduced in the marriages of the next generation.	Agnes	R. Quisumbing
2003	42	Family and Households in Developing Countries	Far above Rubies: The Association between Bride Price and Extramarital Liaisons in Uganda	A survey on HIV related attitudes and behavior was conducted in 1758 households in Uganda in early 2001. We asked all currently married women whether their husband gave her parents any items or monies by way of bride-price. Bride prices were paid for 462 (69.47%) of the married women. The principal determinants of having any bride price were urban residence (O.R. 0.16 S.E. 0.049), current income (O.R. 1.2 S.E. 0.15), and current age (O.R. 1.02 S.E. 0.01).   Controlling for rural residence, current age, current income, and highest grade, we found that having had a bride price lowered the odds of sexual intercourse with a partner other than the spouse (O.R. 0.32 SE. 0.14).  The payment of bride prices has been a prevalent feature among rural Ugandan women, more so for older cohorts.  Women who had participated in this custom were less likely to report extramarital relationships regardless of age.	David	 Bishai	George	 Pariyo	Kenneth	 Hill
2003	42	Family and Households in Developing Countries	Inter-Household Allocations within Extended Households: Evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Survey	This paper uses the data from two waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS 1997 and 2000) to explore the allocation of resources among households within extended households. We are interested in examining how household consumption changes over the period. Since households break-up over time, an analysis using panel of households consisting of only the original households may be biased to the extent that households break-up non-randomly. Analyzing panel of extended households may therefore be preferable. However the approach assumes that extended households pool their resources. We investigate this issue and our findings reject the income pooling hypothesis within extended households in both static and dynamic specifications. Changes in household's own income matters to changes in household consumption even after controlling for the extended-household fixed-effects. Correcting  for measurement error and endogeneity of income using instrumental variables yields similar results.	Firman	 Witoelar
2003	43	The Demography of Infectious Diseases	Qualitative Research as a Means to Accessing Medium Risk Groups for Surveys on HIV/STI Infection in Urban Mali	In order to construct clusters for the ISBS in Mali which comprised a demographic, behavioural and bio-medical survey of medium risk groups, qualitative research was carried out to explore the organisation and dynamics of the groups in question. Those chosen to represent those supposedly at medium risk were domestic servants, ambulatory vendors at bus stations and ticket touts.     Despite all three groups appearing very marginal, mobile and disorganised, in-depth interview and focus group discussions revealed that there was an apparent order within each of them which could be used to construct clusters needed for the survey. The ISBS findings subsequently indicated that the medium risk groups in fact had a higher prevalence of STIs and HIV than some of the groups that were categorised ‘a priori’ as high risk.   It is concluded that the a-priori labelling of groups as ‘high’ and ‘medium’ risk may be misleading.	Sarah	 Castle	Enias	 Baganezi	Caroline	 Ryan	Flabou	 Bougoudogo	Ellen	 MacLachlan	Kathy	A. Parker	Pamina	 Gorbach
2003	43	The Demography of Infectious Diseases	Using the DHS to Measure Intermittent Prophylactic Treatment of Malaria and Low Birth Weight in Malawi		Erin	 Eckert	Kate	 MacIntyre
2003	43	The Demography of Infectious Diseases	Mortality from Infectious and Parasitic Diseases of the Elderly Brazilian Population	During the last decades, the distribution of mortality from infectious and parasitic diseases (IPD) in Brazil was marked by a considerable decline, however, for the elderlys, the levels of mortality remained practically stable. This article outlines the main changes in the mortality patterns examining trends, differentials and determinants of the IPD of the elderly in Brazil and in its states by sex and age groups, and explores its associations with socioeconomic indicators in the period from 1980 to 1995, which was accomplished through the use of the multiple lineal regression.   The ecological analysis of province-level data revealed a significant association with some socioeconomic indicators. The results showed a decrease of the participation of the lung tuberculosis and Chagas diseases and an important increase of the septicemy. But, as a whole, the trends suggest a stabilized control of the IPD in Brazil despite the economic deceleration in the period.	Neir	A. Paes
2003	43	The Demography of Infectious Diseases	Understanding TB and HIV at a District Level in Kenya	In much of East and southern Africa the epidemic of HIV has led to a dramatic resurgence in the rates of TB infection which has increased by up to ten times in some settings. Previous attempts to model the impact of HIV on TB and the implications for controlling the epidemic of TB have been done at a national level. However, there is substantial variation in the rates of both HIV and TB within countries and investigating the geographical spread and time course of both epidemics at a district level should provide important insights. We have developed models of HIV and TB and have applied  these to TB data collected for each of 50 districts and HIV data collected for each of 20 districts in Kenya. We describe and explore the different epidemics in different places and use socio-economic and demographic data to explain the time trends.	Brian	 Williams	Jennifer	 Sykes	Chris	 Dye
2003	44	Cultural Perspectives on Fertility	Catholics as Forerunners of the Contraceptive Revolution in Sub-Saharan Africa?	Using data from several sub-Saharan DHS, this study detects that Roman Catholics are generally in the forefront of contraceptive adoption. Catholics’ contraceptive use levels tend to be similar to or slightly higher than those of mainstream Protestants and considerably higher than those of other Christians, Muslims, and adherents of traditional cults. This Catholic “advantage” is analyzed from the standpoint of three main theoretical frameworks employed in studies of religion and demographic behavior—the theological differences, characteristics, and minority-status perspectives. None of the three perspectives alone provides a fully convincing explanation of the observed patterns. Based on the author’s own qualitative research in a sub-Saharan setting, the paper proposes to look for a key to a better understanding in the relative social diversity and cognitive flexibility of Catholic congregations. These characteristics may facilitate diffusion and legitimation of innovative preferences and behavior, even if such innovations conflict with the church’s official messages.	Victor	 Agadjanian
2003	44	Cultural Perspectives on Fertility	Two Regimes of 'Natural' Fertility: Non-Parity Specific Influences on High and Low Fertility Populations	In a seminal paper in 1961, Henry introduced the concept of 'natural fertility' to refer to the level of reproduction that exists in the absence of deliberate birth control. This does not mean that non-contracepting populations will all reach biologically maximum TFRs of around 16.  Actual population TFRs are considerably lower  because of socioeconomic and cultural factors affecting the risk of intercourse, pregnancy and a live birth.   In principle, Henry's definition allows for a  range of fertility outcomes in natural fertility populations, but conventional wisdom has tended to restrict the concept to the study of high fertility societies. As soon as fertility reaches near and below replacement levels, the conclusion is drawn that this is because of volitional fertility control. We question this assumption by looking at two contrasting examples of 'natural' fertility, in which little parity-specific birth control nevertheless leads to vastly different eventual fertility outcomes.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu	Sajeda	 Amin
2003	44	Cultural Perspectives on Fertility	Meaning Given to Late Motherhood by Contemporary Japanese Women	The postponement of motherhood is an important phenomenon in many low fertility countries.  A number of socio-economic factors, such as higher female educational attainment, greater female labor force participation, the absence or instability of partnerships, cause this.  Cultural factors, such as individualization of values, reduced normative control and feminism, are considered to be one of the important factors in explaining the causal mechanism of this phenomenon.  Cultural factors explain why in some countries recuperation behavior (catching up motherhood in age 30s) is present, and why in some countries this is absent.  This paper studies in more detail the role of societal values regarding late motherhood, and in particular, focuses on the perception of women on motherhood and marriage system as well as their perceived parental views on these issues.  Fifty-one single and married Japanese women without children were interviewed using focus group discussion interview techniques.	Hideko	 Matsuo
2003	44	Cultural Perspectives on Fertility	When and Whom to Marry? Changes in Men's Marriage Patterns and Their Implications for Fertility Decline in Rural Senegal	The fertility decline in Senegal is associated to changes in marriage patterns, in particular to the postponement of women’s first marital union. However, premarital fertility is increasing, implying that the link between marriage and the start of the reproductive life should be nuanced. Because of their key position as decision-makers within the family, the issue of when and whom to marry will be considered from men’s perspective. Qualitative and quantitative data are used to determine how the adoption of “innovative” behaviors occurs in the Niakhar rural area. Men seem to marry at a younger age than previous generations and they seem to have more autonomy in choosing their spouse because of their migration and urban experiences. We will show how these changes in timing and couple matching may shape women’s own reproductive timing and the couples’ expectations in terms of family formation.	Nathalie	 Mondain
2003	45	Adolescent Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use	Within Group Differences in the Timing of First Sex among Hispanic Adolescents: The Role of Acculturation and Neighborhood Social Environments	This paper explores the timing of first sex among Mexican American, Central and South American, and Puerto Rican adolescent girls and boys using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health).  Using a multilevel random intercept hazard model, we find that the timing of first sexual intercourse varies among Hispanic populations.  Compared with Puerto Ricans, the hazard of first sex is lower for Mexican, Central and South American, and Cuban adolescents.  Acculturation and neighborhood environments, in particular the proportion of Hispanics in a neighborhood, explain most of the subgroup variation in the timing of first sex.      Findings from this study suggest that cultural protective factors may exist in neighborhoods with high concentrations of Hispanics that attenuate the risk of early sex associated with structural deficits such as low socioeconomic status.	Michelle	M. Doty	Dawn	 Upchurch
2003	45	Adolescent Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use	Community, Neighborhood and School Effects on Adolescent Sexual Behavior	We examine the linkages between community, neighborhood and school context and an adolescent’s risk of engaging in sexual behavior that can lead to the acquisition of HIV/AIDS and other STDs, and unintended pregnancy.  In particular, we apply the theoretical framework developed by Jencks and Mayer (1990) and examine the influence of five key underlying mechanisms of extrafamilial context (collective socialization, epidemic, institutional, competition, and  relative deprivation mechanisms) on the number of recent sex partners (within the last 18 months) an adolescent has had.  Recognizing that not all adolescents may be similarly affected by their community, neighborhood, and school contexts, we also examine the extent to which age, gender, race/ethnicity, and family structure and process affect an adolescent’s susceptibility to the effects of context on her or his sexual behavior.  We use Wave 1 data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health).	John	O.G. Billy	Lisa	 Cubbins	William	R. Grady	Daniel	H. Klepinger
2003	45	Adolescent Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use	Contraceptive Use Patterns within First Sexual Relationships	Our study examines the consistency of contraceptive use within adolescents’ and young adults’ first sexual relationships.  Our primary goal is to enhance our understanding of how to sustain recent improvements in contraceptive use at first sex so that teens and young adults can become more consistent contraceptive users.  We use a comparison of two nationally representative datasets – the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) -- to explore whether the factors important for adolescents’ contraceptive consistency differ from those important for young adults.  Using bivariate and multinomial logistic regression analyses, we find that characteristics of the both sexual relationship and the sexual partner influence contraceptive consistency, net of individual and family background.  Understanding patterns and predictors of contraceptive use among teens and young adults will help policymakers to develop strategies for preventing unintended pregnancies and STIs.	Suzanne	 Ryan	Elizabeth	 Terry-Humen	Kerry	 Franzetta
2003	45	Adolescent Sexual Activity and Contraceptive Use	Contraception and Conception among Young Single Women: An International Comparison	While overall declines in teenage fertility have been well documented for much of the developing world, wide variations persist at the regional and national levels, and across social groups. Addressing the reproductive and sexual health needs of young people in the context of rapid and profound changes remains challenging. This paper offers an analysis of differentials in fertility, its determinants and impacts among young single women, with a focus on variances across countries and regions. Data are drawn from the relatively less-exploited “calendar” module from the Demographic and Health Surveys for 17 countries. Multiple regression analyses are used to test substantive hypotheses about the correlates of sexual and reproductive health outcomes among women who were aged 15-24 and never married during the calendar period. Identifying the predictors of sexual activity, contraceptive use and conception rates could assist policymakers in creating programmes aimed at improving reproductive health care for young women.	Mohamed	 Ali	Neeru	 Gupta	Iuri	da Costa Leite
2003	46	The Demography of Race and Ethnicity in the Twenty-First Century	New Approaches to the Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	In this paper I review existing and future approaches to racial classification, and the interplay between these approaches and theories of race. Attention will focus on indicators of self-reported and observed race. I also explore the potential for using emerging genetic tools to classify by race. The importance of these topics has increased in recent years as immigration and interracial marriage have combined to further diversify American society, and data sources have used varying methods to collect racial data.	David	 Harris
2003	46	The Demography of Race and Ethnicity in the Twenty-First Century	The Rise and Fall of the Concept of Race	Physical, linguistic, and cultural diversity have been salient features of human societies throughout history, but the origins of “race” as a scientific concept is a modern phenomenon created in nineteenth century Europe as Darwinian thought was (mis) applied to account for differences in human societies. Although modern science has discredited race as a meaningful biological concept, race has remained as an important social category because of historical patterns of interpersonal and institutional discrimination. The problem of consistent and reliable reporting of race, either as an identity or as an observed trait, means that the notion of race as a set of mutually exclusive categories is disappearing. As a social science term, race will gradually be come similar to the amorphous concept of ethnicity.	Charles	 Hirschman
2003	46	The Demography of Race and Ethnicity in the Twenty-First Century	Census Categories and Social Research	In 1977, the federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) established an official classification standard for the measurement of race in the American population.  In so doing, OMB authorities created what amounted to a racial cosmology that spread throughout American society, affecting public perceptions about the racial hierarchy of American society. In 1997, the OMB issued a revised version of this classification in which small changes may profoundly affect the way policy makers and the American public think about race.  At the very least, these revisions present significant challenges to social scientists who study race and ethnicity.  This paper will examine the conditions leading up to the 1997 revisions of OMB Directive 15, and how this may affect social scientific research on the subject of race and ethnicity.	Matthew	 Snipp
2003	47	Immigrants and Labor Markets	Labor Force Participation and Access to Health Care Insurance for Immigrants and Natives	Research has shown that immigrants and natives have significantly different rates of employer-based and Medicaid health insurance coverage. Two main explanations for the differences in employer-based health insurance coverage (EBHI) exist. One postulates that human capital characteristics can explain these differences, the other explanation focuses on the differences in labor force participation. Comparatively few studies have examined labor force participation of native and immigrant differences and access to EBHI health insurance.    	 Using the Current Population Survey from 1994 to 2001, this research examines rates of employment and unemployment for immigrants and natives and their access to employer-based health insurance. The results show that there has been an increase in the number of natives and immigrants in the work force and there has also been an increase in EBHI but nativity inequalities persist.	Olga	 Bright	Frank	D. Bean
2003	47	Immigrants and Labor Markets	Do Immigrants Benefit from an Increase in the Minimum Wage Rate? An Analysis by Immigrant Industry Concentration	This paper analyzes the most recent increase in the minimum wage rate in the U.S., primarily focusing on a group of workers that should benefit the most--immigrants.  In particular this paper makes the distinction between immigrants and natives who work in low and high immigrant industry concentration.  This paper also investigates whether there is any relationship between industry noncompliance and the concentration of immigrant workers.  I find that both immigrants and natives benefited from this recent increase in the minimum wage rate.  Also, the two procedures testing non-compliance towards immigrants unambiguously show no existing evidence of such incidence.  In fact, female immigrants working in high immigrant industries, who are the worst off in the sample compared with the other groups, are the group with the highest compliance towards them.	Kalena	E. Cortes
2003	47	Immigrants and Labor Markets	A Comparison of the Quality and Economic Effectiveness of the Social Networks among Latinos in Boston and Los Angeles	Studies have suggested that the social support among Latinos in the U.S. can help them find jobs, but not necessarily better jobs. In this paper I explore whether there are any differences among different Latino groups with respect to the quality of their social networks and economic outcomes.  Relying on the “Strength of Weak Ties argument of Granovetter (1973), and using the Multy-City Study of Urban Inequality (MCSUI) data for Boston and Los Angeles, I first construct a Network Quality Score (NQS) from characteristics of the contacts for each respondent. I then estimate two OLS regression models. In one, I estimate the determinants of a high quality social network, and in the other model, I use the NQS to predict logged wages.  Preliminary findings suggest that the Mexicans in Los Angeles possess a higher quality social network than Puerto Ricans and Dominicans in Boston, however Mexicans earn lower wages.	Nadia	 Flores
2003	47	Immigrants and Labor Markets	Social Networks and Employment Segregation among Hispanic Workers	In a recent paper, Mouw (Are Black Workers Missing the Connection? Demography 39:3 2002)found that informal hiring procedures increase employment segregation among black and white workers.  In this paper, I use a similar approach to explore the effect of employee referrals and social segregation on inter-firm segregation among Hispanics.  Using a sample of 2,500 firms from the employer survey of the Multi-City Study of Inequality (MCSUI) I test for the effect of employee referrals on the probability of hiring a Hispanic worker, contingent upon the racial composition of the firm's workers and the spatial location of the firm.	Ted	 Mouw
2003	48	Men's Health Knowledge, Risks, and Behavior across the Life Cycle	Condom Use and Need for Protection against HIV among Young Men in Sub-Saharan Africa		Akinrinola	 Bankole	Susheela	 Singh
2003	48	Men's Health Knowledge, Risks, and Behavior across the Life Cycle	Risky Sexual Behaviour among Young Men in Nepal	This paper explores the sexual activity and high-risk sexual behaviour among young Nepalese men using the Nepal Adolescents and Young Adult survey 2000. Information is drawn from 3,802 men aged 14-22 years. We consider the appropriate definition of risky sexual behaviour and analyse the contribution of covariates to the probability of being sexually active and being engaged in risky sexual behaviour.  The results indicate that one in ten single men are sexually active, and one in five of these are engaged in risky sex. Sexual activity among single men is higher in both rural areas and the ‘hill’ ecological region. Young men aged 14-16 years who are sexually active have a high probability of engaging in risky behaviour. Among married males 7.7 percent were engaged in extramarital sex. Nine out of ten married men reported being sexually active and, of these, about one in ten were engaged in risky sex.	Govinda	P. Dahal	Andrew	 Hinde	Monique	 Hennink
2003	48	Men's Health Knowledge, Risks, and Behavior across the Life Cycle	Spousal Communication and HIV-Preventive Behaviors among Men in Uganda	This paper examines factors promoting spousal communication about HIV prevention and the extent to such communication is important for the adoption of HIV-preventive behaviors.  The data come from the 2000 Uganda Demographic and Health Survey. We examine the extent to which spousal communication is related to the following outcomes: (1) condom use at last sexual intercourse; (2) HIV-testing; and (3) sexual fidelity in the past 12 months.  It is hypothesized that spousal communication about HIV-prevention is positively associated with condom use at last sex and HIV-testing and has stronger positive effects on condom use at last sexual intercourse when attitudes towards condom use are positive.  Findings suggest that the frequency of spousal communication about family planning creates an environment conducive to open communication in the dyad, which in turn, exerts a direct positive effect on the adoption of safer-sex strategies.	Anastasia	J. Gage	Disha	 Ali
2003	48	Men's Health Knowledge, Risks, and Behavior across the Life Cycle	Does Marriage Influence Individual Behavior in Urban Africa?  Evidence from a High HIV Area in Kenya	The marriage institution, which plays an important role in regulating sexual activity in most societies, traditionally placed few restrictions on extra-marital relationships in sub-Saharan Africa.  If this pattern continues today, it may help explain the relatively high levels of HIV/AIDS in this region.  We test the link between marriage and sexual activity on a sample of migrants in Kisumu, Kenya.  A preliminary regression shows that married men have significantly fewer non-marital partners than single men, but this regression does not account for selective entry into marriage.  Indeed, the marriage effects disappear when we instrument for marriage.  In contrast, marriage has a strong influence on employment, income, and remittances, consistent with the view that marriage facilitates reciprocal exchange and improves labor market outcomes.  Sexual activity appears to lie outside the range of influence of the marriage institution due to historical circumstance, not because the institution per se is ineffective.	Nancy	 Luke	Kaivan	 Munshi
2003	49	Demography of Income and Wealth Inequality	Immigrant and Native Asset Accumulation: The Issue of Long Term Immigrant Assimilation	What is the wealth position of immigrants relative to natives? Do differences of knowledge and confidence in financial institutions lead to differences in long term economic security? Questions about immigrant worker asset accumulation have remained nearly unasked in the face of hundreds of articles about immigrant assimilation.  We analyze wealth differences by examining the acquisition of a single asset—home real estate.  Are immigrants as likely as natives to purchase their home? Although past authors have concentrated on immigrant nativity and residential location to explain homeownership differences, a more nuanced discussion occurs when immigrants are separated into citizens and non-citizens, and when nationality is compared to ethnicity and race.  We also take the analysis several steps further than past authors.  We examine the determinants of the rate of homeownership/buying, the rate of 100% ownership (owners have no lien on the home), the debt to value ratio for homeowners, and equity levels.	Sherrie	 Kossoudji	Stan	 Sedo
2003	49	Demography of Income and Wealth Inequality	Housing and Wealth Inequality: Race/Ethnic Differences in Home Equity in the United States	In the current research, we provide a first step at broadening our understanding of the sources of both housing and wealth inequality by studying the differential determinants of the value of housing equity among African Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanics, and non-Hispanic Whites in the United States.  Using data from the 2001 American Housing, we examine whether significant race/ethnic gaps in housing equity remain after controlling for a wide range of locational, life cycle, socioeconomic, family, immigrant, and market/contextual characteristics.  We further consider whether socioeconomic, life cycle and metropolitan housing market factors differentially influence equity accumulation for whites and the three minority groups.  The results contribute to the burgeoning literature on wealth and housing inequality which acknowledges the importance of broader social and institutional processes of race/ethnic stratification that advantage some groups, Whites in this case, over others.	Lauren	J. Krivo	Robert	 Kaufman
2003	49	Demography of Income and Wealth Inequality	The Financial Assimilation of U.S. Immigrants	In this paper, we study the factors that affect financial assimilation of immigrants using longitudinal data from the 1996-2000 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). To our knowledge, this is the first economic study to investigate the size and composition of asset holdings of immigrants relative to that of natives using panel data.   We investigate the impact of country of origin variables (including investor protections, degree of similarity to U.S. legal and financial institutions) on the financial assimilation of U.S. immigrants.  Our results suggest that immigrants' use of financial services and portfolio composition converges to that of natives.  However immigrants from countries with less-developed financial markets (relative to the U.S.) may assimilate at a slower rate compared with immigrants from countries with more developed financial institutions, other things being equal.  The results from this study have the potential to inform current policy debates on U.S. immigrant adaptation.	Una	Okonkwo  Osili	Anna	 Paulson
2003	49	Demography of Income and Wealth Inequality	Economic Well Being in Old Age: The Role of International Migration in Mexico	This paper focuses on the socioeconomic differentials in old age, examining the impact that international migration in the past could have on the economic well being of individuals in middle and old age. The paper makes a contribution first, because the data represents a first attempt to measure personal wealth in Mexico in a national sample, enabling comparisons between income and wealth differentials in old-age.  Second, by focusing on the impact of migration, the paper contributes to the literature on explanations of socioeconomic differentials among older persons. The overarching hypothesis is that among  individuals currently residing in Mexico, those with past migratory experience to the U.S. will exhibit higher levels of well being than those who have no such experience.  The data comes from the first wave of the new Mexican Health and Aging Study, a nationally representative, prospective panel study of Mexicans aged 50 and over as in 2000.	Rebeca	 Wong
2003	50	Reproductive and Fertility Issues in Societies with Medium and High Fertility	An Examination of the Intensification Effect of Son Preference on Recent Trends in Regional Fertility in India	ABSTRACT    Son preference's impact on Indian fertility is examined within 14 major states, utilizing the NFHS surveys of 1992-93 and 1998-99 but with emphasis on the NFHS-2 survey. The 14 states are grouped into two on the basis of the strength of son preference.The analysis indicates that the birth hazards for the gender composition of surviving children are highest at parity 3 for the majority of the 14 states. The intensification effect, or increasing impact of son   preference at lower parities, is manifested in strong son preference states experiencing large fertility declines such as Punjab and Haryana. Son preference continues to affect fertility at lower parities and it is possible that a floor well above replacement level is forming, especially in the populous northern/central states. However, with the increasing incidence of sex- selective abortions it is possible that lower fertility with dramatically skewed sex ratios at birth will result.	Rukmini	 Potdar	Douglas	T. Gurak
2003	50	Reproductive and Fertility Issues in Societies with Medium and High Fertility	Decision Making and Family Planning Use in Cebu, Philippines	This study examines the relationship between decision-making and family planning use by married women in Cebu, Philippines. Of particular interest is how autonomous decision making by women differentially affects use and method of family planning compared with joint or spouse-controlled decision making. Autonomous decision making is measured by who women consult and whose will prevails in the decision to use family planning. Findings indicate that women whose will prevails are much more likely to use contraception, and modern over traditional methods, than when spouses' will prevails. When considered together, women who consult their spouse and manage to have their will prevail have the highest probability of contraceptive use. The findings suggest that contraceptive use is highest when women are able to go beyond autonomous decision making and negotiate family planning use with their spouses so that their interests are represented.	Kammi	K. Schmeer
2003	50	Reproductive and Fertility Issues in Societies with Medium and High Fertility	Mortality and Fertility Interactions: New Insights from Recent Population Dynamics in Cambodia	This paper analyzes fertility trends in the years following the Khmers Rouges' regime and the associated mortality crisis in Cambodia (1975-1979). Reviews of demographic responses to exogenous shocks in historical populations suggest that post-crisis fertility rebounds are not uncommon, but typically driven by marital fertility surges due to the increase in the number of susceptible women that follows the crisis' conception dearth. Some features of the post-Khmer-Rouge baby boom do not seem to fit this standard explanation.  Data collected specifically to allow for more detailed analyses of the components of that baby boom reveal that married couples had, throughout the 1980s, higher fertility rates and more diverse marriage patterns than before 1975. Hence, these results support the claim that the survivors of the Khmer Rouge regime engaged in proceptive behaviors at two levels at least: the marital unit itself and the extended family typically involved in marriage arrangements.	Patrick	 Heuveline
2003	50	Reproductive and Fertility Issues in Societies with Medium and High Fertility	Inconsistencies in the Relationship between Contraception and Fertility in Bangladesh: How and Why?	Although CPR increased by 9% from 1993 to 2000, there was almost no decline in TFR during this period in Bangladesh.  The study investigated the reasons for the inconsistency in the relationship between CPR and TFR using data from a demographic surveillance area, and DHS 1999-2000.  The results suggest that fertility converges to desired family size, which in turn depends on the development.  A family planning program is expected to make the convergence quicker, and bring down not only fertility but also abortion.  Son preference explains a small part, but infant and child mortality might have a bigger role in the difference between desired family size and TFR.  Reduction in breastfeeding, and relatively more increase in less effective contraceptive methods might be responsible for the inconsistency in the relationship between CPR and TFR.  Development and IEC along with family planning deserve importance to bring down fertility further.	Unnati	Rani Saha	Radheshyam	 Bairagi
2003	51	Identity, Racial Boundaries, and Patterns of Social and Self-Classification	The Urbanization of Native Americans: The Experience of Mixed Ethnicities in Los Angeles	The urbanization of American Indians is one of the most significant demographic processes to affect this population in the twentieth century.  The population of American Indians has also increased, a factor partially attributed to increasing American Indian self-identity, often measured through the number of people of mixed ancestry.  I provide a brief summary of historical trends regarding the American Indian movement towards urban areas, then use the 1990 Census Public Use Microdata 5% sample to explore the recent socioeconomic experiences of American Indians in Los Angeles.  Los Angeles is relevant because of the potential to study American Indian-Hispanic mixed ancestries.  These preliminary findings suggest similar gender and education effects across groups, but that Other-Hispanic Indians may be more sensitive to contextual factors.	Darcy	W. Hango	Paula	A. Arriagada
2003	51	Identity, Racial Boundaries, and Patterns of Social and Self-Classification	Biracial Black/White Children and Class: The Semi-Permeable Boundaries of Race in America	This paper examines educational differences between biracial black/white children and their monoracial peers, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97).  Previous research has revealed an in-between effect for biracials. I extend the previous research by defining biracial children by the race of their parents in order to avoid issues of reverse causality. I also test whether the outcomes of biracial children are due to superior family resources.    I examine grade retention in both surveys as well as ASVAB scores in the NLSY97.  All outcomes follow the in-between pattern observed by previous studies.  Furthermore, I find that biracial families are more like white families than black families in terms of education, family type, and region.  These family differences fully explain differences between biracials and blacks in terms of grade retention and explain a significant portion of the difference in test scores.	Aaron	 Gullickson
2003	51	Identity, Racial Boundaries, and Patterns of Social and Self-Classification	Bleach in the Rainbow: Latino Ethnicity and Preference for Whiteness	The conventional distinction between the cunderstanding of race in the USA and in Latin America treats race as genotypical in the former and phenotypical in the latter.    The Latin color line is  viewed as nebulous and benign, summarized by the rainbow people metaphor, in contrast with the USA one drop rule,putatively rigid and malign.     Census data for 1980 and 1990 and the Latino National Political Survey (1989-1990) problematicizes the rainbow people interpretation of the Latin conception of race. We demonstrate strong preference for whiteness among Latinos, regardless of skin shade.    Additionally, evidence from the Multi City Study of Urban Inequality, the National Survey of Black Americans, and the General Social Survey indicates the importance of phenotype in the USA. Moreover, the dichotomous black-white distinction is historically contingent -- a development that did not crystallize until evaporation of  social use of the mulatto category in the 1920s.	William	 Darity, Jr.	Jason	 Dietrich	Darrick	 Hamilton
2003	51	Identity, Racial Boundaries, and Patterns of Social and Self-Classification	The “One-Drop Rule”: Does Hypodescent Still Operate for Multiracial Americans?	The “one-drop rule” has been used in legal and popular settings to classify all individuals with any African American ancestry as Black.  This rule might, however, be less influential for multiracial Americans today than it has been in the past.  Using the May 1995 Current Population Survey Supplement and the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, I investigate the salience of the one-drop rule for multiracial Americans with some African American ancestry who are forced to choose a single race on a survey.  I find that the power of the one-drop rule varies significantly by age, region, and educational attainment.  The salience of the one-drop rule varies most, however, across different ancestry groups, with those who choose a “Black and American Indian” identity most likely to follow the one-drop rule, and those who choose a “Black and Asian” identity least likely to select an African American monoracial identity.	Mary	E. Campbell
2003	52	International Perspectives on Fatherhood	Fatherhood in the New Millennium: A European Perspective	This paper is based on research which aimed to enable researchers and policymakers to appreciate the current knowledge, research issues and policies being considered in the area of fathers and fathering in a number of countries in Europe, the USA and Australia.     Results indicate that while fathers clearly matter in some European countries’ policies and discourse (Sweden, Norway, Belgium, Italy Germany and the UK) in other countries (e.g. Netherlands, France and Spain) there is negligible acknowledgement of the need for information about fathers and fathering but for different reasons. And the few studies are limited by methodological constraints.    While we are at the cusp of an expansion of interest in fathers in Europe, there is still confusion about the part men should play or do play in contemporary families. The differing perspectives taken in both policy and research on fathers reveal interesting cultural priorities and attitudes to families.	Lynda	 Clarke	Ceridwen	 Roberts
2003	52	International Perspectives on Fatherhood	Fatherhood in Urban Mexico	This paper analyzes the practice of fatherhood in urban Mexico today. Our objective is to identify the socio-demographic factors which can be associated with a more active participation of men in children’s care and recreation.  Data come from a probabilistic survey of 1 644 men residing in Mexico City and Monterrey in 1998-1999. Logistic regression results indicate that a more participative fatherhood is associated with higher schooling, urban childhood residence, sharing egalitarian views on care and children’s age, but not with income or a younger father’s age (20-29 years). It is men who are 30-39 years old the ones that stand out from the rest (younger or older men) in their fatherhood practice. On the whole, our study helps to identify the nature of fatherhood changes in Mexico, the characteristics of those who are at the forefront of these transformations, as well as the stage of the life-cycle in which they are taking place.	Brígida	 García	Orlandina	 Oliveira
2003	52	International Perspectives on Fatherhood	Father and Fathering in India: Implications from Nationwide National Family Health Survey	This paper explores the extent of fathering (male involvement in child care) by examining National Family Health Survey (1998-99) data in India. It tries to capture fathering indirectly, by analysing father's socio-economic and demographic characteristics and various child-care correlates. Regional analysis has been done to study the impact of cultural variations upon fathering. Estimation of the extent of fathering has been done by cross tabulating father's characteristics and childcare correlates – Immunization (DPT, Polio, and Measles) and Childhood diseases (Pneumonia, Fever, and Diarrhoea). An attempt has also been made to explore the extent of inter-spousal communication and decision-making regarding family planning and unwanted pregnancies that intensely affect child health. The study indicated that factors like father's educational and occupational status, type of earning (cash/non-cash), ethnicity, religion and couple’s ideal family size norms largely affect fathering. Regional analysis indicates that cultural variations have strong impact on the extent of fathering.	Niyati	 Joshi	Prachi	N. Surti	Chander	 Shekhar
2003	52	International Perspectives on Fatherhood	Before Separation and After: the Link Between Family Characteristics and Custody Arrangements	Until recently, most analyses of fathers’ involvement with children after separation drew on characteristics of already separated mothers or fathers to explain observed variations. Panel data from consecutive cycles of the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth make it possible to take a new approach, exploring how the characteristics of couples in “intact” families influence decisions made about custody and visiting arrangements when they separate. Using multinomial logistic regression techniques, and the sample of families that experience parental separation between two survey cycles, we test how pre-separation income, parents’ labor-force involvement and other characteristics (including education, union type, number, age and sex of children) influence how separating parents organize their children’s living arrangements. Findings indicate that the way in which couples share parenting and income-earning roles while living together has a strong influence on how they divide responsibilities when they separate.	Heather	 Juby	Celine	 Le Bourdais	Nicole	 Marcil-Gratton
2003	53	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development	Falling behind while Catching up: Changes in the Female-Male Wage Differential in Urban Turkey, 1988 to 1994	Our main objective in this paper is the examination of the recent evolution of gender wage differentials in the private and public sectors, and reconciliation of the changes with related trends. Two trends we are especially interested in are the gains women have registered in terms of educational attainment and wage employment. Also of interest for us are the labor market implications of the increased exposure of the Turkish economy to global competitive forces. The preliminary results indicate that although the gender education gap is yet to close, women are catching up with men. Data from urban Turkey yield a more desirable picture, and support the view that urbanization is a favorable force. Women are also found to turn to the marketplace in increasing numbers. However, this trend is accompanied by a growing wage dispersion as a consequence of differential improvements in the returns to education.	Meltem	 Dayioglu	Insan	 Tunali
2003	53	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development	Assessing the Impact of Affirmation Action on Educational Attainment in India	While Indian society remains highly stratified along caste and religious lines, India also represents an experiment in affirmative action that exceeds anything seen in developed countries. Compensatory or positive discrimination policies have been put in place to to reserve 15 percent of the seats in institutions of higher education and in government employment for people of the lowest castes, the ‘scheduled caste ’; 7.5 percent seats have been reserved or ‘scheduled tribes’. These policies have generated substantial backlash and on the ground sabotage of the programs. We examine changes in the educational attainment between various caste groups in the past 20 years to evaulate the success of these policies.  We use data from large national sample surveys of over 120,000 households for each of the four survey years, 1983, 1987-88, 1993-94 and 1999-2000 and focus on the educational attainment of youths aged 15-22.	Sonalde	 Desai	Veena	 Kulkarni
2003	53	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development	Gender Differences in Test Score in Colombia. The Paradox of More Education but Low Scores for Women	Average years of education, and enrollment rates for each level of education are higher for women than for men in Colombia. This situation is only present in 13 countries out of 87 developing countries in 1995 (Population Action International, 1998). One might conclude that women have higher incentives to get education given these indicators. It would be expected that women would obtain equal or better scores than men in the National Aptitude Test of High School Students. Surprisingly, the result is completely the opposite. This paper tries to understand why women had lower scores than men did in the national aptitude test taken the last year of high school in 1999. Different explanations are explored, in particular the effect of violence in affecting men school attendance.	Juan	C. Guzman
2003	53	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development	Regional Wage Differential and the Social Returns to Education: A Hierarchical Approach	Regional wages have a strong relationship with regional characteristics. The literature presents two main explanations: first, the human capital model shows how inequalities in the level and distribution of human capital across regions affect local wages; and second, how the structure of  local labor markets influence wage differentials and wage inequality.  The objective of this study is to analyze regional wage differentials in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais and present a different methodology to study these differences, Hierarchical Linear Models. More specifically, the aim is to examine the contribution of personal attributes and regional characteristics to the variability of regional wages  in Minas Gerais. The basic hypothesis of this paper is that regions with a larger stock of human capital will have higher wages in comparison to regions with smaller stocks and that workers will benefit positively from this concentration of human capital in a particular region.	Bernardo	L. Queiroz
2003	54	HIV/AIDS Prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa	Community Mobilization and HIV/AIDS Prevention among Youth in West Africa: The Guinea Case Study	The Guinean Government in coordination with international organizations supports reproductive health and HIV/AIDS prevention programs such as the Youth Campaign of the ‘Project to Strengthen Reproductive Health, STIs and AIDS Interventions’ (PRISM) in Haute Guinea.  The campaign employed a multimedia approach including mass media, community mobilization, and peer educators.      A post-quasi-experimental study was designed to assess campaign impact. Cross-sectional data were collected from a representative household sample of 1008 young men and women (16-24 years old).    The campaign was effective in improving preventive behavior such as condom use at last sex which was significantly higher (p      	Fannie	 Fonseca-Becker	Winifride	 Mwebesa
2003	54	HIV/AIDS Prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa	Does Knowledge of Risk of Contracting AIDS Change Sexual Behavior? The Case of Mozambican Youth	This paper assesses the level of knowledge of HIV among adolescents and young adults in Mozambique, evaluates whether self-assessment of risk of HIV infection is accurate, and if HIV awareness affects sexual behavior.    We use data from the 2001 national population-based Young Adult Reproductive Health and Behavior Risk Survey.The  sample includes 5,338 women and 5,150 men aged 15-24. Respondents assessed their risk of HIV infection as: none; small; moderate high and we compare respondents’ self-assessment of risk with a post data collection risk definition based on sexual behaviour.     We estimate that 17% of women 15-24 that reported being at no risk for contracting AIDS and 40% who reported to be at low risk, are actually at moderate to high risk of contracting HIV. Similarly, 19% of men who report being at no risk and 37% of those at low risk, can actually be considered at moderate to high risk.	Ndola	 Prata	Mark	 Stehr	Leo	 Morris	Elizio	 Mazive
2003	54	HIV/AIDS Prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa	Changing Perceptions of Risk of Infection with HIV/AIDS in Rural Malawi	This paper combines quantitative and qualitative data to investigate changes in perceived risk of contracting HIV/AIDS in rural Malawi.  Using longitudinal survey data, we find that Malawians worried less about contracting HIV/AIDS in 2001 than 1998.  According to qualitative interviews and journal accounts, HIV/AIDS and strategies to prevent it are a frequent topic of conversation amongst Malawians.  Women report worrying most about their husbands as a possible source of infection and discussing with them the importance of avoiding infection.  Men report worrying most about their extramarital partners and adopting preventive strategies such as fewer partners and more careful partner selection.  We show that the decline in perceived risk is significantly associated with declines in the behaviors that Malawians worry most about and perceptions of risk in individuals' social networks.  We interpret these findings as evidence that Malawians are changing their behavior in ways that may reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS.	Kirsten	 Smith
2003	54	HIV/AIDS Prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa	Perceived Social Support and Condom Use in Urban Cameroon	Borrowing elements from the theory of reasoned action, this paper examines the relationship between perceived social support and condom use in urban Cameroon.  In particular, we examine what sexually active people perceive about the attitude of their “significant others” regarding condom use and the extent to which this perception influences their condom use.  We discuss the role of social support as conceptualized in the social learning theory and the theory of reasoned action  as well as the mechanisms through which perceived social support is likely to influence condom use.  Using logistic regression on  data from a 2001-survey of 2632 sexually active men and women aged 15-39 on barriers to condom use that was carried out in Yaounde and Douala, Cameroon we show that, ceteris paribus, perceived social support is a statistically powerful predictor of condom use.	Basile	O. Tambashe	Gervais	 Beninguisse
2003	55	GIS and Spatial Models	Causality Analysis of Point Events in GIS Environments	Almost social and natural events/occurrences happen in geographic context(s) that can be captured as points in GIS environments. Nearest neighborhood analysis (NNA) and autocorrelation methods have been used to evaluate spatial dependency of point events. Lack of geo-referenced data availability hinders causality analysis of point events, since most socio-economic and demographic data are not available for point locations.    Advances in GIS support proximity analysis and spatial joins to create area-aggregated social, economic and demographic data for point events that can be directly imported in statistical packages to evaluate causality of the spatial dependency. In this paper causality of crime locations is analyzed in relation to proximity to alcohol services, urban density, income level and ethnic segregation in Savannah City, Georgia in 2000. Similar approach can be used to analyze other point events/incidences including disease patterns.    Keywords: GIS, Causality, Point Pattern, Nearest Neighborhood Analysis.	Naresh	 Kumar
2003	55	GIS and Spatial Models	County Child Poverty Rates in the U.S.: A Spatial Econometric Approach	This paper is a formal reanalysis of earlier work reported by Friedman and Lichter (1998) in which the effects on child poverty of local industrial structure and household/family composition are examined in a multiple regression framework.  The original analysis was persuasive and provided an important contribution to the poverty literature.  It did not, however, take full advantage of emerging tools in the geospatial analysis and spatial econometrics.  Our reanalysis maintains the original theoretical orientation, variable operationalization, and causal structure.  However, by explicitly acknowledging spatial externalities and neighborhood structure in the model specification, several improvements to the original specification are achieved.  The reanalysis is a convincing demonstration of the need for demographers and other social scientists to examine spatial autocorrelation in their data and to explicitly correct for spatial externalities, if indicated, when performing multiple regression analyses on variables that are spatially referenced.	Paul	R. Voss	David	D. Long	Roger	B. Hammer	Samantha	 Friedman
2003	55	GIS and Spatial Models	Contrast or Continuum? The Creation and Application of an Urban Gradient Index Using Remotely Sensed Imagery and GIS	Urban places are more complex and variable than ever before and rural places are more urban-like than ever before.  These transformations suggest that an urban gradient may be more useful for social science research than a dichotomy.  A wide range of urban indices have been proposed and tested over the years, but most of these have been concerned largely with measuring the extent of urban places, rather than measuring variability within urban places, or measuring the urban aspects of rural places.  Two spatial technologies—remote sensing and geographic information systems (GIS)--permit us to go beyond the indices that have been proposed in the literature to this point.  Using these techniques, I build and test an urban gradient index that assigns an urbanness score to a particular location, and then I discuss the usefulness of such an index.	John	R. Weeks
2003	55	GIS and Spatial Models	The Spatial Diffusion of Fertility in Brazil: How Large Is the Effect?	In this paper we use a data set consisting of more than 100 million randomly-selected individual records from Brazilian censuses of 1960, 1970, 1980, 1991 and 2000 to address questions of spatial diffusion. We have aggregated individual-level records into approximately 500 spatial units (called microregions) that can be identified from geographical codes in all four censuses, and we have constructed fertility and development indices for each of the microregions in each census year from 1960 to 1991. We consider spatial interdependence postulating that, in addition to these covariates, fertility in region i is also related to the level of fertility, at the same time, in “neighboring” or other influential regions. First-differencing this model enables one to “explain” microregional fertility decline as a result of both local development, and of fertility change in the neighboring or influential regions.	Joseph	E. Potter	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Suzana	M. Cavenaghi
2003	56	Inequality, Race and Housing	The Ecology of Racial Digital Divide	In this study, we explore racial digital divide in the U.S.  We develop a casual model to explain computer and internet use at home both at the individual and city ecological levels.   We incorporate the diffusion model suggested in literature on technology transfer, and show the ecological importance of interaction effects between residential segregation and group poverty levels in the city in affecting computer and internet use at home.  The analysis is based on the 2000 Internet and Computer Use Data of the Current Population Survey and 2000 US Census data.  Hierarchical Linear Model will be employed to delineate the effects of individual characteristics and city ecological factors.	Eric	 Fong	Xinshan	 Cao
2003	56	Inequality, Race and Housing	Segregation by Choice: Private School Attendance and Public School Inequality	Surprisingly little is known about the influence of private school attendance patterns on racial and economic segregation in public schools. To study this, I use the 1990 PUMS census data to identify children who attend private school and who live in census areas (PUMAs) that vary in their racial and economic composition. Results indicate that the gap in private school attendance between poorer and wealthier students becomes larger as the poverty rate across census areas increases. Similar patterns are found by race. White children are more likely to attend private school as the percent of non-white students in their census area increases. By contrast, the probability that an African American child attends private school does not fluctuate with the racial composition of the census area. Thus, public schools in neighborhoods with higher poverty rates and greater percentages of non-white children lose the highest proportion of advantaged students to private schools.	Salvatore	 Saporito
2003	56	Inequality, Race and Housing	Housing Tenure Choice of Taiwanese Immigrants: A Different Path to Residential Assimilation	This paper investigates Taiwanese immigrants' housing tenure choice. It reveals that (1) compared with non-Hispanic whites, all Chinese immigrant groups have higher predicted homeownership and share a more similar mechanism in tenure choice; (2) homeownership gaps between Taiwanese and other Chinese immigrants are quite large among newcomers, converging somewhat as their duration of stay in the U.S. extends; (3) Taiwanese, who contributed to the surge in homeownership in the 1980s, were more likely to be young, highly educated, and new immigrant households with incomes lower than the median level; and (4) Taiwanese stand in contrast to other immigrants as English proficiency does not play a significant role in their homeownership attainment.  These outcomes may be an aggregate effect of a large influx of well-off Taiwanese, family support, and cultural affinity for homeownership.  Further research is necessary on factors such as locational choice and informal resources in immigrants' tenure choice.	Zhou	 Yu
2003	57	Early Socioeconomic Status and Health: Intergenerational Transmission and Historical Effects	The Effect of Grandmaternal and Maternal Health and Socioeconomic Factors on Birth Weight	In this paper we examine the intergenerational transmission of birth weight.  Using a unique data source, we look at the effect of grandmaternal and maternal health and socioeconomic factors on infant birth weight.  In preliminary results, one of the most striking findings is that of grandmaternal STD, which is associated with a birth weight deficit of over 150 grams, even after controlling for genetic factors.	Nan	M. Astone
2003	57	Early Socioeconomic Status and Health: Intergenerational Transmission and Historical Effects	Effects of Life-Course Conditions on Old Age Mortality in Southern Sweden 1829-1894	The importance of life course factors, such as socio-economic position, and current conditions for mortality in later life was assessed using historical data from southern Sweden. Longitudinal demographic and socio-economic data for individuals, and household socio-economic data from parish registers were combined with community data on food costs and disease load to analyse the 55-80 years age group mortality (number of deaths is 1,190). Possible dependencies in the data due to kinship and marriage are controlled for.    In this paper, we analyse how factors taking place during the life course influenced old age mortality taking into account early-life and current factors. We explore three different ways in modelling the life-course information and find both expected and unexpected results. Furthermore, both observed and unobserved characteristics at family level, either a result of genetics or shared experience, have a strong impact on mortality in later life.	Tommy	 Bengtsson	Göran	 Broström
2003	57	Early Socioeconomic Status and Health: Intergenerational Transmission and Historical Effects	Long Term Effects of Spanish Influenza on Mortality of Norwegian Cohorts Born around 1900	By using APC-analysis on life-table data for Norway, the paper shows that cohorts of both sexes born around 1900 have experienced significantly higher mortality relative to “neighbour” cohorts. This finding contradicts a widely cited study by Horiuchi, who hypothesized that only males from belligerent countries who were adolescents during WWI exhibit this cohort effect. The search for an explanation in Norway, which was neutral, must clearly go beyond the direct (soldiers wounded physically and mentally) and indirect effects (shortage and rationing of food) of WWI on later life mortality. This paper hypothesises that Spanish Influenza 1918-1919 caused the debilitation, not only for males, but also for females. Large proportion of the cohorts considered (born 1893-1910) was struck, but only a small proportion died of it. The net effect on later life mortality is thus assumed to be that of debilitation.	Svenn-Erik	 Mamelund
2003	57	Early Socioeconomic Status and Health: Intergenerational Transmission and Historical Effects	Social Classes, Inequalities and Health Disparities: The Intervening Role of Early Health Status	The persistence of adult health and mortality inequalities and the equally stubborn reproduction of social class inequalities are two salient regularities in modern societies that puzzle researchers in completely different and unconnected research domains. Using a new strand of labor economics emphasizing the existence of non-conventional skills and relying on research findings about the effects of early childhood health and conditions on adult health and economic success, this paper poses attempts to (a) partially account for intergenerational transmission of inequalities and (b) partially confirm the plausibility and importance of health selection (selection of Type II) as an explanation for current adult health and mortality differentials. We use estimates from NLSY and ECLS as well as from extant economics literature to assemble approximate estimates for the contribution of early child conditions to intergenerational transmission of inequalities, and suggest extensions of the same procedure to account for adult health and mortality inequalities.	Carolina	 Milesi
2003	58	Risk and Protective Factors for the Young	Risk and Protective Factors of Substance Use and Premarital Sex among Asian Youth	This paper examines levels of smoking, drinking, and premarital sex, and their covariates among youth aged 15-24 in Indonesia, Nepal, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Thailand, using large-scale national Youth Surveys.  The levels of substance among youth is very high in these societies, although the pattern of what substance is most commonly used varies from society to society. The prevalence of premarital sex is high among male youth except in Indonesia but low among female youth except in Taiwan. Five sets of variables are examined as potential risk and protective factors: community characteristics, parents¡¯ characteristics and indicators of respondents¡¯ relationships to their parents; individual level variables including religiosity, educational aspiration, and variables indicating self-esteem; indicators of stages of transition to adulthood; and respondent¡¯s other risk taking behavior. We use discrete-time hazard models using  person-ages as units of analysis and initiation of drinking, smoking, or premarital sex as dependent variables.	Minja	K. Choe
2003	58	Risk and Protective Factors for the Young	Risk and Protective Factors for Sexual Behaviors among Caribbean Youth	Objectives: 1) Identification of individual and family factors associated with: sexual debut; effective contraception; pregnancy history; 4 or more partners; and same-sex relationships. 2) Explore the extent to which the identified risk and protective factors cross-cut a range of sexual behaviors. Methods: A survey of 87 multiple-choice questions were asked of representative samples of young people from nine countries in the Anglophone Caribbean (n-15,695). Data were analyzed using logistic regression; resulting odds ratios evaluated with Wald Chi-square statistics. Results: Parental drug use, mental health, violence and attempted suicide, as well as rage and physical/sexual abuse are associated with more sexual health compromising behaviors. Parent connectedness has a weak association with sexual behaviors. The same is true for self-assessed school performance. Regular school attendance is associated with a lower likelihood of reporting 4 or more sexual partners.	Robert	 Blum	Sarah	 Lerand	Marjorie	 Ireland
2003	58	Risk and Protective Factors for the Young	Non-Consensual Sexual Experiences of Young People: A Review of the Evidence from Developing Countries	This review synthesises the evidence about non-consensual sexual experiences of young people in developing countries, its magnitude and correlates. Studies tend to be sparse and disparate, and the profile depicted here has had to rely on a few pioneering studies, drawn on selected sub-populations of youth. Findings may not be representative and comparability limited and for obvious reasons, responses in standard surveys are not always reliable. Findings suggest that non-consensual sexual experiences are not unknown and that for considerable minorities, including boys, sexual debut itself was coerced. Leading factors that place young people at risk of non-consensual sexual relations or inhibit them from seeking care, taking action against a perpetrator or withdrawing from a coercive relationship include gender double standards; and a lack of (a) communication and negotiation on sexual matters; (b) a supportive environment; and (c) trusted adults and peers to consult on sexual health matters.	Shireen	J. Jejeebhoy	Sarah	 Bott
2003	58	Risk and Protective Factors for the Young	Risk and Protective Factors for Coercive First Sex in Rakai, Uganda	A central feature of the HIV epidemic in many developing countries is the pronounced gender differential in age at acquisition, with young women having significantly higher rates of HIV. Although a potentially important factor, little attention has thus far focused on the role of coercive sex. Our study analyzes data from approximately 2000 sexually active young women in Rakai, Uganda, interviewed during 2001-2002 concerning sexual coercion, both recently as well as athe time of first sex. Our paper initially presents data on the prevalence and nature of coercive first sex in this population. We then investigate the individual, familial, and community factors which influence the risk of coercive first sex-- both factors which elevate as well as protect against such risk. Our findings will illuminate an important risk behavior  which may be contributing to the continued HIV/AIDS epidemic in settings such as Uganda.	Michael	 Koenig	Tom	 Lutalo	Nelson	 Sewankambo	Jennifer	 Wagman
2003	59	Links between Gender Inequality and Socioeconomic Development	Socioeconomic Development and Gender Inequality in Bangladesh: The Mediating Role of Marriage	This paper presents findings from a study of the relationships between socioeconomic development processes and interventions, gender inequality, and reproductive and sexual health in rural Bangladesh.  Using longitudinal and cross-sectional survey data from 1994 and 2002, we identify social and economic enabling factors that contribute to women's empowerment, examine the near-term and inter-generational health and social effects of women's empowerment, and describe the mechanisms through which change occurs.  We hypothesize that the effects of policies, programs, and economic opportunities on women's empowerment are often influenced by strategies developed by individuals, families and larger social entities regarding marriage, family formation, and economic survival.  In particular, prevailing marriage systems and practices may undermine the effects of development policies and programs that would be expected to enhance women's empowerment and gender equality.  We use complementary qualitative data to better understand the complex pathways between social and economic factors, gender inequality, and health outcomes.	Lisa	M. Bates	Farzana	 Islam	Md.	Khairul  Islam
2003	59	Links between Gender Inequality and Socioeconomic Development	Household Economic Strategies and the Dynamics of Marital Power in Rural Africa: Ugandan Case	In this study, I examine the effects of the household commercial production on women's marital power in rural Uganda. The developmental significance of African women's empowerment has become clear as development projects have gone awry because they made erroneous assumptions about African women's motivations and their lives.  It has become evident that interventions into African social life often have to be based on solid understanding of the opportunities and constraints facing African women. This study borrows from the marginalization perspectives on  women's status to examine hypotheses about the impact of household market production on women's marital power in rural Uganda. Data for the study come from  the 1995/96 Negotiating Reproductive Outcomes survey conducted in the Masaka and Lira districts of Uganda by the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) program of Macro International and the Institute of Statistics and Applied Economics (ISAE) at Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda.	Kofi	D.  Benefo
2003	59	Links between Gender Inequality and Socioeconomic Development	Changing Economic Roles of Men and Women in Northern Vietnam: An Analysis of Four Marriage Cohorts	The effects of socialism, war, and market transition upon men's and women's workforce opportunities in Vietnam's Red River Delta are explored.  War and economic transition brought marked shifts in the local labor supply and demand for labor in Vietnam during the late 20th century.  Data collected in the 1995 Vietnam Longitudinal Survey illustrate changes in the occupational distribution of male and female employment across four marriage cohorts (1945-64, 1965-1974, 1975-1984, 1985-1994).  Analyses demonstrate marked shifts in Vietnamese women's occupational opportunities over time. In particular, women made gains in professional, managerial and skilled production fields during periods of armed forces mobilization and wartime production.  By contrast, the most recent period features a sizable increase in the share of newly married men and women working primarily in agriculture.  The end of wartime conditions and policies supporting women's public employment has been accompanied by their return to the household and traditional economic sectors.	Kim	 Korinek
2003	59	Links between Gender Inequality and Socioeconomic Development	Does Educational Superiority Autonomize Daughters-in-Law Who Live with Their Mothers-in-Law? A Test of Caldwell’s Thesis	In India, where a partiarchial kinship system tends to limit a young bride from household decision making and restricts her movement inside and outside the home, previous studies conclude that with education women are more equipped to deal with and perhaps defy the socio-cultural system. Caldwell contends that South Asian daughters-in-law who live with their mothers-in-law are more autonomous if they are better educated than their mothers-in-law.  Yet, little empirical research has addressed the links between a woman's autonomy, her educational achievement and the educational achievement of her mother-in-law.    Using data from the National family Health Survey II (1998-99), this paper attempts to address this gap in empirical studies that address women's autonomy and education.   Measuring autonomy as a function of perception and experience, results from our logistic regression models suggest that education has important implications for women's empowerment and an interesting intergenerational dyadic relation exists within the household.	Manisha	 Sengupta	Nan	 Johnson
2003	60	Causes and Consequences of Divorce	Marital Dissolution and Migration: The Case of Mexico	This paper examines migration as one of the causes behind marital dissolution among Mexican migrants to the U.S. Specifically, we evaluate whether the risk of union disruption for male household heads is related to migration experience.  The data come from the Mexican Migration Project database (MMP).   Using discrete time event history analysis, we find that U.S. migration experience significantly increases the odds of union dissolution among male household heads.   Furthermore, the effect of U.S. migration experience appears to vary according to the timing of the U.S. migratory trip.  Those household heads living in the U.S. in the preceding year were almost 4 times as likely to experience union dissolution in the following year (OR=3.73).   This relationship was stronger and more pronounced than the one capturing general migration experience and union dissolution, suggesting that actual physical presence in the U.S. may be a key contributing factor to union dissolution.	Reanne	 Frank	Elizabeth	M. Wildsmith
2003	60	Causes and Consequences of Divorce	Fathers' and Mothers' Expectations about Child Rearing after Divorce: Does Anticipating Difficulty Reduce the Chance of Divorce?	This paper investigates how married parents' expectations about whether children will live with them and about the difficulty of child rearing after divorce affect whether the parents stay together or end their marriage.  We use longitudinal data from the National Survey of Families and Households to examine the effect on divorce of married mothers' and fathers' explicit evaluations of whether being a parent would be worse if they divorced.  We also estimate the effect on divorce of the predicted probability that children will live with their mother (or father) after divorce.  The prediction of living arrangements takes account of the nonrandom selection into divorce.  The paper considers both fathers' and mothers' attitudes as well as the potentially offsetting effects of expected social and economic costs of divorce.	Anne-Rigt	 Poortman	Judith	A. Seltzer
2003	60	Causes and Consequences of Divorce	Marital Quality and Divorce Adjustment	A large body of research has shown that the divorced are significantly less happy and healthy than the married.  Marital happiness and conflict, however, are associated with both individual well-being and the decision to divorce.  This paper re-examines the consequences of divorce on psychological well-being while allowing for variation in marital happiness.  Using longitudinal data from the National Survey of Families and Households, we find that the effect of divorce on psychological well-being depends significantly upon the level of prior marital happiness.  We demonstrate that those in unhappy marriages who divorce fare at least as well as (and possibly better than) the unhappily married who remain married.  By viewing divorce as a response to conditions within the marriage and incorporating measures of marital quality, our results suggest the negative consequences of divorce for individual happiness may be overstated.	Sheela	 Kennedy	Frank	 Furstenberg
2003	60	Causes and Consequences of Divorce	The Influence of Parents' and Children's Union Formation and Dissolution on Adult Children's Attitudes toward Divorce	Data from a thirty-one year, intergenerational panel study are used to investigate the influence of parents' marital dissolution and parents' attitudes toward divorce early in children's lives on adult children's attitudes toward divorce. We also examine the impact of children's union formation and dissolution between the ages of 18 and 31 on their subsequent attitudes toward divorce. Among the children, we consider the influences of entering a first cohabitation, entering a first marriage, dissolving a first cohabitation, and divorcing from a first marriage. We find that parental divorce followed by remarriage increases adult children's tolerance of divorce, as do mothers' attitudes toward divorce. Among children, divorce from a first marriage dramatically increases children's acceptance of divorce. Conversely, entry into a marriage decreases children's acceptance of divorce. Those who enter stable marriages after first cohabiting are substantially more tolerant of divorce than those who enter stable marriages without first cohabiting.	Mick	 Cunningham	Arland	 Thornton
2003	61	Emerging Global Patterns of Very Low Fertility	A Comparative Study of Recent Trends in Canadian and American Fertility, 1980-1999	Canadians and Americans report wanting to have the same number of children. However, the differential between the two countries has increased over the last decade and is now about one-half child per woman. This study describes fertility differences between the two countries and explores possible explanations, drawing on vital statistics data and on two national fertility surveys conducted in 1995: the GSS and the NSFG.      Growing gaps between the two countries are due to a sizable drop in fertility among Canadian women under 30 years of age. High fertility rate of American teenagers explains nearly a third of the difference.  Unwanted pregnancies and births are more frequent in the United States, as is the use of abortion. Canadian females use more effective contraceptive methods than Americans. Marriage takes place earlier and is more widespread in the US.  Labour market access is more difficult for young Canadians than for young Americans.	Alain	P. Belanger	Genevieve	 Ouellet
2003	61	Emerging Global Patterns of Very Low Fertility	Fertility Decline in the Former Communist Countries of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe	Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia, the liberalization of society, and the start of the transition towards a market economy, the fertility rates across the region have plunged precipitously, with some now competing for the distinction of being the lowest in the world. Using the proximate determinants framework, this paper will examine the fertility decline across this unique set of countries. Changes to each of the four primary proximate determinants – percent married, contraception, abortion, and breastfeeding – will be analyzed to determine their relative impact on fertility trends. In addition to these proximate determinants, changes at the macroeconomic and societal level will also be examined for their impact on fertility. Data to examine fertility declines in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe will be drawn from vital statistics, population censuses, and the various demographic and health surveys that have been conducted across the region.	Timothy	 Heleniak
2003	61	Emerging Global Patterns of Very Low Fertility	Europe’s Population at a Turning Point – A New Policy Approach	Europe has just entered a critical new phase of its demographic evolution. Around the year 2000, it began generating “negative momentum:” a built-in tendency to decline due to shrinking cohorts of young people caused by three decades of low fertility.  Currently the effect of this momentum on future population is small, but each additional decade that fertility remains at its present low level will imply a further decline in the EU of 25 to 40 million people, absent offsetting effects from immigration or rising life expectancy. Governments in Europe are beginning to consider a range of policy options to address the perceived negative implications of population decline and rapid aging. Social policies and labor laws aimed at halting the further increase in the mean age of childbearing have substantial scope for affecting future demographic trends in the EU, and would have health benefits as well.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Brian	C. O'Neill	Sergei	 Scherbov
2003	61	Emerging Global Patterns of Very Low Fertility	Fertility Studies in Context of Negative Natural Increase: An Analysis Based on the 2000 Census Data in Metropolitan Shanghai, China	Based on the new database of the 2000 population census of Shanghai in China, this research will take a quantitative study on those factors associate with fertility decreasing in context of a negative natural increase. This research was motivated by three questions: is the fertility decline a real decline or virtual decline? Is the fertility decline a forced decline or voluntary decline? Is the fertility decline a stable decline or unstable decline. The author will test whether changing in age structure, marriage patterns, urbanization process, education degree, internal migration, and other factors have positive or negative impact on population fertility with case study of Shanghai. Based on socioeconomic and institutional circumstance is changing, the author calls for reforms on the family planning policies in eastern coastal cities in China, and concludes some implications on maintaining low and stable fertility rate and advancing population and development in urban China.	Yuan	 Ren
2003	63	Migration, Urbanization and Development	Back to the Countryside: Urban Refugees in Post-Socialist Rural Hungary	This study examines the population distribution implications of the post-socialist transformation in Hungary.  We identified two streams of post-1990 population deconcentration, suburbanization and net migration to  villages, using secondary data. The stream into rural villages is consistent with observations made by a number of scholars that workers who lost their jobs in urban industrial workplaces are piling up in rural ghettos, thus exaccerbating spatial inequality. We examined this hypothesis with a household survey conducted in 49 villages in four distinct regions of the country.  In contrast to previous observations, we find that very few recent migrants to Hungarian villages came from Budapest  or other large industrial centers, and we find that in-migrants are younger, better educated, and are more likely to be employed than longer term village residents.	David	L. Brown	Laszlo	 Kulcsar	Laszlo	J. Kulcsar
2003	63	Migration, Urbanization and Development	Modeling Migration and Defining Transnational Outcomes in Rural Oaxaca, Mexico	Anthropologists have embraced the concept of transnationalism.  This is nowhere more evident than in the discussion of Mexican-US migration patterns.  Nevertheless, little attention has been paid to defining methods that can aid in measuring, explaining and predicting transnational outcomes.  We use data from an investigation of migration in the central valleys of Oaxaca, Mexico to show that we can measure and quantify transnational outcomes; explain community and household variation; and develop a systematic model of migration outcomes in the central valleys of Oaxaca, Mexico.  Our data come from an ethnosurvey conducted with 590 randomly selected households located in 11 randomly selected communities located in the central valleys of Oaxaca, the intermountaine region surrounding the state’s capital.	Jeffrey	H. Cohen	Alicia	Sylvia  Gijon-Cruz	Rafael	 Reyes-Morales	Garry	 Chick
2003	63	Migration, Urbanization and Development	Replication and Advancement of the Cumulative Causation Model: Evidence from Nang Rong, Thailand	The tendency for migration to gain a strong internal momentum once it is initiated has been studied under a variety of rubrics. Economists refer to a process of path dependence and Sociologists refer to a process of cumulative causation.  We build on these models and test their fit with data collected from Nang Rong, Thailand.  Using retrospective life history data we measure cumulative causation at the individual, household, and community levels.  We replicate previous models and find similar results.  Then, we correct for unobserved heterogeneity at the individual level.  Third, we introduce  household measures of cumulative migration experience to our model.  Finally, we introduce measures of marital status and level of economic development into our models.  Although we closely replicate previous models using the Thai data, when we add greater specificity to measures of cumulative causation we observe a shift in the importance of community level cumulative causation.	Sara	 Curran	Filiz	 Garipe	Chang	Y. Chung	Kanchana	 Tangchonlatip
2003	63	Migration, Urbanization and Development	Rural Families and Urban Households or Rural Households and Urban Families? Migration, Urbanization, and Family Change in Nigeria	This paper presents demographic and ethngraphic data to show that among Igbo people in Nigeria, as urbanization increases, extended families and kin groups continue to be tremendously important social institutions that link households, families, and generations through mechanisms of reciprocity that combine moral obligation, emotional attachment, and pragmatic self-interest. Further, the paper suggests that categories typically used to organize demographic analyses impose a structure that fundamentally misrepresents the reality of how Igbos have adapted to migration and urbanization. The paper argues that the social organization of domestic groups in both rural and urban communities can be adequately understood only if the rural community and its urban migrants are treated as one continuous social field. Urbanization, when looked at from the perspective of individuals, households, families and communities involved, is shown to be a process that unfolds simultaneously in rural and urban places, with processes in each setting affecting the other.	Daniel	 Smith	Thanh-Huyen	 Vu
2003	64	HIV/AIDS and Sexual Behavior	The Influence of Knowledge Factors on Perception of HIV Risk in Kenya	Using data from the 1998 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, logistic regressions are used to examine whether having the correct knowledge about AIDS is associated with perception of HIV risk among women and men. Knowledge factors were significant even after controlling for confounders such as age, marital status, education, work status, ethnicity and sexual behaviour. Perception of risk was higher among women and men who reported specific aspects of AIDS knowledge and prevention. Young and unmarried women and men were more likely to perceive themselves at small or no risk at all compared to the older and married ones. No significant effects of education, urban-rural residence and work status were observed. The findings suggest that AIDS prevention programs should focus on reducing misinformation and misconceptions that may influence people’s attitudes and behavior.	Priscilla	A. Akwara
2003	64	HIV/AIDS and Sexual Behavior	Urban-Rural Differences in Sexual Networking in Burkina Faso	The Priorities for Local AIDS Control Efforts (PLACE) field method was used in two Burkina Faso health districts to identify sites where people meet sexual partners and assess potential for HIV/AIDS intervention. Formal bars and brothels comprised a large proportion of sites in urban areas (45%), while small sites such as roadside bars were popular in rural areas (38%). Large public sites were common in urban and rural areas (30 and 47% of sites, respectively). Among 1036 individuals interviewed at sites, men and women reported at least one new sexual partner in the past month in both urban areas (42 and 61%, respectively) and rural areas (29 and 25%, respectively). The percentage of women who received goods for sex is greater in urban areas (56%) than rural areas (15%).  A minority of urban and rural sites had condoms, but 85% are willing to participate in prevention activity.	Maria	 Khan	Lisanne	 Brown	Nicolas	 Nagot	S	 Salouka	S	 Ganou	Joseph	 Bidiga	Sharon	 Weir
2003	64	HIV/AIDS and Sexual Behavior	Determinants of Reported Ability to Refuse Unwanted Sex among Female Youth in Côte d'Ivoire	Studies suggest female youth engage in substantial levels of unwanted sexual activity, thus increasing their risk for ill-timed pregnancies, STIs, and HIV. This study uses logistic regressions to explore predictors of youth’s perceived ability to refuse sex with various individuals. Data stem from a 2001 reproductive health survey among youth aged 15-24 in Abidjan, Bouaké and Korhogo.    Female youth are not confident in refusing unwanted sex with certain individuals. In fact, only a quarter were confident they could refuse sex in all circumstances. Predictors of ability to refuse sex vary by females relationships with individuals. Younger females and those who question gender beliefs were more likely to report confidence refusing sex with someone known for months— those who experienced forced sex or exchanged money for sex were less confident. Questioning gender beliefs is associated with confidence refusing sex with someone who gave gifts— having a child is associated with uncertainty.	Megan	L. Klein
2003	64	HIV/AIDS and Sexual Behavior	Sexual Behavior of Older Thai Men	Many adults, in Thailand and elsewhere, remain sexually active well into late middle and old age. A group that may be at particularly high risk for contracting HIV is older men who do not have access to marital sexual relations.      We explore this hypothesis using qualitative data from 9 in depth interviews of currently unmarrried Thai men in their 50's conducted in a central Thai province during June 2001.   Semi-structured interview guidelines explored prevailing social norms regarding older male sexuality during the current era; social norms regarding younger male sexuality during the time these men became adults; the number, types, and key features of recent sexual relationships engaged in by these men and by men in their friendship groups; detailed sexual histories of these men; and the understandings these men have about the risks of contracting HIV and AIDS.	Mark	 VanLandingham	John	 Knodel
2003	65	Beyond the Basics: Estimating and Projecting Characteristics Other than Age, Sex, and Race	Counting Same-Sex Unmarried Partners in the 2000 US Census Data: How Many Are Gay and Lesbian?	Large increases in the reporting of same-sex unmarried partners in the Decennial Census 2000 provides a significantly larger sample of same-sex unmarried partners than was available in 1990 and bodes well for research on the demographic and economic aspects of the gay and lesbian population.   However, a change in Census coding procedures between 1990 and 2000 creates a problem whereby a heterosexual married couple household that miscodes the sex of one of the partners will now be counted as a same-sex unmarried partner household.  Even a small fraction of sex miscodes among married couples creates a sizable measurement error issue among same-sex unmarried partners.  We use the Census 2000 Supplementary Survey Public Use Microdata Sample to test a set of models for assessing the extent of the measurement error and calculating reliable estimates of demographic characteristics of gay and lesbian couples.	Dan	 Black	Gary	J. Gates	Seth	G. Sanders	Lowell	 Taylor
2003	65	Beyond the Basics: Estimating and Projecting Characteristics Other than Age, Sex, and Race	An Evaluation of Small Area Estimates of Household Income	Etimates of household income weigh heavily in business decisions involving local consumer markets. The authors used the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) mortgage reporting data as one input into a small area income estimation model. This input data and the final household income estimates are compared to Census 2000 income results. The authors draw on the growing literature relative to evaluating small area estimates and use various measures for comparing two or more sets of spatial attribute data. Relatively high variability was expected between the income estimates developed from demographic estimating techniques and census data. The paper discusses this variability in terms of magnitude and direction, comparative measures and measurement issues, and the general significance of factors affecting the validity and accuracy of census data as well as the estimate data. The objective of this paper is to evaluate household income estimates with an eye to improving estimation techniques.	Thomas	G. Exter	Lew	Jean C. King
2003	65	Beyond the Basics: Estimating and Projecting Characteristics Other than Age, Sex, and Race	Has Asthma Prevalence Continued to Increase? A Quantifiable, but Convoluted, Answer	The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) has been the source of asthma prevalence data since 1979.  In 1997, the NHIS underwent a major revision that drastically changed the concept of asthma prevalence.  Prior to the revision, it measured a 12-month period prevalence, allowed both self and proxy responses, and did not require a physician diagnosis.  Beginning in 1997, adult proxy reporting was eliminated, a physician’s diagnosis was required and the question wording drastically changed to a lifetime prevalence concept. Because of these three changes, the historic asthma prevalence time trend was terminated.    The primary goal of this analysis is to provide annual estimates of time trends back to 1979 and future projections through 2010 for the historic 12-month asthma period prevalence measure and a current asthma point prevalence measure.  For each asthma prevalence measure we will provide annual estimates for both the percent prevalence and the number of cases.	Jeanne	 Moorman	Clinton	J. Alverson
2003	65	Beyond the Basics: Estimating and Projecting Characteristics Other than Age, Sex, and Race	'Lingering Effects' of Discrimination: Tracing Persistence over Time in Local Populations	I address a legal issue susceptible to demographic analysis: To what extent does past discrimination result in effects that linger in current times-—for example, narrowing residential choices, blunting educational aspirations of those affected and their offspring, and hindering contemporary political participation.  Lingering effects of past discrimination might persist directly or derivatively.  A Latino home buyer in the 1940s whose choices were restricted to narrow portions of a city by racially restrictive covenants then in existence, and who remained there ever since, would exemplify a direct effect.  A contemporary Latino home buyer's reluctance to settle outside that area would exemplify a derivative effect.  Such effects can be evaluated empirically, applying standard demographic concepts and data sources.  I offer several illustrations of how applied demographic analysis can either confirm, cast doubt on, or rule out the contemporary existence of a specific “lingering effect.”	Peter	A. Morrison
2003	66	Women's Changing Labor Force Participation	The Timing of Marriage, Fertility, and Female Labor Forice Participation in Morocco	Studying the impact of fertility on female labor force participation and the form that this participation takes is complicated by the fact that both fertility and participation are potentially endogenous household decisions, requiring simultaneous estimation.  Moreover, age at marriage, which is an important determinant of both fertility and participation, may also be endogenous to those decisions.  In this paper, we estimate a structural model of labor force participation that distinguishes between different participation states (non-wage work, public wage work, private wage work, and unemployment) and that takes account of the endogeneity of the timing of marriage and fertility.  We find that in Morocco, marriage itself is not a constraint on labor force participation, but the presence of children under six significantly reduces participation in wage work.  This effect is significantly weaker in the public sector, which appears to be more accommodating than the private sector to mothers with young children.	Ragui	 Assaad	Sami	 Zouari
2003	66	Women's Changing Labor Force Participation	The Relationship between Remarriage and Female Labor Supply	Because in second and higher marriages, a woman is more likely than in a first marriage to have children whose father is not her spouse, and the dissolution of a previous marriage may affect her expectations about the duration of her current marriage, the decrease in labor supply that frequently accompanies marriage may be dampened for second and later marriages.  I investigate this possibility using data from the PSID.  Because differences in work behavior may be the result of either the marital transitions or differences, observed or unobserved, between those who have one versus multiple marriages, a simple comparison of changes in labor supply associated with a first versus higher marriages may erroneously attribute the effects to remarriage.  To correct for the unobserved heterogeneity, I estimate an individual fixed-effect, and use state-level variation in sex ratios and divorce laws to identify the impact of marital decisions on labor supply.	Alison	 Aughinbaugh
2003	66	Women's Changing Labor Force Participation	Changes in the Size and Composition of the Population Outside the Labor Force	The United States adult population may be divided into two parts: those who are members of the labor force and those who are not.  Studies are generally interested in further analyzing persons in the labor force.  This research asserts that while societal changes had a profound impact on persons in the labor force, we miss part of the labor market story by not understanding the roles and characteristics of persons outside the labor force.  Using Current Population Survey data from 1964 to 2000, the growth and change in the population outside the labor force is decomposed into factors associated with demographic change and factors associated with social change (changes in participation in activities outside the labor force).  Separate analyses were conducted by gender and race.  Results for females and males highlight the contribution of social change in this population.	Shasta	F. Jones
2003	66	Women's Changing Labor Force Participation	Do Lack of Human Capital and Traditional Values Hinder Female Labor Force Participation? The Case of Portuguese Women in the U.S.	This paper examines how cultural, family and human capital characteristics affect the labor force participation of Portuguese women. It uses 1990 US Census data (IPUMS) and logistic regression to compare them to other European Americans in general and Italian Americans in particular.  The analysis shows that Portuguese immigrant women are more than twice as likely to be in the labor force than other European Americans with the same personal family, and residential characteristics, while those born in the U.S. are 21 percent more likely. Living in the Northeast, where a large proportion of the Portuguese have settled, enhances the likelihood of labor force participation for Portuguese women, but not for the comparison groups. The findings indicate that Portuguese women, more so than Italians, have been successful in overcoming human capital deficits and traditional, Southern European values to engage in work outside the home, using ethnic networks to do so.	Maria	 Mulcahy
2003	67	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Education in Pastoralist Communities in Kenya	Pastoralist communities in Northern Kenya are faced with a number of challenges, from drought and weather shocks, violence, wide fluctuations in market prices for livestock, and increasing threats from HIV/AIDS. Using a unique data set, we follow 180 pastoralist households for two years through a drought and recovery period. Although some sectors of the pastoralist community remain viable, many people are leaving the pastoralist system.  Preliminary analysis suggests that education is a key factor in people being able to successfully diversify their incomes to sources beyond livestock.  In this paper, we explore the patterns of education among members of the pastoralist community and examine the impacts of the drought on education patterns.  We can examine this both before and after the drought shock changed herd composition.  In addition, we analyze whose animals were sold to pay for school fees, which allows us to look at both outcomes and processes.	Cheryl	 Doss
2003	67	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Smoking, Drinking and School Dropout among Adolescents in the Philippines	I explore the relationship between three problem behaviors–smoking, drinking, and school dropout in a cohort of nearly 2,000 adolescents in Cebu, Philippines.  With longitudinal data, I assess whether problem behaviors cluster and whether smoking and drinking predicts future school dropout.  Both girls and boys who report that a close friend drinks alcohol are over 7 times as likely to report continuing to drink alcohol (beyond experimentation), even after controlling for other problem behaviors.   For boys, their own smoking and drinking behaviors during the 1998 survey  significantly predict school dropout by 2001.  For girls, own smoking and drinking behavior does not predict school dropout, but the smoking behavior of their friends in the 1998 survey  predicts school dropout by 2001.  For both boys and girls, it is clear that smoking and drinking behaviors are an not only an important concern for schooling outcomes but a concern for their future health.	Michelle	 Hindin
2003	67	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Early Childhood Development in the Philippines: Family Background-Service Provider Interactions	Increasing resources are devoted to early childhood development (ECD) programs in developing countries. But little is known about the effects of these programs.  One under-researched question is: are interactions between family background and ECD programs important? Are there gross complementarities (substitutions) such that “better” family background interacts positively (negatively) with ECD services? We examine these questions using rich new data that we collected from the Philippines that include indicators of (1) ECD for 12,000+  Filipino pre-school children (anthropometrics, health status, illness history, motor and cognitive development) (2) family background (parental schooling and anthropometrics, household assets) and (3) local ECD providers (presence of various facilities).  We use principal components to summarize the substantial information for these three sets of variables.  In the multivariate relations, we explore robustness of estimates to controls for unobserved community and family background characteristics that might relate to ECD and be correlated with the interaction terms.	Elizabeth	 King	Jere	 Behrman	Judith	B. Borja	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Socorro	 Gultiano
2003	67	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Food for Thought: Poverty, Family Nutritional Environment and Children's Educational Performance in Rural China	Sociology of education research has traditionally focused on economic, cultural and social resources as dominant mechanisms by which impoverished households transmit educational disadvantages to children.  This study introduces a new perspective by considering household food environment as a possible mechanism of educational stratification.  Analyzing data from a survey of 2000 9-12 year-old children and families in rural Gansu, China, this study addresses two specific questions: first, can the household nutritional environment be linked to school performance, and second, is nutritional environment a significant mechanism linking poverty and school performance?     Results show that nutrition measures exert significant effects on school performance while controlling for socio-economic status, other family demographic and environmental variables, and unobserved school and community differences. Further, the effects of socio-economic status are significantly reduced in models that consider nutritional environment in the home, suggesting that nutrition is an important mechanism linking household poverty to school outcomes.	Shengchao	 Yu	Emily	 Hannum
2003	68	Social and Economic Forces and the Transition to Motherhood	Distribution of the Age at First Birth among US Women 1984-1993: An Analysis of a Bimodal Pattern	Using both waves (1988 and 1996) of the National Survey of Families and Households, I show that the age at first birth among US women has a bimodal distribution, with peaks near ages 20 and 25.  This finding suggests a new interpretation of fertility patterns among US women, namely that there are two entirely separate childbearing regimes which can be identified through age at first birth.  Overall, women who have a later first birth have much greater control over their lives and are following distinctly different life course trajectories than those who have an earlier first birth.  Given that fertility is closely related to marriage and methods of family strategizing, the existence of differential fertility regimes indicates that there may be a divergence in the means through which the structure of modern families is determined, which is important to our understanding of the family as well as to policy considerations.	Rachel	 Sullivan
2003	68	Social and Economic Forces and the Transition to Motherhood	Do College-Educated Women Reduce Their Motherhood Wage Penalty by Delaying Childbearing?	One of the stylized facts from the past thirty years has been the declining rate of first births before age 30 for all women and the increase rate of first births after age 30 among women with four-year college degrees (Martin 2000).  What are some of the factors behind women’s decision to postpone their childbearing?  We hypothesize that the wage gap often observed between like-educated mothers and non-mothers (Waldfogel 1998) may be mitigated by postponing fertility.           We use individual-level data on women from the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to estimate a wage equation model that is later on expanded to address fundamental econometric issues and the education/fertility issue at hand.  We find that half of the motherhood wage gap of college-educated women can be eliminated by postponing fertility until their thirties, helping us understand the postponement of maternity among educated women and the overall decline in fertility.	Catalina	 Amuedo Dorantes	Jean	 Kimmel
2003	68	Social and Economic Forces and the Transition to Motherhood	Entry to Motherhood and Higher Education in Three Regimes of Welfare Capitalism		Michael	 Rendall	Encarnacion	 Aracil	Christos	 Bagavos	Alessandra	 DeRose	A	 Dharmalingam	Heather	 Joshi	Lisbeth	B. Knudsen	Philip	 Merrigan	Lene	 Meyer	Ian	 Pool	Filomena	 Racioppi	Janet	 Sceats	Georgia	 Verropoulou
2003	68	Social and Economic Forces and the Transition to Motherhood	On the Changing Relationship between Fertility and Female Employment over Space and Time	Various authors find that in OECD countries the cross-country correlation between the total fertility rate and the female labor force participation rate turned from a negative value before the 1980s to a positive value thereafter. Based on pooled cross-sectional data, Kögel (2002) shows that (a) unmeasured country-specific factors and (b) country-heterogeneity in the magnitude of the negative time-series association accounts for the reversal in the sign of the cross-country correlation coefficient. Our paper aims to identify those variables that may explain country heterogeneity in the negative association between fertility and female labor force participation. We apply aggregate descriptive representations of the time series and cross-country evolution of fertility, female employment and a set of labor market, educational and demographic variables and indicators of social policy. We confront our findings with existing macro and micro demographic theories and point towards some refinements.	Henriette	 Engelhardt	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz
2003	69	Demography of Disability and Aging	Toward a Better Understanding of Race/Ethnic Differences in Active Life Expectancy	We use data from the 1992-2000 HRS to investigate changes in functional ability across race/ethnic groups. Specifically, we address three major questions on race/ethnic differences in active life:    1) How do changes in functional ability with age differ for whites, blacks and Hispanics?   2) How do the consequences of changes in functional ability with age differ for whites, blacks and Hispanics?  3) How similar is the education gradient in functional ability changes with age for whites, blacks and Hispanics?     We use multistate life table models to describe changes in functional ability, estimating transition probabilities using a discrete-time hazard model, regressing the age-specific risk of functional change on dummy variables for black and Hispanic, and including indicators for sex, education level and the interactions between education and the race/ethnicity dummy variables. Using these estimated transition probabilities, we subject a hypothetical life table cohort to the implied functional ability change schedule.	Mark	D. Hayward	David	F. Warner	Eileen	 Crimmins
2003	69	Demography of Disability and Aging	Does Frailty Always Mean Short Longevity?	At advanced ages prevalence of disability in women is higher than in men. This supports a hypothesis that frailty may be associated with high longevity. Public use analytic data file of NLTCS conducted in 1982, 1984, 1989, 1994 was used to test the disability-longevity relationship. The disability was defined as impossibility to perform without special equipment or personal help at least one of nine predefined activities: eating, getting in/out of bed, getting in/out of chairs, walking around inside, going outside, dressing, bathing, using toilet, urination.     At age 90+ men reported as disabled had higher chances to survive than nondisabled. The difference in life expectancy estimates is 2.3 years (p-value       	Anatoli	I. Michalski	Kenneth	G. Manton	Anatoli	 Yashin
2003	69	Demography of Disability and Aging	A Comprehensive Sociomedical Framework for Measuring Changes in Physical Functional Status among Older Age Groups	Improvements in the public health of the elderly are most closely tied to understanding functional status trajectories. We developed a framework to disentangle the socio-biomedical aspects of functional status as the fundamental component in the disablement process. Synthesizing existing constructs and principles in the light of Newtonian law of universal gravitation, we extracted five factors from 21 physical functional status indicators, Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey 1991-93. The invariant factor structure over waves has good validity and reliability, loadings and Chronbach Alpha (.80s and .70s), RMA (.02), GFI (.94), and RMSEA (.58 with CI .57-.60). Stability emerged as a self-contained factor adding marginally to factors of lower- and upper-body functioning and transferring-1 and -2. The factors were re-interpreted as a rigorous sequence of physical necessity in human adaptation to his/her own body and the environment. Our unifying theme of physical property corroborated the frameworks of frailty, morbidity and modern physical therapy.	Shuanglin	 You	S.L.	 Bernard	R.G.	 Rozier	Jianwen	 Cai
2003	69	Demography of Disability and Aging	Trajectories of Physical Disability and Distress: The Longitudinal Effects of Social Support	Using multiple waves of data from the Duke Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly (EPESE), we investigate the relationship between trajectories of physical impairment, received and perceived social support, and depressive symptoms.  We argue that impairment, depressive symptoms, and social support can be considered growth processes in late adulthood.  Growth in impairment is expected to produce growth in depressive symptoms, while social support growth is expected to mediate the effect of impairment.  The research makes several contributions.  First, we demonstrate how Bayesian random coefficients models can be used to model growth and to handle missing data and unequal timing-of-observations that structural equation-based growth curves cannot.  Second, we find that growth in impairment predicts growth in depressive symptoms across age, and that growth in perceived support mediates the effect of growth in impairment on depressive symptom growth.  Third, we find that this mediation does not occur for received support.	Miles	G. Taylor	Scott	M. Lynch
2003	70	Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Onset of Fertility Transition in Rural West Africa: Evidence from Niakhar Demographic Surveillance System, Senegal	Fertility transition in Sub Saharan Africa has been shown in most countries. However, in West Africa, fertility levels in rural areas are still very high and contraceptive practice very low. In Senegal, the number of child per women 15-49 years was 5.7 in 1997, but the gap between urban and rural context is growing (4.3 vs. 6.7)  Data used are coming from the Niakhar study area in rural Senegal, where a Demographic Surveillance System is running from several decades (since 1963 for 8 villages and 1983 for 30 villages). A reproductive health project aims to document trends in fertility and to understand the process of behavioral change in a population just engaged in the first stage of transition.  Results show that fertility is declining specifically at young ages, age at marriage is rising, men become sexually active earlier and premarital births are more frequent in the younger generations.	Valérie	 Delaunay	Agnès	A. Adjamagbo	Pierre	 Levi	Adama	 Marra
2003	70	Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Fertility Transition in Ethiopia: A Search for Explanations	Ethiopia, which has a very serious economic problem, is also one of the sub-Saharan African countries with challenging population problems being overwhelmed by the ever-growing numbers of people needing basic services.      On the other hand, the first ever Demographic and Health Survey (ETDHS 2000) revealed that a unique fertility transition is taking place in Ethiopia.  For instance, the fertility level of the capital city – Addis Ababa has reached below-replacement level, which is an uncommon phenomenon in the context of fertility transition in sub-Saharan Africa.  Much as it is a surprise, it is also a challenge to researchers to provide possible explanations.      Using data from ETDHS 2000 and employing time series, multinomial logistic and loglinear Poisson regression analyses, this paper, first assesses the timing of the fertility transition and proceeds to explore for possible explanations for the unique fertility transition that is taking place in the country.	Muluye	S. Desta	Ian	D. Diamond	Zoe	 Mathews
2003	70	Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	The Timing of the Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa	If demographic and health surveys have underlined declining fertility trends in many countries of sub-Saharan Africa, little is known on the precise timing and the speed of the fertility transition in the continent. This study attempts to fill this gap, by using an innovative approach to the analysis of DHS data and other relevant surveys. The method utilises fine tuning of fertility trends year by year, for urban and rural areas separately. The paper starts by a case study of the fertility transition in Kenya. The same method is later applied to 20 countries. Results indicate that in many countries, fertility started to decline in the late 1960’s and 1970’s in urban areas, and about 10 years later in rural areas, much earlier than usually thought. Placing a time frame at the onset of the fertility transition allows one to develop further analysis of key determinants of the fertility transition.	Michel	 Garenne	Veronique	 Joseph
2003	70	Fertility Transitions in Sub-Saharan Africa	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from the Demographic and Health Surveys	In previous work we used data from the Demographic and Health Surveys of nearly 30 countries in sub-Saharan Africa to provide an overview and analyses of fertility transition in the region.  That research pointed toward a three-stage transition process, with fertility decline beginning in urban areas and then spreading to rural places.  Multivariate analyses of cross-sectional data on age-specific fertility rates in urban and rural places highlighted the importance of women's education, proportions married, contraceptive use, infant and child mortality, and urban residence as influences on fertility.  This research extends that earlier work by focusing on data for the subset of countries that have had at least two DHS surveys.  Analyses of data from countries with multiple DHS surveys allow us to examine changes in fertility in urban and rural places directly, and to assess how those changes are related to levels of and changes in the corresponding explanatory variables.	David	 Shapiro	Lisa	 Strunk	Tesfayi	 Gebreselassie
2003	71	Cohabitation and Exchange	How Institutionalized Is Cohabitation? Emotional and Material Support from Parents to Cohabiting Adult Children	Previous research has suggested that nonmarital cohabitors have lower quality relationships than married individuals because cohabitation is an “incomplete institution” in the United States; not only is cohabitation not regulated by the legal system in most states, but it also lacks support from societal norms concerning partners’ appropriate roles, responsibilities, and behavior. This paper investigates one way that this institutionalization may be manifested—in parents’ provision of emotional and material support to their adult children. We examine whether parents’ support to their adult children varies by the adult child’s relationship status. With cohabitation becoming an increasingly normative experience, it is important to understand the ways in which it differs from and is similar to marriage. Our results will help to determine whether cohabitation has indeed been institutionalized in individual social relationships even if it has not yet been institutionalized in the US legal system.	Susan	M. Lee	Pamela	J. Smock
2003	71	Cohabitation and Exchange	Cohabitation and Exchanges of Support	Cohabitation has rapidly become entrenched in the life course of young adulthood over the past few decades yet its effects on family ties remains poorly understood.   This paper examines the relationship between non-marital cohabitation and routine exchanges of support between American adults aged 19-30, and their aging parents using data drawn from the National Survey of Families and Households.   Cohabiting young adults were found to be significantly less likely to be exchanging support with their parents than their married or single, non-cohabiting compatriots.  Examination of specific exchanges revealed the largest differences between married or single and cohabiting respondents were in exchanges of household help and childcare or babysitting.    Analysis of variability in exchanges of support with parents among cohabiting young adults revealed that the quality of the relationship with the parent to be the most potent predictor of exchanges.	David	 Eggebeen
2003	71	Cohabitation and Exchange	Who Pays the Rent? Who Pays for the Kids? How Married vs. Cohabiting Parents Divide Expenses for the Household and the Child when the Couple Keeps Separate Purses	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCW) to examine how cohabiting as opposed to married parents divide expenses for the household, such as rent and utilities, and expenses for their child.  Currently, very little is known about economic relationships, including the sharing of income and dividing of expenses, in cohabiting-parent households.  Thus, the implications of the increasing frequency of this family form for child poverty and inequality are unclear, in part because we do not know whether the economic contributions of cohabiting fathers to their partners and children are more similar to those of married fathers or to those of unmarried, non-resident fathers.  In this paper, I consider the effects of marital status, household division of labor, family complexity, couple conflict, and race and ethnicity on the division of expenses in married-parent and cohabiting-parent households.	Catherine	T. Kenney
2003	71	Cohabitation and Exchange	Financial Arrangements in Marital and Cohabiting Unions with Children: An Analysis of the Income Allocation Methods of Fathers of Mainland Puerto Ricans *	The rise of cohabitation and the growing share of births to cohabiting couples have led to speculation that the boundary between marriage and cohabitation is blurring. We address one part of this issue by demonstrating the implications of union type for financial arrangements in mainland Puerto Rican families with children.  The analysis shows that married fathers are more likely than cohabiting fathers to pool their income. Cohabiting fathers are more likely to provide no support, irregular support, or a regular allowance.  We find no support for the assertion that these differences result from socioeconomic or demographic factors that foster uncertainty. The analysis also demonstrates that income allocation methods are stable over time, once differences in union dissolution by allocation method are considered.  The discussion emphasizes the need for research on the ways in which financial ties reflect and reinforce the bonds between partners.	Sal	 Oropesa	Nancy	S. Landale	Tanya	 Kenkre
2003	72	Public Policy and the Family	The Effect of Child-Care and Part-Time Opportunities on Fertility Decisions in Southern Europe	Institutional variation provides a possible explanation for cross-country variations in the relationship between women's attachment to labor force and fertility. In particular, the availability of child-care and part-time jobs have often been suggested as explanations of cross-national variation of fertility.  The paper, therefore, aims at measuring the impact of child-care availability and part-time job availability at the regional level on second births.  The impact of the regional context is analyzed with the use of multi-level techniques, which are combined in the same model with event history techniques.  Results show that the availability of child care and part time work increases  the probability of  having a second child.	Pau	 Baizán
2003	72	Public Policy and the Family	The Impact of Parental Leave Statutes on Maternal Return to Work after Childbirth	Although new mothers are more likely than ever to be in the labor force, the time around childbirth is a dynamic period with women quitting work altogether or changing jobs to accommodate the demands of their infants.  The 1993 Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) may have changed incentives and opportunities for employment among new mothers.  Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and its 1997 Child Development Supplement (CDS), this paper will examine whether the FMLA or state-legislated leave packages are associated with the following changes: continuity of employment for new mothers, return to previous employer, and post-birth earnings gains.  Results indicate a positive association between the FMLA and both the rapidity of the mother's return to employment and the probability that she returns to the same job.  Surprisingly, the FMLA was associated with a negative post-birth earnings gain after two years.	Sally	C. Curtin	Sandra	 Hofferth
2003	72	Public Policy and the Family	Determinants of Out-of-Home Living Arrangements for Children: To What Extent Do Family Resources, Family Structures, and Public Policies Make a Difference?	A large and growing number of children in the U.S. spend some part of their childhood in living arrangements that do not include their birth parents. This paper uses data from the NLSY to estimate the effects of income and poverty, family structure, and income support policies on the probabilities that children are living in various out-of-home settings. Results suggest that lower-income, single-parent, and mother-partner families are more likely to have children living out-of-home in a given year. Higher AFDC/TANF benefits are associated with decreases in the probability that a family has a child living in a child welfare service setting, but increases in the probability that a family has a child living with relatives. Higher foster care payments are associated with increases in out-of-home placements. This research holds implications for predicting the ways in which changes in policies that affect family resources and structures may influence children’s living arrangements.	Lawrence	M. Berger	Jane	 Waldfogel
2003	72	Public Policy and the Family	The Impact of Welfare Reform on Living Arrangements	We use data from the March CPS to examine the impacts of 1990s welfare waivers and the 1996 Federal welfare reform on living arrangements in samples of both children and women. Our findings suggest three main conclusions. First, welfare reform has had large effects on some important measures of living arrangements. Second, those effects are neither entirely aligned with the stated goals of reform nor entirely in spite of these goals. For example, TANF was associated with an 11 to 17 percentage point reduction in the fraction of black children living in central cities who live with an unmarried parent. However, the fraction of these children living with neither parent rose by 7 to 12 percentage points, more than doubling the baseline level. Third, there is a great deal of treatment effect heterogeneity. Standard approaches focusing only on dropouts and assuming homogeneous reform effects would generally not uncover these effects.	Jonah	B. Gelbach	Hilary	W. Hoynes
2003	73	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement and Analysis	Data Sources for the Estimation of Hierarchical Models of Individual Mortality Outcomes	A central challenge facing mortality research is the lack of available datasets for performing hierarchical analyses that: a) assess the influence of residential context on individual life chances, and b) examine how contextual factors condition the relationship between individual characteristics and mortality.  The sample design of the most popular data sources largely preclude a hierarchical analysis.  We develop a new method for the hierarchical analysis of individual mortality outcomes by pooling data from the 1990 Census of Population and Housing Public Use Microdata Samples and 1985-1990 Multiple Cause of Death Data.  This methodology provides a data source for estimating Hierarchical Discrete Time Hazard Models that incorporates spatial context into the modeling of mortality outcomes.  The implementation of this method provides a means to better understand how contextual factors, such as health infrastructure, community organizations, and the physical environment, condition health disparities across rural and urban portions of the U.S.	Troy	 Blanchard	Jeralynn	S. Cossman	Martin	L. Levin
2003	73	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement and Analysis	Measuring Living Standards in Demographic Surveys and Evaluating Their Impact on Unmet Need for Family Planning: A Structural Equation Modeling Approach	In this paper, we focus our analysis on unmet need for contraception, drawing upon the Demographic and Health Surveys. Building on recent literature regarding the measurement of household living standards, we specify structural equations models (SEMS) for unmet need using estimation techniques developed by Jöreskog 1979, 2000, where household wealth is considered an unobserved latent factor. The crude consumer durables and housing quality variables routinely collected in the DHS are employed as observed indicators of this latent factor. The paper will focus on three measures of unmet need for family planning, a measure of unmet need among reproductive age women, and specific indicators of unmet need for spacing and limiting. The objective is to assess differential levels of unmet need by living standards and to evaluate spatially-concentrated aspects of poverty, e.g., do poor households in non-poor neighborhoods have different levels of unmet need than do poor households in poor neighborhoods?	Paul	 Hewett
2003	73	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement and Analysis	Application of Mortality Estimation Techniques to the 1999 Census of the Solomon Islands: Problems and a New Procedure	Mortality-level estimates for Solomon Islanders derived from direct and indirect estimation methods seem far too optimistic and are irreconcilable with levels of fertility, migration, socio-economic development and health. This paper describes a new procedure that leads to more plausible estimates of mortality levels. First, a best-fitting model life-table is derived, through simulation, by projecting the age-distribution of the previous census to the date of the current census, using appropriate fertility and migration assumptions and the cohort component projection method. Second, time-series estimates of life expectancies at birth are examined of countries in the region with similar levels of development to estimate an average yearly change in life expectancy at birth. Third, results of previous steps are combined and a mathematical function is derived to estimate levels of mortality and concomitant model-life-tables in the Solomon Islands for each year in the intercensal period.	George	 Groenewold	Jeroen	 van Ginneken	Bart	 de Bruijn	Reuben	 Tovutovu
2003	73	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement and Analysis	How Are Biomarkers Related to Physical and Mental Well-Being?	Studies investigating the sources of increasing longevity require extensive demographic, socioeconomic, environmental, and health information.  However, much of the existing empirical literature examining the determinants of aging and longevity is limited by the absence of biological markers of health, or the use of small or otherwise nonrepresentative samples.  This analysis investigates the associations between self-reported measurements of physical and mental health and biomarkers of aging using a large, population-based sample of older Taiwanese.  Data are from the Social Environment and Biomarkers of Aging Study (SEBAS) conducted in 2000, and combine rich biological measures with a wealth of social information and self-reports of physical and mental well-being.  Results indicate significant associations between the biomarkers and profiles of health.  Although this cross-sectional investigation does not attempt to establish any causal relationships between health trajectories and biomarker measurements, it is likely to provide new insights about such pathways.	Christopher	L. Seplaki	Yu-Hsuan	 Lin
2003	74	Mortality Measurement	Infant Mortality in Brazil: A Probabilistic Record Linkage Approach	Objective: To study infant mortality in Brazil, we use data from the 1998-birth cohort of the City of São Paulo, Brazil.    Methods: Data are from two files from vital statistics data for São Paulo, the birth and death files, to take advantage of variables only available in the birth record such as birth weight.  To link births and deaths we used a probabilistic record linkage procedure, since the two files do not contain unique identifiers. To analyze the matched data, we used weighted logistic regression, weighting observations according to how certain we were that each matched pair corresponded to the same infant.    Some main results: Infants of older mothers were less likely to die in the neonatal period and of adolescent mothers were more likely to die in the neonatal and post-neonatal period even after controlling for maternal factors, birth weight, gestational age, and Apgar scores and community development.	Carla	J Machado	Kenneth	 Hill
2003	74	Mortality Measurement	Assessing the Validity of Adult Mortality Estimates Measured through Questions on Sibling Survival in Household Surveys	Mortality measurement in developing countries has largely focused on child mortality; as a result reliable measures of adult mortality levels and trends are available for only a fraction of countries. This paper analyzes 34 Demographic and Health Survey datasets containing questions on sibling survival. Previous work in this area has found no systematic pattern of deviation from United Nations mortality estimates, though sibling measures appear to underestimate adult mortality when compared to reliable life tables.  This paper applies formal statistical methods to examine trends in under-reporting of deaths of siblings in 29 countries and examines the possibility that under-reporting of sibling deaths relates to age difference between respondent and sibling. Preliminary results suggest systematic trends in under-reporting across countries, with much greater under-reporting for adult mortality than for child mortality. Formalizing underlying trends could lead to a correction method for under-reporting, allowing estimation of correction factors from established survey programs.	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Christopher	J.L. Murray	Margaret	 Hogan	Alan	D. Lopez
2003	74	Mortality Measurement	New Life Tables for Latin America: An Investigation of the Evolution of Mortality Patterns since 1900		Guido	 Pinto
2003	74	Mortality Measurement	Aggregation and Insurance-Mortality Estimation	One goal of government health insurance programs is to improve health, yet little is known empirically about how important such government interventions can be in explaining health transitions.  We analyze the child mortality effects of a major health insurance expansion in Costa Rica.  In contrast to previous work in this area that has used aggregated ecological designs, we exploit census data to estimate individual-level models.  Theoretical and empirical findings indicate that aggregation can introduce substantial upward biases in the insurance effects.  Overall we find a statistically significant but quite small effect of health insurance on infant mortality in Costa Rica.	William	H. Dow	Kristy	 Gonzalez	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby
2003	74	Mortality Measurement	New Life Tables for Sub-Saharan African Countries	Under-five and adult mortality indicators obtained from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) data have so far remained disjointed in the sense that they have not been used to arrive at a more comprehensive mortality profile over the life course in countries lacking such information. This paper proposes a method for deriving national life tables from DHS data. First, survivorship functions are directly estimated for the age groups between 0 and 55 years using the birth and sibling history modules of the DHS data. The logit transformations of these indicators are then regressed linearly on existing accurate empirical mortality curves (mainly from INDEPTH publications). The regression coefficients from this step are used to extrapolate, to age 85+, the truncated DHS life tables estimated earlier. Results from 16 sub-Saharan African countries demonstrate that DHS data can be used to produce reliable life tables for countries where such information is not available.	Pierre	 Ngom	Alex	 Ezeh
2003	75	Economic Demography of Health and Aging	The Returns to Medicare: New Answers to an Old Question	Previous research has found that Medicare benefits flow primarily to the most economically advantaged groups and that the financial returns to Medicare are consequently higher for the rich than for the poor. Taking a different approach, we find very different results.  According to the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, the poorest groups receive the most benefits at any given age.  In fact, the advantage of the poor in benefit receipt is so great that it easily overcomes their higher death rates.  This leads to the result that the financial returns to Medicare are actually much higher for poorer groups in the population and that Medicare is a highly progressive public program.  These new results appear to owe themselves to our measurement of socioeconomic status at the individual level, in contrast to the aggregated measures used by previous research.	Jay	 Bhattacharya	Darius	N. Lakdawalla
2003	75	Economic Demography of Health and Aging	Health Risk and Portfolio Choice	This paper investigates how health, a nontradeable risky asset, can affect the portfolio choices of older investors.  A theoretical model is proposed in which individuals are initially endowed with health but face the risk of purchasing health when sick.  The model's chief prediction, that health risk prompts individuals to invest more cautiously, is tested with data from the HRS/AHEAD.  Findings indicate that health risk is a significant factor in portfolio choice that explains some of the variation attributed to age.  A one standard deviation increase in health risk is associated with a 5-25 percentage point decline in the risky portfolio share.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2003	75	Economic Demography of Health and Aging	Social Security and Minorities	In this study, we demonstrate how factors such as differential earnings, mortality and disability rates affect various moneysworth measures across racial and ethnic groups.  Furthermore, as the current Social Security system has large unfunded future liabilities, we compare the moneysworth measures across different policy scenarios that restore 75-year balance to the system.  Our analysis uses the Social Security Administration’s Modeling Income in the Near Term (MINT) microsimulation model, version 3, to examine distributional aspects of the current Social Security program.  MINT3 allows us to expand our measure of Social Security benefits to include some spousal benefits and disability benefits as well as retirement benefits.	Gretta	 Goodwin	Brendan	 Cushing-Daniels	Grant	 Mallie	Alicia	P. Cackley
2003	75	Economic Demography of Health and Aging	Intergenerational Transfers, Aging & Health Dynamics	The aims of this project are: to identify the patterns of inter vivo transfers over time and to examine the impacts of health on wealth transfers.  Using all the available waves of Health and Retirement Study, the trajectories of inter vivo transfers are identified across different wealth, age, and cohort groups.  Interesting non-linear relationships with age, health and wealth status were found: the wealth transfer peaked between the ages 60 to 66.  As the self-reported health status declines, the probability of transferring wealth to children declines, but only until one reports poor health.  As health condition worsens to be extremely poor, the probability of transferring wealth increases.  As household wealth increases, the probability of transferring wealth also increases except for the bottom quartile of wealth group.  The second quartile is less likely to make inter vivo transfers than the bottom quartile. These results indicate a likelihood of Medicaid Estate Planning.	Jinkook	 Lee
2003	76	Age Patterns of Migration	Migration during the Relatively Stationary Mid-Life Years: Migration among Mid-Lifers by County Context	Initial migration among 18-25 year olds, when overall mobility levels are highest, is largely driven by widely shared life-cycle activities such as seeking education or exploring employment.  Less is known about forces shaping (a) the migration decision or (b) the destination choices of 25-34 year old migrants, an age when income increases and family-building proliferates.  For example, in rural areas, the inmigration of 25-34 year olds is more geographically concentrated than the outmigration of younger adults.  As a result, many counties gain population among 25-34 year olds while areas with high net migration losses are distinguished more by low inmigration than high outmigration.  To examine this process, migration is examined, using the NLSY79 geocode data, to identify factors that trigger migration during the relatively stationary age 25-34 life-phase.  Individual variables include presence of children; marriage/divorce; employment; and migration history.  Contextual variables including metro-nonmetro; retirement; or amenity county-types are examined.	E.	Helen  Berry	Michael	B. Toney	John	 Cromartie
2003	76	Age Patterns of Migration	Recent Age-Specific Net Migration Patterns in the United States	As fertility differentials in the U.S. diminish, population redistribution trends are increasing dependent on migration. This research uses newly developed county-level age-specific net migration estimates to examine migration patterns between 1990 and 2000. This will be supplemented by longitudinal analysis of age specific migration trends over the past fifty years. If selective deconcentration is now underway (as recent research suggests), we would expect the distribution of net rates by age to change as persons in different age groups responded to new incentives or disincentives to move.  However, such age based migration variation is likely to be tempered by location specific county characteristics. This research enhances our knowledge of how migration processes are differentiated by age and functional type of county as well as how they have changed in response to the macro forces impacting America during the past several decades.	Kenneth	M. Johnson	Glenn	V. Fuguitt	Roger	B. Hammer
2003	76	Age Patterns of Migration	Mobile Nation? Migration and the Effects of Changing Age Structure and Family Characteristics in the U.S., 1981-2001	Despite the popular perception that Americans are a highly mobile population, the rates of long-distance migration have declined over the past 4 decades (Long 1990).  While the causes of the decline in mobility have not been identified, changes in the demographic and economic characteristics of the population are likely causes.  Demographic explanations attribute the decline to two main influences: (1) changes in family structure, particularly the increasing prevalence of two-earner families; or (2) changes in the age structure of the population, particularly the ?aging? of the population.  This paper presents an empirical test of these competing explanations using data from the March Current Population Surveys for the years 1981 through 2001.  Results illustrate how observed trends in migration rates are the result of the confounding effects of the changes in family structure during the past 20 years.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2003	76	Age Patterns of Migration	County Net Migration Rates by Age, Sex and Race/Ethnicity, 1990 to 2000: Methodology and Outcomes	This paper discusses the production of age-sex-race/ethnicity county-level net migration numbers and rates for the U.S. for the intercensal period 1990 to 2000.  These data, derived using a basic residual methodology, represent the fifth such set of county net migration numbers and rates.  The net migration data for the 1990s are shown for five-year age groupings (0-4, 5-9,…, 85+), by sex (male, female), and by race/ethnicity (race: white, black, all other; ethnicity: Hispanic, nonHispanic).  A brief introduction to the methodology used for the 1990s net migration numbers and rates is given.  These data will be placed in the public domain, will be accessible through the internet and will be linked to similar net migration data for earlier decades.  A version of this paper, planned for publication, will serve as the basic reference to these data when used by the demographic research community.	Paul	R. Voss	Scott	C. McNiven	Glenn	V. Fuguitt	Kenneth	M. Johnson
2003	77	Statistical Demography	A Simple Correction for Fertility Selection	Failure to account for the possibility that unmeasured determinants of health may affect the fertility decision, and thus the composition of those born classified by health, may result in biased estimates of the determinants of child health.  Parameter identification is the first practical problem in controlling for fertility selection.   If parents care about the health outcomes of potential births, then any exogenous variable that affects health also affects the fertility decision.  The availability of longitudinal data on births permits modeling fertility selection as arising from the correlation between a random effect influencing the probability of a birth and another influencing the health of those born.  The second problem is computational complexity.  This paper sets out some methods for controlling and testing for fertility selection that can be simply implemented using only a few lines of code in standard software packages, and provides simulation results demonstrating the efficacy of these methods.	Mark	 Pitt
2003	77	Statistical Demography	Modelling Human Mortality Trajectories via an Accelerated-Ageing Hazard Function	We suggest an accelerated-ageing hazard function for the analysis of human mortality. Beside the heterogeneity captured by the relative-risks frailty model, a second source of heterogeneity should be addressed, due to possible individual differences in the rate of ageing. Unfortunately, a random term acting multiplicatively on age makes nor the predictive distribution of frailties neither the probabilities of death at the population level available in closed form. To overcome the problem, we suggest and implement a Monte Carlo E-M algorithm. The accelerated-ageing and the relative-risks models have been estimated on a Swedish data set. Although both the models seem reasonable and give significant estimates, the accelerated-ageing model seems to give a better fit compared to that given by the relative-risks model and gives results that might match better with the observation of extreme ages at death that have never been captured by other mortality models.	Elisabetta	 Barbi	Francesco	 Lagona
2003	77	Statistical Demography	A Simulation Analysis of Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Log-Rate Models with Gaussian Unobserved Heterogeneity	This paper assesses the properties and the robustness of the Maximum Likelihood Estimator of mixed proportional hazard rate models when the unobserved heterogeneity components are assumed to have a normal, or a joint normal, distribution function additive on the log-hazard, and where duration dependence is given a flexible specification (piecewise continuous linear Gompertz). We undertake an extensive simulation/bootstrap analysis of a previous application in which migration and fertility transitions are modelled as interrelated processes. We investigate the properties of estimates for single spell - single process (out-migration), multiple spell - single process (the fertility process), and multiple processes (fertility and out-migration as interrelated processes). In most cases we find MLE to perform well - generally producing unbiased estimates. However, the analysis demonstrates under which circumstances large biases might arise. More specifically, this tends to happen in single spell models when the variance is small, and in models with multiple processes when the covariance is large and positive.	Francesca	 Michielin	Constantijn	(Stan)  Panis
2003	77	Statistical Demography	Bayesian Multivariate Spatial Estimation of Small-Area Fertility Schedules	Accurate estimation of localized rate schedules and age patterns is essential in many demographic analyses, and has become more important with greater access to geocoded data.      In this paper we explore applications of Bayesian spatial methods to estimation of rate schedules for small areas. The main novelty is treating each rate schedule as a vector of parameters to be estimated simultaneously, rather than element-by-element.     We extend Bayesian spatial methods to estimate vectors of local rates –- specifically, fertility schedules for a set of over 3500 Brazilian municipalities in 1991. The main idea is to estimate local ASFRs by “borrowing strength” not only from women of the same age in neighboring areas, but also from women in other age groups within the area, and from observed regularities in ASFR schedules across locations. This method promises significant improvements in local-area rate estimates when both spatial and age-related patterns in rates are strong.	Renato	M. Assuncao	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Suzana	M. Cavenaghi
2003	78	Demographic Foundations of Evolution	Rethinking the Evolution of Aging: Fertility, Mortality and Intergenerational Transfers		Ronald	 Lee
2003	78	Demographic Foundations of Evolution	Optimality Models vs. Evolutionary Models of Mortality Patterns		Shripad	 Tuljapurkar
2003	78	Demographic Foundations of Evolution	Demo-Evo Models of Negative Senescence		James	W. Vaupel	Annette	 Baudisch	Jutta	 Gampe
2003	79	International Insights on Internal Migration and Population Redistribution	Comparing Internal Migration between Countries: Measures, Data Sources and Results	This paper derives from a program of research which aims to develop a robust framework for cross-national comparisons of internal migration. Stage one examined the obstacles to such comparisons and made proposals for a battery of 15 migration indicators covering four broad dimensions of population mobility which were then tested using British and Australian data. Wider implementation requires assembly of databases for countries around the world. Stage two takes the first steps to this goal by establishing a worldwide inventory of contemporary practice with respect to collection of internal migration data, based on published sources and a comprehensive survey of national statistical agencies. Information collected includes the source and type of  data, migration intervals and zonal system. The paper summarises the conclusions from Stage 1, reports results from the Stage 2 inventory and outlines proposals for a collaborative network to implement the cross-national indicators worldwide.	Martin	 Bell
2003	79	International Insights on Internal Migration and Population Redistribution	Beyond the Urban/Rural Dichotomy: Towards a New Conceptualization of Settlement for Demographers	Space is important in demography. It has long been recognised that where people live can be a relevant factor in helping to explain demographic behaviour. However, unlike many of the other independent variables we employ, our efforts to categorise location remain surprisingly crude. Most commonly, the simple urban/rural dichotomy is used to differentiate types of location for demographic analysis. Yet the measures of urban and rural employed by most nations were generally developed 40 or more years ago, and even then these were widely acknowledged to be blunt instruments. Since then, they have received only minor modification despite the fact that settlement systems have increased greatly in complexity since the 1960s. Moreover, developments in technology and methodology make it possible to analyse data in increasingly rapid and sophisticated ways. The time has come for a rethink of how settlements should be delineated in population data collection and analysis.	Anthony	G. Champion	Graeme	J. Hugo
2003	79	International Insights on Internal Migration and Population Redistribution	Residential Moves and Residential Choices of the Foreign Born	RESIDENTIAL MOVES AND RESIDENTIAL CHOICES OF THE FOREIGN BORN    William A. V. Clark and Sarah Blue    ABSTRACT    There is evidence that the residential relocations of the foreign born are following paths established by white suburban movers four decades ago. Hispanics and Asians are increasingly choosing suburban locations.There are two unknowns about these flows -- what are the spatial outcomes of the flows and who are the foreign born who are able to make this upward and outward movement. Data from the 1990 and 2000 Census show that the foreign born in the suburbs are less likely to be living with other foreign born although the outcome varies by ethnicity. Logit models of foreign born choices of suburban location show that marital status, citizenship time of arrival and tenure all play a role in the likelihood of suburban residence.	William	A.V. Clark
2003	79	International Insights on Internal Migration and Population Redistribution	Recent Trends in Internal Migration and Population Redistribution in Australia	Australia has one of the world’s most residentially mobile populations but paradoxically there has been little change in the centre of gravity of the national population over the last century.  Despite the latter there have been some important changes in the detail of population distribution wrought mainly by the differential impacts of internal and international migration.  This paper uses recently released data from the 2001 Australian Census to assess the major shifts which have occurred in internal migration within the country over the 1996-2001 intercensal period.  It assesses counter-urbanisation and interstate population distribution.  There have also been some important changes occurring in the population distributon within the nation’s major metropolitan areas with a reduction in growth in peripheral areas and significant evidence of net migration gain in the inner and some middle suburbs.	Graeme	J. Hugo
2003	80	Resource Allocation Within and Across Households and Generations II	Family Culture of Intergenerational Transfers: Dynamics of Aging and Health	Families can be characterized along several dimensions, including: structural features, such as size, composition, or generational counts; the attributes and behaviors of individuals linked together in ascending and descending generations by blood or marriage; and, family-specific cultural features which refine generalized societal notions  of kinship, kin roles, obligations, and expectations. Of these three dimensions, shared family characteristics, including the family's transfer culture and background, have been  largely ignored. These shared family-specific features, however, may anchor notions of obligation, expectation, and responsibility that distinguish the transfer behaviors of one family from another. Layering notions of shared family traits onto more conventional measures of individual kin in the family matrix is likely to yield new insights into why  similarly configured families differ in their kin exchange behaviors.	John	 Henretta	Beth	 Soldo
2003	80	Resource Allocation Within and Across Households and Generations II	Availability of Child Care in China and Families' Child Care and Labor Force Decisions	Both families' use of child care and mothers' labor force participation are often described as being linked to the availability of both center-based and relative child care.  While the role of family member availability is well documented in the literature, there is less evidence regarding the importance of center availability.  This is due in part to both the paucity of data on center availability and the challenges inherent in accounting for endogenous center availability.  This paper uses unusually rich data, from the China Health and Nutrition Survey, which includes information on both family member and center availability, and incorporates an estimation strategy that addresses concerns about the potential endogeneity of center availability.    Our difference-in-difference estimates suggest that the availability of child care centers in China is associated with greater child care utilization and women's participation in the wage sector in urban areas.  Furthermore, the results indicate that the impact of center availability in urban areas on these outcomes is sizeable.  Hence, in urban areas, our findings suggest that the Chinese government's expansion of child care center availability was effective in realizing its objective of promoting mothers' labor force participation.  We do not find the same results for families in rural areas, but the incidence of center care use was extremely low in rural areas, making it unlikely that we would have identified any effects of center availability.    We find evidence that the placement of centers does not appear to be random, but rather that centers appear to be located in communities with higher demand for child care.  Estimates of a naïve model, which simply included center availability as a covariate without using the difference-in-difference strategy, find no relationship between center availability and either of the two outcomes of interest.  This implies that accounting for non-random availability of centers is an important consideration.     The findings in this paper add to the literature that demonstrates the importance of family members other than parents in the household for child care and maternal work decisions.  However, the results do not present a consistent picture in terms of what types of family members-grandparents versus older siblings, for example-are most important for these decisions. In urban areas, the availability of grandparents is related to higher participation in the wage sector by mothers but is not related to child care use.  The type of family member that appears to affect child care use in urban areas is teenage siblings-their presence lowers the chances that the family uses outside child care for young children but does not seem to be related to mothers' participation in wage labor.  In rural areas, the presence of grandparents is associated with only slightly higher rates of mothers working in the wage sector and but much lower use of outside child care by the family. The results from both the urban and rural samples demonstrate that the mother's work decision and child care choices are highly correlated, indicating that these two outcomes need to be modeled jointly as suggested by the standard economic model of families child care choices.	Rebecca	 Kilburn	Ashlesha	 Datar
2003	80	Resource Allocation Within and Across Households and Generations II	The Impact of the One-Child Policy on the Well-Being of Chinese Children and Gender Differential	Although there has been much research on how the One-Child policy affected population growth in China, little is known about how attempts to restrict childbearing have affected Chinese families in other ways. This paper addresses this issue by presenting evidence from the China Health and Nutrition Survey. CHNS is a three-year panel data with detailed information on the One-Child policy variations in 190 communities from 1989 to 1993. This paper explores the relationship between the One-Child policy and the well-being of Chinese children by studying nutritional intakes and anthropometric measures of Chinese children. Of particular interest is how the one-child policy affected intra-household distribution between genders. The results indicate that the one-child policy improved Chinese children’ health status in general. However, the majority of the benefits went to boys in families with children of both sexes. Two significant factors that mitigate the gender discrimination are household income and maternal education.	Guanghui	 Li
2003	80	Resource Allocation Within and Across Households and Generations II	Network Propositions on the Division of Household Labor	The paper has two goals. First, it advances three network propositions on the division of housework. From two existing network approaches (autonomy and cohesion), it draws unified propositions regarding spouses' network based on mathematical proof: (1) Sharing friends increases the probability of doing traditional division of housework, (2) Sharing free time does not have any effect, and (3) Each spouse being embedded in a dense friendship increases the odds for the traditional division of housework. Second, the first two propositions are examined by using the Households In Netherlands 1995 (HIN 1995) that are based on a representative sample of 1,533 couple-matched observations (or 3,066 spouses). As expected, couples whose friends are all mutual friends are about 2.6 times more likely to engage in a traditional division of housework compared to couples who do not share any friends while sharing free time is not significantly associated with the division of housework.	Yoosik	 Youm
2003	81	Gender and Sexuality	Sexuality and Sterilization in International Reproductive Health Programs	Female sterilization is a significantly more invasive, costly and risky procedure than male sterilization, and is somewhat less efficacious, yet its prevalence dramatically surpasses vasectomy everywhere except in North America and Western Europe. That female sterilization has become the norm, while male sterilization is viewed with suspicion, is a clarifying moment of gender inequity.    Though the profound reproductive health disparities women and men face are increasingly well documented, a comprehensive review of the factors that contribute to divergent sterilization rates is conspicuously lacking.  Several gender-related factors within health systems contribute to higher levels of female sterilization:  The privileging of male sexuality and virility in the reproductive health context; health system efficiencies that favor sterilization by tubal ligation at the time of delivery or abortion; and the role of health services in coercive sterilization of women who come for other services.	Margaret	 Greene
2003	81	Gender and Sexuality	The Prevalence of Gender Ballet on Sex among Young Couples: Some Results on Italy and Other Six Countries	The timing of first sexual intercourse within a couple can be viewed as a compromise between desires and powers of the two partners. In the Gender Ballet of Sex, men would prefer to have sex quickly whereas women refuse for an extended period of time. The aim of our paper is to verify if this gender ballet is a remnant of double standards or a persistent typology of gender dynamics. The diffusion of Gender Ballet as an analytical framework is compared with other possible frameworks used to explain first sex among young couples. The study is based on data from a new cross-cultural survey which focuses on students aged 19-22 of Italy, Russia, Japan, Bulgaria, Rumania, Poland, and USA. The analysis is particularly developed for Italy, where our research deals with a national representative sample, involving around 5,000 university students from 23 universities.	Gianpiero	 Dalla Zuanna	Letizia	 Mencarini
2003	81	Gender and Sexuality	The Epidemiology of the Sexual Behaviour of Shanghai Couples	Abstract   To investigate epidemiology of sexual behavior of Shanghai couples six years of marriage and exploring its integrative relation with MS. A cohort of 7,697 couples was followed-up. About 4 % of wives and 2 % of husbands said they had no foreplay and 16% of wives and 11 % of husbands admitted they had no after-play. About 5 % of wives and 2 % of husbands said they had no orgasm. The main methods of foreplay were kissing and caressing.  The main actions of after-play were talking and kissing. The signs of orgasm (vaginal secretion / pleasant feeling at ejaculation) were for 60% of wives and 73% of husbands.  Logistic regression models shows they affected both of spouse' MS by having an integrative relation with SS indirectly. Husbands who used stroking breast or talking seemed to have wives with less MS.     Key words:  Foreplay; Orgasm; After-play ; Marital satisfaction; Sexual satisfaction	Guo	 Youning	E.M.L.	 Ng	Katherine	 Chan
2003	81	Gender and Sexuality	Chinese Sexual Behaviors: Emerging Trends and Consequences for Women	This paper examines the changing trends in sexual behaviors across age cohorts in urban China and discusses the consequences brought about by these changes.  New sexual practices in urban China began to emerge along with the launch of open-door policy in the early 1980s.  Clearly, sex in China now is more liberated, individualistic, and pleasure-seeking oriented.  However, compared with other developing countries as well as the West, sex in China shows a distinct Asian pattern that is different from the western pattern and can be best characterized by late sex debut, delayed age at first marriage, and large gender disparity in sexual liberation.  The recent unleashed sex also brings heavy costs for Chinese women.  This paper also discusses two kinds of these costs, the impact of new sex role models on women’s body image and the resurgence of sexually transmitted diseases.	Tianfu	 Wang	William	L. Parish	Edward	O. Laumann	Kwai	Hang  Ng
2003	82	Race, Ethnicity and the Niceties of Neighborhoods	Movin' on Up? Racial Inequality in Children's Neighborhood Socioeconomic Status	How different are the neighborhoods in which Black and White children live? Does racial inequality in neighborhood context change as children experience residential mobility? In this paper I use hierarchical linear modeling techniques to estimate effects of household- and metropolitan area-level characteristics on racial differences in children's neighborhood socioeconomic status (SES) and on neighborhood SES returns to residential mobility. I find that the vast majority of the variation in children's neighborhood SES is within, and not between metropolitan areas. I also find large racial gaps in children's average neighborhood SES, yet statistically nonsignificant gaps in neighborhood SES returns to residential mobility. Although Black and White children live in neighborhoods with vastly unequal levels of social and physical resources, there does not appear to be strong empirical evidence that variation in constraints on Black residential mobility is associated with variation in racial inequality in children's neighborhood SES across metropolitan areas.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake
2003	82	Race, Ethnicity and the Niceties of Neighborhoods	Race-Ethnic Preference and Neighborhood Quality Effects on Residential Mobility Decisions: Evidence from the Los Angeles Survey of Families and Neighborhoods	Although individuals appear to consider the race-ethnic makeup of neighborhoods when they decide where to live, the reasons for this are not well understood.  This paper examines the impact of racial composition and nonracial characteristics of neighborhoods on residential location decisions, using residential mobility histories of a sample of adults in Los Angeles.  Using a discrete choice model, which allows the probability of moving to vary with the characteristics of the potential neighborhoods, holding constant individual characteristics, we ask: (1) Does the race-ethnic composition of a neighborhood affect the probability of choosing that neighborhood over another?  Does this effect vary across racial groups?  (2) If the race-ethnic makeup of a neighborhood appears to affect neighborhood choice, to what extent do other correlated nonracial characteristics of neighborhoods account for these preferences?  (3) Do life cycle and other individual-level characteristics interact with race-ethnic composition and other neighborhood characteristics to affect neighborhood choice?	Vanesa	 Estrada	Robert	D. Mare
2003	82	Race, Ethnicity and the Niceties of Neighborhoods	Historical Trends in the Determinants of Exiting and Entering Poor Neighborhoods	This study uses thirty years of individual-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics merged with tract-level census data to analyze historical changes in the determinants of residential mobility between poor and nonpoor neighborhoods.  Between 1968 and 1997, blacks became increasingly similar to whites in the rate at which they move from poor to nonpoor neighborhoods, but contrary to widely-accepted theory we find no evidence that this migration stream has become increasingly class-selective.  Consistent with theoretical models of the gentrification process, high-income whites have become increasingly similar to blacks in the likelihood of moving from nonpoor to poor neighborhoods.  Despite this convergence, blacks remain substantially less likely than whites to exit poor neighborhoods and substantially more likely than whites to enter them.  We also find historical changes in the impact of metropolitan-level ecological conditions, most likely reflecting the growing concentration of poor people in poor neighborhoods.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Scott	J. South
2003	82	Race, Ethnicity and the Niceties of Neighborhoods	The Place of Opportunity: Community and Individual Determinants of Economic Hardship among Jews and Arabs in Israel	Israel is geographically segregated: Only eight urban localities are ethnically mixed, accounting for 8.6 % of the country's Arab population.  Overall, Arab communities suffer discrimination in resource allocation, investment in infrastructure, and economic development, and have high poverty rates. Most Arab communities are relatively small and located in the periphery, far from large urban centers and have limited employment opportunities.   Data from Israel’s 1995 Census, conducted by Israel’s Central Bureau of Statistics, are combined with information from Israel’s Central Bureau of Statistics special publication on localities.  The relative importance of community-level and household-level characteristics as determinants of household poverty, and the ways in which community characteristics mediate the effect of household-level characteristics on economic wellbeing are explored using Hierarchical Linear Modeling (HLM).   Preliminary findings confirm that characteristics of both household and locality are related to economic hardship, and thus, both have implications for social policy.	Alisa	 Lewin	Haya	 Stier	Daphna	 Caspi-Dror
2003	84	How Late Can You Wait?  Fertility, Fecundity, and Aging	Pushing the Age Limit? Long-Term Trends in Late Childbearing: Evidence from Sweden	Childbearing is increasingly postponed towards higher ages in numerous contemporary populations, and there have been concerns that contemporary populations might be approaching upper age limits of fertility that would be problematic to overcome in the near future.   In this paper, we aim at analyzing the medium- and long-term trends in late childbearing using high-quality register data quality from Sweden. Some of these data span over the whole twentieth century, and are more detailed from the 1970s onwards. Our preliminary analyses show that the long-term trend in late births has been downward until the 1970s, with a clear reversal after that nadir point. The reversal however does not yet correspond to a higher share of births at “latest-late” ages. For the extreme age at birth, the long-term stability around the age of 51 years has been restored very recently, and that there are now signs of a rising extreme age.	Francesco	C. Billari	Gunnar	 Andersson	Hans	 Lundstrom
2003	84	How Late Can You Wait?  Fertility, Fecundity, and Aging	How Late Can You Wait? Measurement Challenges and Health Concerns Related to Infertility and Delayed Childbearing	Periodic national fertility surveys in the United States have produced standard measures of reproductive behavior so that trends such as delayed childbearing can be identified and prevalence of conditions such as infertility can be measured over time. Standard measures, however, bring methodological challenges.  This paper examines the difficulties in measuring infertility on a population level consistently and accurately over time.  We focus on two measures, 12-month infertility and impaired fecundity, in an attempt to better understand the sometimes conflicting messages about prevalence of infertility from various data sources.  We also discuss these measures of infertility in the context of health concerns confronting women who delay childbearing and perhaps pursue infertility treatment.  These concerns, which include increased risk of multiple births, low birthweight, and birth defects, are in excess of the challenges of getting and staying pregnant, and should be included in any assessment of how late women can wait.	Anjani	 Chandra	Elizabeth	H. Stephen	Dik	 Habbema	Egbert	R. te Velde
2003	84	How Late Can You Wait?  Fertility, Fecundity, and Aging	Age and Fertility: What Are Your Chances of Bearing a Child at Each Age?	The time necessary to conceive, the rate of foetal wastage and the risk of becoming permanently sterile are all increasing with age. For a couple wanting a child, the practical questions are the following: what are the chances if the woman is aged AW and the man aged AM to conceive within a reasonable delay (say, 6 or 12 months), or the risk of not conceiving at all? If the woman does conceive, what is her probability of having a live birth? We can also add an other question, in case of failure to conceive: what is the probability of conceiving (and delivering a baby) with the help of some medical techniques, such as hormonal stimulation, IVF, AID or ICSI? We can rather easily answer each of these questions separately, but their combination may lead to fallacious estimates, because the various components have been estimated separately and are partly overlapping.	Henri	F. Leridon
2003	84	How Late Can You Wait?  Fertility, Fecundity, and Aging	“Can We Wait until the Early 30s?” Some Results on the Effect of Age on the Probability to Have a First Child	One of the  limits of previous studies of  How late can you wait? is the difficulty  of controlling for sexual behaviour. McDonald and Rosina (2002) analysed Hutterite fecundability using marriage duration as a proxy for coital frequency and disentangled the effects of covariates on sterility and on conditional fecundability (i.e. the probability of conception given that the couple is not sterile). Conditional fecundability is related with marriage duration, while sterility is significantly reduced in the second half of 30s.  Dunson et al. (2002) use data  on timing of intercourse. They find that fecunability declines in the late 20s with substantial decreases by the late 30s.   Using the same data, we focus on the probability of a first  pregnancy for women 20-34 years old. In our model we try to evaluate the effect of age trying to take into account primary sterility, and to control for frequency and timing of intercourse.	John	W. McDonald	Ester	 Rizzi	Alessandro	 Rosina
2003	85	Socioeconomic Status and Health among the Elderly in the U.S.	Trends in Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality and Risk Factor Distributions by Age, Race, and Gender	Socioeconomic differentials in health continue to be an important public health concern in the United States and elsewhere.  In this paper, we contribute to the literature on socioeconomic inequalities in mortality by examining all-cause and cause-specific mortality trends and changes in risk factor distributions (e.g., obesity, smoking) by gender, race, and educational attainment over time in the United States. Separate analyses are conducted for middle and older ages.  The cause-specific investigations together with analyses of risk factor distributions point to areas where public health interventions might be most effective in reducing social class inequalities in health and mortality.	Irma	T. Elo	Kirsten	 Smith
2003	85	Socioeconomic Status and Health among the Elderly in the U.S.	Inequality in Adult Mortality in the United States: Measurement and Determinants	Many studies exist on inequalities in mortality rates across subgroups of a population, defined by income, education, race, occupation, etc. This study examines inequality across individuals in the US, using the National Health Interview Survey linked to the National Death Index for 1987-97. The proposed method uses a survival analysis model with a Gompertz distribution on the baseline hazard and a gamma distribution on the random effect to predict an individual's probability of death based on the individual’s set of covariates and geographic area in which they reside. Results suggest there is more inequality in risk of death among males than females. By age and sex, the predicted average hazard rate is presented along with absolute and relative measures of inequality in the distributions of risk of death. The effect of the main determinants of inequality including income, education, self-reported health status, and use of health services is studied.	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Ajay	 Tandon	Gary	 King
2003	85	Socioeconomic Status and Health among the Elderly in the U.S.	Functioning, Disability and Health among Older Americans: Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey, 1997-2000	The goals of this paper are three-fold: (1) to highlight the measures of functioning, disability and health in the United States’ leading population health survey, the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS); (2) to examine the levels of function, disability and health among older persons (defined here as age 55 and older) using recent data (1997-2000, and 2001 if available) from the NHIS; and (3) to compare the function, disability and health of elders by socioeconomic status, race/ethnicity and gender.  In examining the health, disability and function (e.g., cognitive limitation, functional difficulties, personal care needs, and bed days) of older non-institutionalized, civilian Americans, I will use a sociomedical framework, like the new International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, for understanding disability as not merely a consequence of disease or a characteristic of an individual but as a product of the interaction between a person and their environment.	Diane	S. Shinberg
2003	85	Socioeconomic Status and Health among the Elderly in the U.S.	The Cumulative Impact of Job Characteristics on Health at Midlife	In our research we investigate the cumulative impact of the physical and psychosocial characteristics of paid employment on a variety of physical and mental health outcomes using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS).  We do so with an eye toward understanding the ways in which the physical and psychosocial job characteristics across the life course mediate the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and health.    Specifically, we ask how the physical and psychosocial characteristics of jobs influence general/overall health, depression, and cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and stress-related health problems and medical conditions.  Questions about the impact of physical and psychosocial job characteristics have frequently been addressed using cross sectional or short-term longitudinal data, and so our ability to consider job characteristics across respondents’ careers and health outcomes at age 53 puts us in a much stronger position to understand how job characteristics cumulate to affect health.	John	R. ("Rob") Warren	Pascale	 Carayon	Peter	 Honnakker
2003	86	Demographic and Health Impacts of Family Planning Services	The Rise of Sterilization and the Cost of Neglecting Birth Spacing in India	Recent stagnation in the decline of infant mortality can arguably be attributed to the lack of progress in lengthening birth intervals.  Meanwhile, recent family planning efforts have been successful particularly in states such as Andhra Pradesh, although family limitation is almost exclusively by means of sterilization at increasingly early ages (median: 23 years, 1998-99).  This paper quantifies the effects of neglecting strategies that encourage delaying and spacing of births in India.  Firstly, the possible number of infant deaths that would be averted by increasing birth intervals is calculated by using results from multivariate mortality models.  Secondly, the effects of adopting a ‘later and longer’ family planning strategy are compared with the continuation of fertility concentrated in younger age groups.  Results from the population projections suggest that a policy encouraging birth spacing would achieve a substantial reduction in the future total population size.	Zoe	 Matthews	Sabu	S. Padmadas	Juliet	 McEachran	B.M.	 Ramesh
2003	86	Demographic and Health Impacts of Family Planning Services	The Fertility Impact of the Navrongo Project	The Navrongo Community Health and Family Planning Project is an experimental study launched in rural northern Ghana in 1996 to test the hypothesis that reproductive change can be induced and sustained by community health and family planning services in a setting with high fertility and mortality and significant socio-economic barriers to reproductive change. This paper reports results from analyses of demographic surveillance data comparing fertility regimes of women exposed and unexposed to treatment conditions. Where nurses provide outreach services in conjunction with village mobilization activities, project impact is significant, pronounced, and sustained with a fertility reduction of nearly 20 percent. Results support the hypothesis that service delivery approaches can introduce reproductive change. However, achieving this impact is conditional upon launching a comprehensive family planning and health service approach incorporating strategies for community mobilization, male involvement, and continuous outreach addressing a range of social and health activities. Policy implications are discussed.	James	F. Phillips	Elizabeth	F. Jackson	Ayaga	A. Bawah	Cornelius	Y. Debpuur
2003	86	Demographic and Health Impacts of Family Planning Services	China's Population Policy: One-Child Variations and Fertility Response	It is now more than two decades since the institution of China's one-child policy.  Life in China is substantially different than it was twenty years ago.  In particular, economic context, due to economic reform and associated economic growth, has changed markedly.  To what extent does fertility in China today reflect individual preference or adherence to policy dictates? Our paper is an attempt to gain a better understanding of precisely this issue.  We approach this question by exploring the effects of relaxing the one-child policy on fertility behavior.  Results should enhance our understanding of the ability of policymakers to influence childbearing directly through birth planning restrictions and indirectly through economic change.    (EXTENDED ABSTRACT SENT BY EMAIL TO SESSION ORGANIZERS)	Susan	E. Short	Andrew	 Foster
2003	86	Demographic and Health Impacts of Family Planning Services	Fertility, Child Work and Schooling Consequences of Family Planning Programs: Evidence from an Experiment in Rural Bangladesh	Since the mid-1970s Bangladesh has relied on its family planning program to deliver modern contraceptive methods as well as information about these methods to households. It can be expected that the net reduction in price of fertility regulation induced by such a program influences not only households’ fertility but also choices closely related to it. Using data from a randomized family planning program experiment in rural Bangladesh, this paper evaluates the program’s impact on fertility. It also estimates the effect of this program on children’s labor force participation and schooling. Women’s exposure to the program significantly lowered their fertility. The program appears to have no statistically significant effects on school enrollments of sons or daughters. However, it appears to significantly raise labor force participation by sons.	Nistha	 Sinha
2003	87	Father and Fathering: Paternal Investment on Children	Assessing the Causal Relationship between Child Support and Visitation	This study assesses whether paying child support encourages nonresident fathers to visit their children, using nonresident fathers’ and custodial mothers’ reports from a recent nationally representative survey.  Although the survey only identifies about 70% of nonresident fathers, we conduct this analysis because of the importance of understanding nonresident fathers’ perceptions of their child support payments and visitation.  We estimate a two-stage instrumental variables model, instrumenting payment with a variable correlated with child support enforcement.  We find that increasing the likelihood of paying child support results in greater father-child contact among nonresident fathers in household surveys.  Thus, child support enforcement appears to be having a positive impact on visitation among these fathers.	Elaine	 Sorensen	Kate	 Pomper
2003	87	Father and Fathering: Paternal Investment on Children	Child Support Payments and Father/Child Contact in Fragile Families: Establishing a Causal Path	Prior research has determined that fathers who pay child support have more contact with their children; however, due to the endogeneity between payments and contact, the direction of these effects has not been conclusively untangled.  This paper will use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a longitudinal survey of unwed parents in 20 large U.S. cities, to assess the impact of child support payments on father/child contact approximately one year after the child’s birth.  The Fragile Families data contain measures of fathers’ commitment to their children, attitudes toward parenting, and new family responsibilities, characteristics which were previously considered unobservable.  Additionally, fathers’ payments will be instrumented using indicators for the strength of child support enforcement in the state.  This analysis will attempt to establish a more precise estimate of the effect of payments on visitation as well as shed light on the magnitude of bias in prior research.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy
2003	87	Father and Fathering: Paternal Investment on Children	Father Involvement and Child Support Payments: Multiple Families, Multiple-Father Families, and Interstate Enforcement	We examine how incentives to cooperate with child support enforcement are affected by impediments to a non-custodial parent’s (NCP's) involvement with his child.  We analyze the impact on the fundamental child support outcomes of three interrelated impediments:  having children in multiple families to support, having children who reside in a family with children of other fathers (multiple-father families), and residing at a distance and/or in another state.  We hypothesize that these impediments will make NCPs less likely to establish paternity, pay support, or pay the full amount.  We use standard econometric methods, including OLS and probit regression analysis, on state administrative data for a sample of around 50,000 welfare recipients from Central Illinois from a period before, during and after welfare reform.  Our results can be used to make policy recommendations for Illinois and elsewhere on means to increase NCPs' financial involvement with their children.	Andrea	H. Beller	Elizabeth	T. Powers
2003	87	Father and Fathering: Paternal Investment on Children	Do Fathers Invest More in Sons?	Studies examining the relationship between marital stability and gender of child have garnered substantial interest over the past two decades.  Researchers hypothesize that the increased propensity to divorce among couples with daughters relative to couples with sons can be explained by fathers’ differential involvement with sons.  Despite increasing evidence in both the marital stability literature and the time with children literature that the nature of father involvement with sons and daughters has changed, the relationship between father involvement and gender of child has not been empirically examined in recent years.  Using nationally representative time diary data collected in 2000, this paper empirically examines the relationship between a father’s involvement with his children and the gender composition of the sibship.  Preliminary analyses suggest that fathers do not invest more time in their children when they have sons rather than daughters.	Sara	 Raley
2003	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	The Impact of Child Support on Fertility, Parental Investments and Child Health and Well-Being	Previous studies have shown that children who receive child support are better adjusted and have higher levels of school achievement than children who do not receive support.  Another literature has found that child support has a negative effect on fertility. Yet studies of the effect of child support policies on child health and well-being have not taken fertility decisions into account, that is, they assume that the composition of children classified by child health and well-being is unrelated to prior fertility decisions.  Failing to account for the fertility decision will bias any estimation of the impact of child support on child health and well-being. Knowledge of the total impact of child support that affects both the fertility decision and parental investments after the child is born requires estimating the parameters on both the birth selection process and child investments, conditional on being born.	Anna	 Aizer	Sara	 McLanahan
2003	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	The Impact of the WIC Program on Pregnancy, Infant, and Child Outcomes	The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, infants and Children (the WIC program) provides direct nutritional supplements and nutritional advice to pregnant, postpartum and lactating women, infants and children who are income eligible and are deemed to be nutritionally-at-risk.   Numerous studies have concluded that the WIC program is beneficial for infants.However, these studies have been criticized for failing to control adequately for unobserved characteristics of mothers that might explain both WIC participation and better birth outcomes.Using nationally representative data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, we investigate whether previous findings about the effect of WIC on infant and pregnancy outcomes hold in more recent data. We also extend the fairly limited existing literature on children's outcomes. We use both a fixed-effects and an instrumental-variables strategy to correct our estimates for possible positive selection into the WIC program.	Marianne	 Bitler	Janet	 Currie
2003	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	Exploring the Effects of the National School Lunch Program on Child Obesity and Development Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study	The National School Lunch Program (NSLP) is a federally sponsored nutrition program serving approximately 26 million children a day with estimated expenditures of $5.8 billion in 1998 (Oliveira, 1999).  Recent estimates indicate that the NSLP is available to 92% of U.S. students, and that 56% of these students participate in the program (Burghardt and Devaney, 1995).    	Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, 1998-1999 Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K), this study examines three research questions.  First, what are the effects of participation in the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) on changes in children's test scores and measures of obesity?   Second, do these effects differ by measures of children?s school context?  Finally, do these effects differ by characteristics of children such as gender or income status?	Rachel	 Dunifon	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2003	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	A Reconsideration of an Oft-Used Method of Program Evaluation	In program evalutations, participants are often compared with eligible non-participants with respect to an ouctome consistent with program goals.  If participants are better off, this is a recommendation for the program; if participants are as well-off or worse off, this is not a recommendation.      Such conclusions, we argue, may unnecessarily paint some programs in a negative light and limit the opportunities for program improvement.  We, instead, propose an alternative interpretation whereby we incorporate the knowledge of policymakers and program administrators.  After incorporating this knowledge (and the observed and unobserved characteristics of households) the interpretation of the sign and signficicance of the relevant coefficient will change.    After a theroetical treatment of our argument, we then turn to a consideration of the impact of the Food Stamp Program on food insecurity.  For this, we use the Current Population Survey and reconsder the usual comparisons between participants and non-participants.	Craig	G. Gundersen	Dean	 Jolliffe	Laura	 Tiehen
2003	89	Abortion: Measurement, Motivations and Determinants	Socio-Demographic Determinants of Abortion in India: A North-South Comparison	Data from the second National Family Health Survey (NFHS2) of India are used to examine the net effects of social and demographic characteristics of women on the likelihood of abortion while emphasizing important differences between women from northern and southern states.  A north-south comparison illustrates that southern women have relatively higher status, lower levels of son preference, and smaller family size.  Results from logistic regression analyses show that literacy, age at marriage, belonging to a scheduled tribe, urban residence, standard of living, age, and contraceptive behavior all have significant effects on the likelihood of abortion.  However, these effects significantly differ for southern and northern women. Moreover, the effect of agricultural work, son preference, and number of living children on the likelihood of  abortion are significant for northern but not southern women.	Sunita	 Bose	Katherine	 Trent
2003	89	Abortion: Measurement, Motivations and Determinants	A New Approach to Estimating the Efficacy of Medical Abortion	We propose and implement a new method for evaluating the efficacy of medical abortion.  Previous research on the efficacy of medical abortion has followed the conceptual model for the analysis of surgical abortion; the failure rate is computed by simple division and expressed as a proportion.  While this method of calculating efficacy is appropriate for the discrete event of surgical abortion, it is inappropriate for medical abortion because it fails to account for the temporal process of medical abortion.  We assert that life tables should be used to calculate the efficacy of medical abortion because they incorporate the important dimension of time in success and create unbiased estimates of efficacy.  Using data on more than 6,500 women from six previously conducted medical abortion studies, we use life table procedures to calculate the efficacy of medical abortion and hazard models to assess the impact of various demographic characteristics on efficacy.	Allison	A. Hedley	Charlotte	 Ellertson	James	 Trussell	Abigail	 Norris Turner	Beverly	 Winikoff
2003	89	Abortion: Measurement, Motivations and Determinants	Women and Reproductive Control: The Nexus between Abortion and Contraceptive Use in India	We examine women’s options to exercise reproductive control by focusing on contraception and abortion as two main proximate determinants of fertility outcomes.  We examine how domestic and provider-related constraints are reflected in the occurrence and resolution of unwanted pregnancies.      We utilize high-quality data from a methodologically innovative study that captures the full reproductive histories—including abortion—of 2500 married women (15-39) in Madhya Pradesh, India.      Our data show that 23% of women have attempted at least one abortion.  Although abortion is legal in India, most abortions for rural women (56%) were through unsafe means.  Women’s effective access to contraception is extremely limited: spacing methods were used only 6.4% of the time that women wanted to space childbearing.    Our results suggest that, to achieve continued fertility decline and reproductive health and rights, policy efforts must make the effective provision of spacing methods a priority and improve access to safe abortion.	Anju	 Malhotra	Laura	 Nyblade	Sulabha	 Parasuraman	Kerry	 MacQuarrie	Namita	N. Kashyap	Sunayana	 Walia
2003	89	Abortion: Measurement, Motivations and Determinants	Sex Selective Abortions in Rajasthan, India	While family size preferences have declined in India, little, if any, change in preferred sex composition of children has been observed. Son preference continues to be deep-rooted and sex selective abortions are increasingly used to meet family size and sex preferences. This paper probes the context of abortion in Rajasthan, explores perceptions and experiences of sex selective abortions, and traces the pathways adopted in seeking the abortion. Data are drawn from an qualitative study and a large community-based survey.    Preliminary findings confirm deeply embedded son preference. Wide gender disparities make a son - and even two - imperative to establish woman's status in her marital home. Familiarity with sex selective techniques is high. Even though abortion is perceived as sin and sex determination is banned, sex selective abortion is acceptable to ensure the preferred number and composition of children. These services appear widespread in urban areas and among formal providers.	Shalini	 Verma	Hillary	 Bracken	Batya	 Elul
2003	90	Small Area Population Estimates and Projections	An Evaluation of Hispanic Population Estimates for Counties in Florida	The Hispanic population of the United States has grown dramatically in recent decades.  Although not all states and local areas have shared equally in this growth, rapid growth of the Hispanic population has occurred in many places throughout the United States.  In this paper, we describe a methodology that uses birth, death, and school enrollment data to estimate the size of the Hispanic population.  We test this methodology by developing estimates for Florida and each of its 67 counties and comparing those estimates with 2000 census counts.  We compare the accuracy of these estimates with the accuracy of estimates based on several alternatiave estimation methods.  We conclude that estimates based on symptomatic data series such as births, deaths, and school enrollment are more accurate than estimates based on commonly used alternative methods.	Stanley	K. Smith	June	M. Nogle
2003	90	Small Area Population Estimates and Projections	Developing State Population Estimates: Can the Current Two Methods Be Integrated into One?	In response to the demand by planners for timely dissemination of sub-national population estimates by demographic characteristics, the Census Bureau is examining the development and production of the current set of state population estimates by demographic characteristics.  Currently the Census Bureau develops two sets of state population estimates by characteristics, each employing its own methodology.  The first is developed using Component Method II.  The second is developed using Cohort Component method.  It is proposed that the two sets be integrated into one set with full detail to be released in the spring, rather than currently in the summer.  In this paper there will be an evaluation of the estimates produced by these two methodologies for the year 2000 compared against Census 2000.  It will conclude with a discussion of the issues to consider in such an integration process, and some recommendations for integrating the two methodologies.	Katherine	M. Condon	Larry	D. Sink	Sam	T. Davis
2003	90	Small Area Population Estimates and Projections	Estimation and Projection of County Survival Rates	Age-specific survival rates may vary among counties due to socioeconomic, environmental and health care differences. In small-population counties, deaths in many age-sex groups are small and subject to random variation. Consequently, is actual data or a model more reasonable for projections?  This paper compares two approaches to developing county-level survival rates, utilizing Wisconsin data. First, we calculate rates based on vital events from the 1990s. Second, we employ a model that applies state level survival rates to every county's population at the decade's outset to estimate deaths by age and sex over a ten-year period. Then, using the ratio of actual to estimated county deaths, we adjust the estimated distribution of deaths and compute survival rates.  We discuss the problems we confronted in these approaches and the solutions we adopted. Furthermore, we compare the two sets of life expectancies generated from the survival rates at various ages and across counties.	David	A. Egan-Robertson	Balkrishna	 Kale
2003	90	Small Area Population Estimates and Projections	Small Area Population Projections Using Stochastic Simulation	Small area estimates and projections play a central role in some of the most important and contentious planning exercises at the metropolitan level.  For example, regional transportation planning, metropolitan water planning, and the spatial allocation of future housing growth all emerge from city-level population and household projections.  Despite their prominent role in planning, the methodology used to produce small area estimates and projections has seen relatively little innovation since the introduction of the housing unit method in the 1950s.  That methodological stagnancy is due in part to real data limitations and the inherent complexity of the projection exercise.  This paper proposes a stochastic simulation version of the housing unit method that was used to produce the 2030 population and household projections for the Southern California Association of Governments.	Stuart	H. Sweeney
2003	91	Interracial Contact	Between Acculturation, Segregation and Assimilation: Examining the Association between Racial Contact and Psychological Distress	Does racial mixture coincide with psychological distress?  Using Robert Park’s “Marginal man” hypothesis and notions of acculturative stress associated with cross-cultural contact as points of reference, we explore the psychological health of interracial couples using a nationally representative data set.  We use a pooled 1997-2000 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) sample and analyze the odds of distress for interracial vs. same race married/cohabiting adults.  There are three key findings.  First, presence in an interracial union is associated with psychological distress (O.R.= 1.26).  Secondly, this relationship is stronger among non-White (O.R.= 1.37) than White (O.R.=1.23) populations.  Finally, the roles of socioeconomic status and acculturation vary by race/ethnic group.  Acculturation partially explains the effect of presence in an interracial union for Asians and Hispanics while socioeconomic status masks the effect of interracial unions on distress for non-Whites.  The results are consistent with notions of increasing stress associated with traversing inter-group boundaries.	Jenifer	 Bratter	Karl	 Eschbach
2003	91	Interracial Contact	Mixed Race Households, Residential Segregation, and Neighborhood Diversity	Most North American residential segregation research focuses either on White-Black patterns or clustering among newly-arrived immigrant groups.  We analyze the geographies of mixed-race households in twelve large metropolitan areas using confidential 1990 Census tract-matched long-form data.  We utilize Dissimilarity and P* indices to compare the residential patterns of the 6 most frequent cross-racial pairings (White-Latino, White-Asian, White-Black, White-Native, Asian-Latino, and Black-Latino) relative to each other and to single-race groups.  We introduce the Neighborhood Diversity Exposure (NDE) index -- a modified P* -- to capture the amount of tract level ethnic and racial diversity to which households are exposed.  Mixed-race households occupy to a limited extent in-between geographies, though highly conditioned by household status markers.  Mixed-race households including a black partner occupy residential spaces more diverse than other mixed-race households, and more diverse than either of their single-race reference groups.  We do not see evidence of new mixed-race enclaves.	Steven	R. Holloway	Mark	 Ellis	Richard	 Wright	Margaret	A. Hudson
2003	91	Interracial Contact	Meet the Parents: Why Interracial Intimacy Declines in the Transition to Adulthood	How do individuals’ chances of forming intimate relationships with members of other racial groups change during the transition to adulthood? Using a life course approach, we predict that interracial involvement decreases in adolescence and young adulthood. Our analyses are based on the first two nationally representative surveys to collect detailed information on the romantic and sexual relationships of adolescents and adults: the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health and the National Health and Social Life Survey. Our results demonstrate that individuals’ chances of experiencing interracial intimacy decline dramatically between the ages of 12 and 30. Our results also suggest chances of interracial intimacy decline in adolescence and young adulthood mainly because intimate relationships become more integrated into family networks during these periods. In conclusion, we discuss the implications of our findings for future race relations among adolescents and adults.	Kara	 Joyner	Grace	 Kao
2003	91	Interracial Contact	Socioeconomic Outcomes of Children of Interracial and Same-Race Couples	Utilizing multivariate regression techniques and data from the 2000 Census PUMS, this project analyzes the outcomes of children of interracial couples.  Specifically, the project aims to answer the following questions:    (1) How are the adolescent children of interracial couples faring in terms of socioeconomic outcomes and how are they faring relative to children from corresponding single-race couples?    (2) Among children of both interracial and single-race couples, what are the major determinants of socioeconomic outcomes?  How are family background characteristics shown to influence children's outcomes?    (3) Do results seem to be consistent with Robert Park's marginal man theory or more consistent with class background explanations?    (4) How are the reported races of adolescents associated with both family background characteristics and the socioeconomic outcomes considered?    This project will provide answers to these particular research questions, and in doing so, will tie together social stratification research with very recent research on multiracial Americans.	Thomas	 Wells
2003	92	Population and Land Use	Incorporating Demographics into Agent-Based Models of Landcover Change	This paper presents an agent-based model of landcover change for south-central Indiana.  This area has experienced a slight but detectable reforestation since the early 1900’s.  The model presented here simulates the decisions of individual agents, interactions between agents and the impact of the agent-decision making on aggregate or macro-scale outcomes, particularly deforestation and reforestation.  Our goal is to identify factors that contribute to the process of reforestation in south-central Indiana.    We explore how household structure might affect landuse/landcover change decisions in the context of parcel characteristics including topography, soils and exogenous factors such as wage labor rates.  Spatial metrics are used to characterize parcel-level landcover composition and pattern at each time point.  We demonstrate how modeling activities can be used to inform subsequent data collection and analysis to explore theories of landcover change.	Tom	P. Evans	Hugh	 Kelley	Leah	K. VanWey
2003	92	Population and Land Use	Land Use and the Family Cycle in the U.S. Great Plains	In agricultural settings, population, production, and environment are linked through family mechanisms, especially where agricultural settlement and colonization are underway. This paper explores the process of settlement and its relationship to land use trajectories through the lens of family structures in the Great Plains of the U.S., during the period (1870 to 1940) when this region turned from open rangeland to a developed mix of land uses. The theoretical perspective in this paper draws on studies of family, settlement, and environment in the Americas, which show that land use processes simultaneously reflect the mechanism of settlement and each settler family’s life cycle stage. Our research uses both qualitative and quantitative data sources. Family formation and cropland development went hand-in-hand, but there are differences in the process of family formation in different ecological sub-regions. The causal process is intertwined with ethnic differences and fertility decline in the U.S.	Myron	P. Gutmann	Sara	 Pullum-Piñon	Geoff	 Cunfer
2003	92	Population and Land Use	Human Impacts on the Environment in India	The rapid population growth and economic development in country are threatening the environment. Though the relationship is complex, population size and growth tend to expand and accelerate these human impacts on natural resources and the environment. The present paper is an attempt to study the population change and its impacts on natural resources, and the environment. The data have been analyzed from various secondary sources of data. Conducted an analysis of changes and trends over last fifty years. The analysis reveals that rapid population growth plays an important role in depleting natural resources. Population pressure on arable land contributes to the land degradation, thus affecting the productive resource base of the economy. The importance of population and environmental pollution control and protection of natural resources and environment has been highlighted. The paper concludes with some policy reflections and emphasizes the potential importance of natural resources.	Dewaram	A. Nagdeve
2003	92	Population and Land Use	Multilevel Statistical Models to Assess Factors Influencing Land Use: A Case Study in the Ecuadorian Amazon	Statistical models examining the interaction between population and land use (LU) have been evolving through the integration of survey and satellite data as well as the application of more sophisticated estimation techniques.  However, very few approaches incorporate contextual factors influencing LU or directly test or control for spatial autocorrelation among model variables.  The absence of context ignores much of the historical development of LU dynamics, while the presence of spatially correlated variables can provide results that are exaggerated due to abnormally small standard errors. Therefore, we have developed a multilevel model to simultaneously investigate contextual effects at the household and community levels.  In addition, we explicitly test for the presence of spatial autocorrelation and control for spatial dependencies in the model.  We will present the statistical formulations of multilevel models, spatial tests for autocorrelation, and results demonstrating the improved estimation when including community variables and controlling for autocorrelation.	William	 Pan	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2003	93	Environmental Impacts on Population, Health, and Quality of Life	Air Pollution, Health, and Socioeconomic Status: The Effect of Outdoor Air Quality on Childhood Asthma	This paper examines the effect of air pollution on child hospitalizations for asthma using a unique zip code level panel data set.  The effect of pollution is identified using naturally occurring seasonal variations in pollution within zip codes.  I also improve on past work by analyzing how the effect of pollution varies by age, by including measures of avoidance behavior, and by allowing the effect to vary by socioeconomic status (SES).  Of the pollutants considered, carbon monoxide has a significant effect on a hospitalizations among children ages 1 to 18.  In addition, households respond to information about pollution with  avoidance behavior, especially high SES families, suggesting that is important to account for these endogenous responses when measuring the causal effect of pollution on health.  Finally, the net effect of pollution is much greater for children of low SES, indicating that pollution is one potential mechanism by which SES affects health.	Matthew	J. Neidell
2003	93	Environmental Impacts on Population, Health, and Quality of Life	The 1997 Malaysian Forest Fires: Respiratory Hospitalizations in Persons with a History of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease	To investigate the respiratory health effects of the 1997 Malaysian haze episode, admissions to hospitals in Kuching, Malaysia, were selected from a database of all hospital admissions that occurred in the state of Sarawak from 1/1/1995-12/31/1998. We identified cohorts of persons whose members were admitted for respiratory problems during January 1 through July 31 of each year, 1995-1997. These persons were then followed until first re-admission for the same condition during the August-December of each year. We compared the survival curve of time to first readmission for the 1997 cohort (exposed to the haze) to the survival curves for the 1995 and 1996 cohorts (pre-haze cohorts). Persons with previous admissions for respiratory diseases were more likely to be re-hospitalized for respiratory diseases during the follow-up period in 1997 than during the pre-haze years. These findings suggest an association between forest-fire smoke exposure and  increased respiratory hospitalizations among susceptible adults.	Joshua	A. Mott	Clinton	J. Alverson	David	 Mannino	Andrew	 Kiyu	Jamila	 Hashim	Ken	 Falter	Stephen	 Redd
2003	93	Environmental Impacts on Population, Health, and Quality of Life	Unequal Burdens: The Demographics of Noxious Industrial Activity in Metropolitan Areas	This paper frames the issue of environmental justice in terms of the heterogeneity present in industrial land uses and across minority communities.  Drawing on this perspective, industrial zones are considered to be a contested terrain in which groups seek to maximize rewards such as access to employment opportunities while externalizing costs such as potential health risks.  Using tract-level census data and data on various types of industrial facilities and noxious sites, the analysis presented in this paper provide results that are consistent with the notion that certain groups are better able to capture the rewards associated with industrial activity while others are more burdened. Hispanics are more likely to reside in industrial areas of all kinds.  Blacks, however, are more likely to live in industrial areas characterized by a high level of burden. Access to industrial employment opportunities come, therefore, at a much higher cost to blacks than other groups.	Pamela	 Davidson
2003	93	Environmental Impacts on Population, Health, and Quality of Life	Rural Out-Migration and Environmental Risk: Examining the Association between Hazardous Waste Facilities and Population Loss	This research extends consideration of the demographic correlates of the local environment to include proximate facilities potentially posing risk to proximate environmental quality, namely facilities that manage, treat, or store hazardous wastes.  Such facilities may offer economic gains through jobs and tax revenue, although they may also act as environmental disamenities. As such, local quality of life impacts can be either positive or negative.  We examine the possibility that the presence of such facilities equates with differential loss of rural population, focusing on human capital, through modeling of aggregate outmigration rates, as well as age and education composition of outmigration streams, and the number of hazardous waste facilities, incinerators, and landfills across rural counties within the 48 contiguous states.  Preliminary results reveal significant associations between outmigration and HWFs, generally suggesting lower outmigration rates from rural areas with more such facilities, although little variation with regard to rural human capital loss.	Lori	M. Hunter	Jeannette	 Sutton
2003	94	Issues in the Use of Demographic Surveys to Define Population Genetics	Epidemiologic Issues in the Design and Analysis of Demographic Surveys Utilizing DNA 'Data'	One of the major success stories in the use of genetic information to identify biologic processes important in causing a common disorder at late ages involves Alzheimer disease and the functional polymorphic variants for the apolipoprotein E gene. This story will be used to demonstrate points to consider when designing other genetic studies using nominally population-based samples: 1) Get the DNA at the time the subjects are ascertained as frequencies for the genetic variants may change over time due to selection for mortality. 2) There is age heterogeneity wrt risk for diseases of the elderly. 3) Genetic variants coding for common 'normal' proteins may influence the timing of disease onset or, alternatively, survival for affected persons. 4) It may be desirable to jointly investigate candidate	Elizabeth	H. Corder
2003	94	Issues in the Use of Demographic Surveys to Define Population Genetics	Polymorphism Choice and Implications for Linkage Disequilibrium Estimation and Mapping	The sheer volume of information that can now be generated for identifying genetic variation affecting complex phenotypes is overwhelming.  I will highlight some novel approaches for identifying genetic variation affecting complex phenotypes, with a focus on some of the design issues that are relevant in population studies.  In particular, I will focus on approaches related than can be combined with simple association approaches to enhance the ability to distinguish signal from noise.	Nancy	 Cox
2003	94	Issues in the Use of Demographic Surveys to Define Population Genetics	From Population to Individual: Identifying Genetic Contributions to Complex Disease	Now that the complete human genome sequence is available, attention has turned in earnest to the dissection of the genetic basis of complex disease, with the aim of identifying risk variants of individual significance and effect.  Thus far, however, complex trait variation has been much harder to reliably locate in families, and so new population-based approaches have been proposed instead.  The nature of these approaches, their underlying assumptions (some shared, some contested), as well as their likely success in the face of the considerable genotypic and etiological heterogeneity likely to characterize much complex disease, will be discussed.	Malia	 Fullerton
2003	94	Issues in the Use of Demographic Surveys to Define Population Genetics	Methods for Inferring Haplotype Blocks and Informative SNP Selection	The sequencing of the human genome has created tremendous opportunity for advances in pinpointing disease-related genes, predicting disease risk, and defining population structure and history. The most common form of variants among individuals are called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and consist of a substitution of one nucleotide for another at a specific location. Cost effective technology has recently been developed for SNP genotyping.  However, the human genome has millions of SNPs and we are left with the problem of choosing a subset of these SNPs for our studies. Due to strong correlations among SNPs a smaller fraction of them can determine the rest.  Here, we present methods for choosing such an informative subset of SNPs.     We further present results of an empirical study on the profile of SNP variation across human chromosomes 6, 21 and 22 in African-American and Caucasian populations.	Bjarni	 Halldorsson
2003	95	Gender Differences in Determinants and Consequences of Migration	Immigrant Social Structure and Gender Differentials in Internal Migration	Utilizing 1990  and 2000 PUMS census files, this paper investigates the nature and extent of differences between foreign-born men and women in their propensity to migrate within the U.S., and whether migration patterns are shaped by their U.S. origin context. The context of origin (1985 and 1995) and boundary criteria for migration classification consists of 394 labor market regions (LMRs). Individual and context determinants of inter-LMR migration are estimated for over 30 origin groups. Three measures of gender context of the origin LMR are constructed by aggregation within LMRs. These are educational inequality between adult men and women, percent of adult women in the labor force, and the percent of adult women in married households. Multilevel models are estimated in order to assess the extent to which these and other context conditions influence migration beyond the contribution of individual demographic and socio-economic factors.	Mary	M. Kritz	Douglas	T. Gurak
2003	95	Gender Differences in Determinants and Consequences of Migration	Employment, Gender, and Social Ties among Mexican Immigrants	Most research regarding social networks and immigrant economic outcomes has failed to take a gender-sensitive approach to this issue.  This is problematic, given that there are typically sex differences in network composition, and particularly given the qualitative evidence that immigrant men and women experience very different returns to their social ties.  I consider how gender interacts to affect the likelihood of mobilizing social ties to obtain employment, and how this tie mobilization differentially affects employment outcomes for Mexican men and women.	Gretchen	 Livingston
2003	95	Gender Differences in Determinants and Consequences of Migration	Is Migration Healthy for Mexican Boys and Girls? Sex Differences in Child Health	Missing in recent studies on migration and health is an examination of how the gendered process of migration affects the health of children in Mexican households.    This is surprising given that substantial scholarship has revealed that parents selectively discriminate against girls in households worldwide.  Using new binational data on the health of Mexican children, we examine whether and how the gendered process of migration differentially affects the health of girls and boys in Mexican families.  Our findings reveal that gender inequality in child health is related to preferences built on the traditional gender hierarchy, but shifts in the power distribution brought about by the experience of U.S. migration reduce the inequality.  These results have important implications for understanding gender differences in migration and health.	Katharine	M. Donato	Melissa	 Stainback	Caitlin	C Rosenthal	Shawn	Malia Kanaiaupuni
2003	95	Gender Differences in Determinants and Consequences of Migration	Gender and Unauthorized International Labor Recruitment and Migration from Northern Thailand	Drawing on institutional migration theory, this paper develops a gendered analysis of the unauthorized international labor migration institution in Northern Thailand.  Based on findings from in-depth interviews with returned migrant workers, recruiters, and government officials, the paper presents two conceptual models developed to help explain the main methods of unauthorized labor recruitment employed by Northern Thai migrants.  ‘Direct pay’ unauthorized migrants pay for their recruitment at the time of migration, while ‘debt bondage’ unauthorized  migrants work off recruitment costs with the overseas employer after arrival in the destination country.  The two modes of recruitment are compared, focusing on the ways recruitment experiences and the relative power of migrants in the recruitment relationship vary by gender.  Several factors shaping men’s and women’s recruitment choices are examined, including gendered labor demand among overseas employers, financial resources available to potential migrants prior to departure, previous international migration experiences, and differences in social networks.	Teresa	R. Sobieszczyk
2003	96	Immigrant Labor Market Integration and Impact	Crossing Borders in the Information Age: The Impact of Highly Skilled Migrants on US Labor Market Outcomes	Social scientists have given increased attention to the question of whether immigrants are labor market complements or substitutes for native workers. Whereas efforts to explain the effect of less skilled foreign-born workers have produced and tested a number of intriguing hypotheses, the impact of college-educated workers has gathered scant theoretical and empirical attention.     Employing 1990 Census data, we seek to examine the nature and extent of the effect of highly-skilled immigrants on the earnings of native-born and foreign-born professionals across U.S. labor markets. First, the paper explores the characteristics of the American highly-skilled labor market as well as examines the distribution of foreign-born professionals compared to that of overall highly-skilled workforce across places, occupation, and industries. Second, using hierarchical linear modeling, we investigate the effect of the immigrant proportion of the highly-skilled workforce on the earnings of native (minorities, in particular) and foreign-born professionals, controlling for workers’ social and human capital characteristics as well as labor market characteristics.	Jeanne	 Batalova	Frank	D. Bean
2003	96	Immigrant Labor Market Integration and Impact	The Wage Structure of Latino Origin Groups across Generations	Latinos are the largest minority group in the U.S. work force.  We analyze in detail the determinants of the wages of Latinos of Mexican origin, Central/South Americans, and Puerto Ricans, and compare the wage structure facing these workers to the white and Black worker wage structure.  The wage structure facing second and third and higher generation Latinos is very similar to the wage structure of third and higher generation white workers.  Unlike African American workers, more than half of the native Latino/white wage gap can be accounted for by the lower educational attainment and potential experience of native Latino workers.  The analysis also explicitly examines the wages of immigrant Latinos that arrived in the U.S. early in their childhood.  The wages of immigrant Latinos that are educated in the U.S. do not approach native-born Latino wage levels.  Latino child immigrants are not “near-native” in their labor market outcomes.	Richard	A. Fry	B.	Lindsay  Lowell
2003	96	Immigrant Labor Market Integration and Impact	U.S. Meat Processing Industry Restructuring and New Hispanic Migration	Findings from the 2000 U.S. Census indicate high rates of Hispanic population increase outside urban areas as well as outside the Southwest. The diversity of new rural areas of destination raises questions about forces attracting migrants to these areas and the connection between economic structural change and Hispanic population growth. Our conceptual framework applies dual-labor market theory linking international migration to industrial restructuring in the meat processing industry with nonmetropolitan Hispanic population growth. We select a subsample of counties with exceptionally high meat processing production and detail its economic and demographic transformation.  We document the consolidation and integration in the meat processing industry and its consequent increased demand for low skilled labor, outline the link between increased labor demand and recruiting and hiring of international migrants, and demonstrate ethnic and racial composition changes in the meat-processing industry.	William	A. Kandel
2003	96	Immigrant Labor Market Integration and Impact	Does Immigration Affect Wages? Evidence from Occupational Data	Previous research has reached mixed conclusions about whether higher levels of immigration reduce the wages of natives.  This paper reexamines this question using data from the Current Population Survey and the Immigration and Naturalization Service and focuses on differential effects by skill level.  Using occupation as a proxy for skill, we find that an increase in the fraction of workers in an occupation who are foreign born lowers the wages of unskilled natives--particularly after controlling for endogeneity--but does not have a negative effect among skilled natives.	Madeline	 Zavodny	Pia	 Orrenius
2003	97	Maternal Mortality and Pregnancy Outcomes	Skilled Attendance at Delivery: A Comparative Study of Trends in Delivery Care in Six Developing Countries	Prioritization of skilled attendance at delivery is a recent strategy for the improvement of maternal health.  The purpose of this paper is to provide a better understanding of trends in delivery care across a range of developing countries. It involves a detailed secondary analysis of data from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) in Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ghana, Indonesia, Malawi, and the Philippines. Delivery with a health professional (DHP) has increased over the last decade in all six countries, with the largest absolute increases observed in Bolivia and Indonesia (14.6 and 13.4 percentage points) and the lowest observed in Malawi (0.4 percentage points). Increases in DHP have been more pronounced among low parity women leading to widening parity differentials over time.  Differentials by poverty quintile are also large and there is generally evidence that DHP is improving more slowly in the poorest quintile of the population resulting in widening poverty differentials.	Sian	 Curtis	Jacqueline	 Bell	Silvia	 Alayon
2003	97	Maternal Mortality and Pregnancy Outcomes	Qualitative Assessment of Emergency Obstetric Care Services in the Maharashtra State of India		Lakhan	 Singh	Shrikant	 Singh	Harish	C. Srivastava	Subrata	 Lahiri
2003	97	Maternal Mortality and Pregnancy Outcomes	Implementing Reproductive Rights: Identifying Cost-Effective Strategies to Increase Access to Safe Abortion Care	Abortion is legal for some indication in 118 of the world’s 192 countries. Nonetheless, safe abortion is often not accessible on the grounds for which it is legal, and accessing appropriate care for abortion complications can be challenging. Consequently, for largely socio-political reasons, unsafe abortion is a leading cause of maternal mortality. This paper presents a discussion of a newly-developed demographic-economic model that demonstrates the costs of multiple technological, personnel, and other strategies of providing abortion and postabortion care in varying abortion policy and service delivery contexts. Through estimating comparative costs of strategies of legal abortion and postabortion care provision, the model identifies the most cost-effective mechanisms to increase access to abortion care and associated services. With current widespread health sector reform, exploration of the financing of safe abortion care service delivery, as well as means of increasing access, is particularly timely to influence key decision-makers in challenging socio-political contexts.	Heidi	B. Johnston	Janie	 Benson
2003	97	Maternal Mortality and Pregnancy Outcomes	Constructing Political Will for Safe Motherhood in Honduras	In the 1990s Honduras experienced a major decline in maternal mortality.  Drawing on social constructionist theory, this paper explains how political priority for safe motherhood emerged in the country.  We identify five factors:    1) a legacy of attention in the 1970s and 1980s to maternal health and health infrastructure development  2) the appearance of safe motherhood on the global health agenda in the late 1980s  3) the 1990 publication of a study in Honduras revealing significantly higher levels of maternal death in childbirth than officials previously believed existed  4) the subsequent mobilization of the health bureaucracy for safe motherhood by a group of mid-level civil servants  5) the collaboration of this group with a network of Honduran-based international donors who already prioritized maternal mortality reduction.    The paper presents a case study of the political process and draws out lessons concerning political mobilization for other countries facing maternal mortality problems.	Jeremy	 Shiffman	Cynthia	 Stanton	Ana	Patricia  Salazar
2003	98	Gender, Livelihoods and Labor Markets	Accounting and Counting Housewives Work: Low-Income Migrant Women's Informal Income Generating Activities in Urban Turkey	Urbanization in Turkey has resulted in housewifezation of women in urban areas. Rural-urban migration has been the main trend in housewifezation and led to women’s withdrawal from labor force participation. It is recorded that 19 million women are either housewives or not working. However, this does not mean that urban women are economically inactive. Rather, women are pushed towards informal activities, especially home-based ones that are recognized as the main areas of women’s economic activity in the labor market. The main purpose of the study is to review the evidence available from National Statistics as well as other studies on women and their involvement in the so-called informal sector. The paper will draw on different forms of informal activities that women engage in and that are missing from the records of National Statistics in Turkey.	Saniye	 Dedeoglu
2003	98	Gender, Livelihoods and Labor Markets	Is Bangladesh Experiencing a 'Feminization' of the Labour Force?	In Bangladesh the primacy of women’s household and care-giving work not only makes it invisible but also depresses their propensity to participate in the visible market economy, resulting in female labour force participation rates that are a fraction of male rates. However, in the last decade growth of the female labour force was considerably greater, both in absolute and in relative terms, and the female share in incremental labour force increase has risen rapidly. These trends indicate a “feminization” of the labour market, with consequences for the quality of women’s employment and the welfare of women and family members dependent upon their care-giving labour. This paper examines official labour statistics to describe this phenomenon and accompanying changes in gender segregation of the labour market, and tries to assess the direct impact of feminization on women’s access to more rewarding market work and the indirect impact on their status.	Simeen	 Mahmud
2003	98	Gender, Livelihoods and Labor Markets	Maquiladoras and Market Mamas: Women's Work and Child Care in Guatemala City and Accra	This paper examines joint decisions of child care choice and labor force participation of women in Guatemala City and Greater Accra, Ghana. Participation in the labor market and use of formal daycare are joint decisions of mothers. There are differences between the results from the two cities.  In Guatemala, greater travel time from home  to the day care center reduces utilization of this type of care, but a larger supply of day care centers in the community does not affect use of formal care in Accra.  The lack of importance of formal day care supply variables in Accra suggests that formal day care may not be the key to increasing mothers’ labor force participation rates in cities where the informal sector dominates. In more urbanized settings where the formal sector generates a higher proportion of jobs for women, formal day care is more important to mothers’ decision to work.	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Marie	 Ruel
2003	98	Gender, Livelihoods and Labor Markets	Gender and Intergenerational Transfer of the Farm: It’s Influence on Multiple Job-Holding and On-Farm Decision-Making among U.S. Farm Women	Participation rates for farm women in off-farm labor markets continue to increase, as does their participation in making major farm decisions. Data from the Survey of U.S. Farm Women conducted in 2001 by Penn State in collaboration with NASS and ERS are used to examine the multiple work roles of farm women off the farm and in farming. Models of job choice considering jointness in participation are estimated followed by models of on-farm decision-making using a household bargaining approach. Of particular interest is the effect of the path of intergenerational farm transfer (i.e., if inherited/purchased through her family or her spouse’s family) on job choice and farm decision-making. Preliminary results show that the path of farm transfer influences women’s choices: transfer of the farm through her family mainly increases her farm involvement and participation in farm decisions, while transfer through the spouse’s family generally reduces her participation in farm decisions.	Jill	L. Findeis	Hema	 Swaminathan
2003	99	Race and Identity in the 2000 Census	Exploring the Consistency of Race Reporting in Census 2000 and the Census Quality Survey	Census 2000 allowed people to report more than one race,  meaning data on race collected in Census 2000 are no longer comparable with previous data collection efforts.  The Census Bureau conducted a survey of about 60,000 households to create a dataset that could be used to develop race bridging parameters.  We examine consistency of race reporting between this survey and Census 2000 to identify the extent to which people who reported more than one race will report a single race or vice versa.  We analyze the differences in race reporting across several geographic and demographic variables.	Claudette	 Bennett	Jorge	 del Pinal	Art	 Cresce
2003	99	Race and Identity in the 2000 Census	New Explorations of Race Reporting for Interracial Couples and Their Children: Census 2000	Our previous analyses of children in two-parent interracial families in Census 2000 found significant variations in race reporting patterns by age, sex, Hispanic origin, and regional distributions, and illustrated that the number of multiple race children in Census 2000 does not reflect the potential number of children who – based on their interracial parentage – could have been reported as more than one race, or may do so in the future.  We extend these analyses to examine geographic and contextual variables that may influence differential race reporting patterns for children in interracial families.  Our research highlights the complexity of race reporting for children in interracial families.	Nicholas	A. Jones	Amy	S. Smith
2003	99	Race and Identity in the 2000 Census	How Intermarried Couples Identify Their Children’s Race in the 2000 Census	For the first time in the census history, Americans were able to mark one or more racial categories in the 2000 Census to classify their race. The emergence of this two or more races classification represents a significant change in racial statistics and the treatment of this population may affect race-based policies in the United States. This study examines how intermarried couples in the 2000 Census identify their children’s race and compare differences in children’s racial identification by race of the racial minority parent (African American, Latino, Asian American, or American Indian). I focus on how couple-level characteristics and neighborhood compositions affect racial identification of children of intermarried couples. This study compares parents’ racial combination with the child’s race, which provides a picture of race formation processes of these children.	Zhenchao	 Qian
2003	99	Race and Identity in the 2000 Census	Race and Hispanic Origin for Puerto Rico in Census 2000: An Evaluation	In Census 2000, questions on race and Hispanic origin were asked in Puerto Rico for the first time in many years.  Prior to this, the last indication of the racial composition of Puerto Rico came from the 1950 census.  During this census, enumerators entered the race of the respondent by observation.  Due to the absence of information on race and Hispanic origin in the commonwealth during the last fifty years, there is much interest in how the residents of Puerto Rico responded to these questions.    This study examines the data from Puerto Rico on the race and ethnicity questions from Census 2000.  It identifies patterns in the responses to these questions by age, sex, educational attainment, income level, and the like.  In addition, it compares these responses to those of Puerto Ricans and other Hispanic groups in the U.S.	Matthew	 Christenson
2003	99	Race and Identity in the 2000 Census	Changing Racial and Ethnic Classification: A Comparative Study of U.S., British and Indian Censuses	There is a resurgence of racial and ethnic questions in the censuses of western world.  Race is no longer a group defined on the basis of physical characteristics only but socially and politically constructed. The modern secular state justifies the inclusion of question on race and ethnicity on the basis of protecting minority rights.  The shifting boundary of race and ethnicity is not easy to be operationalised in the censuses.     The white-black bio-polarity is the first and foremost concern in the racial and ethnic classification followed by the concerns of linguistic and national origins. Religion has been kept a side from the scheme of classification in the U.S. and British censuses in contrast to India.  The present study examines the question and categories of races and ethnicity in the censuses of US, Britain and India. It suggests to restrict the census to the minority racial and ethnic groups only rather than rigidly categorizing the whole population.	Ram	B. Bhagat
2003	100	Contraceptive Use and Effectiveness	Sterilization Failure, Sterilization Reversal, and Pregnancy after Sterilization Reversal in Quebec	Sterilization is intended to prevent pregnancy permanently, and women and men are counseled that reversal is not always possible. Nevertheless, sterilization reversals and pregnancies after sterilization do occur. We examine what happens after sterilization in the Canadian province of Quebec using payment data from the provincial health insurance system.      The data for this study were obtained for each person undergoing vasectomy or female sterilization from January 1, 1980 to December 31, 1999 and linked through a unique identifying number for each person. Using life-table procedures, we examine the likelihood of sterilization reversal and subsequent sterilization among men and women; among women, we also examine the likelihood of pregnancy following sterilization (contraceptive failure) and following sterilization reversal.      We conclude that sterilization reversal and pregnancy following sterilization are uncommon but not rare. Relatively high rates of reversal among the youngest age groups suggest a need for better counseling about alternative contraceptive strategies.	Edith	 Guilbert	Allison	A. Hedley
2003	100	Contraceptive Use and Effectiveness	Why Do Women Use Contraception?	Much of the demographic literature presumes that women use contraception to either limit family size or space births. This paper argues that women also use contraception to postpone pregnancy. Postponement is not synonymous with spacing but arises when women delay their next birth for reasons unrelated to the age of their youngest child. We demonstrate that postponement has a distinctive impact on the shape of birth interval distributions that differs from those of family size limitation, birth spacing, and a mixture of the two behaviours. Some populations, such as South Africa, have developed fertility regimes characterized by birth intervals far longer than can be accounted for by birth spacing. Postponement of births is most likely to become widespread in countries characterized by social unrest and dysfunctional institutions and those developed countries with particularly high opportunity costs of childbearing for women.	Tom	A. Moultrie	Ian	M. Timaeus
2003	100	Contraceptive Use and Effectiveness	The Calendar of Contraceptive Method Choice, France, 2000	This paper analyses a representative set of contraceptive histories collected in 2000 in France (n=1676), using both a period and a life-course approach. We first compare these contraceptive histories (1970-2000) to current contraceptive use data in three cross-sectional surveys (1978, 1988, 1994): respondents have simplified their contraceptive histories, omitting short episodes of non- and natural methods use. We then describe the evolution of contraceptive use between 1970 and 2000 in France: while modern methods have stopped diffusing, some amount of natural and local method use remains; condom use continues to increase among the young. We finally analyse contraceptive choice patterns over the life course: teenagers have a greater coverage of more efficient contraceptives. With age, two opposite forces are operating: parity increases contraceptive coverage, and the switch to longer lasting methods; non exposure decreases contraceptive coverage. The recourse to natural and local methods, constant through age, should be further studied.	Clementine	 Rossier
2003	100	Contraceptive Use and Effectiveness	Understanding Risk: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Communicating Contraceptive Effectiveness	Accurately communicating risk to patients poses challenges.  We randomized 433 reproductive aged women to one of three tables presenting contraceptive effectiveness (pregnancy rates, pregnancy categories, or a combination of rates and categories).  Before looking at the tables, about half the women knew that pills are more effective than condoms (57%) and that hormone shots are more effective than pills (48%).  While the two tables containing numbers increased participants’ knowledge about the two key comparisons (pills vs. condoms and pills vs. hormone shots) by 15-20 percentage points, the table with only categories increased participants knowledge by about 30 percentage points (p      	Markus	 Steiner	Rosalie	 Dominik	Sandy	 Dalebout	Sean	 Condon
2003	101	Gender and HIV/AIDS	The Influence of Culture on Sexuality: Gender Stereotypes and Condom Use among Young Mexicans	Despite the government actions to prevent AIDS, the upward trend in HIV infection continues among young heterosexuals in Mexico. A key element, usually not considered, in the policies and programmes are the cultural factors that may prevent condom use. This paper focusses on the obstacles that prevent the systematic use of condoms in the sexual relationships among young Mexican students. Several elements that may act as obstacles to condom used are examined, such as knowledge of prevention, socio-demographic, cultural factors and gender constructions on safe or unsafe sexual practices. The data - both quantitative and qualitative - were collected specially for this analysis, and biological markers of risky behaviour (laboratory tests) were also obtained. Our findings indicate that gender is a key element in the construct of sexuality, risk and prevention. Gender relations make young people not feel the need of prevention of sexually transmitted infections or HIV/AIDS.	Fatima	 Juarez	Cecilia	 Gayet	Miguel	A. Sanchez	Carlos	 Conde
2003	101	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Suspicion, Infidelity and HIV among Married Couples in Malawi	Husbands and wives are exposed to the risk of acquiring HIV, not only through their own behaviors, but also via their spouses' behaviors, specifically their spouses' extramarital relationships.  This risk is particularly acute for married women.  Using data from waves I (1998) and II (2000) of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change project, this paper examines the relationship between HIV risks and infidelity.  By comparing spouses' self-reports of extramarital relationships to respondents' suspicions about their spouses' fidelity, we estimate the accuracy of respondents in assessing spousal infideity and characteristics that improve  respondents' accuracy.  In particular, we explore the role of social networks on wives' ability to accurately assess husbands' fidelity.  This work draws greater attention to the need to better understand how infidelity is perceived within marriage, the HIV risks it poses, and the protective strategies, if any, that are adopted in response.	Shelley	 Clark
2003	101	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Gender, Inequality, and HIV Risk in South Africa	Although South Africa has fewer than one percent of the world’s 15–24 year-olds, it accounts for roughly 14 percent of global HIV infections among this age group.  Young women are at particular risk:  for South Africans this age, there are 5 infected females for every 2 infected males.  Aside from biological factors, relative social and economic vulnerability of women puts them at higher risk for engaging in unsafe sexual practices, including “exchanges” of sex for favors and goods.  While to some extent a “normal” aspect of sexual relationships, the health risks of such exchanges with certain types of partners (older men of economic means) may be great.  The extent of and factors influencing such behavior are examined using the 2001 round of the “Transitions to Adulthood in the Context of AIDS in South Africa” panel study in KwaZulu-Natal.  Relative poverty is associated with higher rates of sexual exchanges.	Kelly	 Hallman
2003	101	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Men's Sexual Behavior and Women's Vulnerability to HIV in Urban North India	Women in India are vulnerable to HIV due to their social status. Patterns of male out-of-marriage sexual behavior and its relationship to women's vulnerability remains poorly documented.  Using qualitative methods, men in urban areas of North India were interviewed to explore this relationship. Socio-economic status varied considerably. Nearly all men had premarital sex, and most had multiple partners. Levels of perceived risk for HIV were associated with education.  Despite experiencing sexually transmitted infections (STIs), men with low education felt fairly safe.  About one third of men felt that wives and sex workers did not have the right to refuse sex or demand condom use. Others felt that women would never make such demands. Women in North India are clearly dependent on men to protect them from STIs and HIV. Men in this sample did little to protect the women with whom they had sex, whether wives or sex workers.	Shelah	S. Bloom	Kaushalendra	K. Singh	Sunita	 Singh	Chirayath	 Suchindran
2003	102	Retirement, Pensions and Health Insurance	Transitions to Self-Employment at Older Ages: The Role of Wealth, Health, Health Insurance, and Other Factors	Although the phenomenon of self-employment has received academic attention, relatively little research has been devoted to studying self-employment among those in middle and late life.  Indeed, at ages 45 to 54, 8.9 percent of all workers are self-employed compared with 20.5 percent for those ages 65 and above.  As a result, a disproportionate share of self-employed workers are older workers.  This study uses data from the Health and Retirement Study to document the patterns of self-employment among older workers and the determinants of labor force transitions to and from self-employment at older ages.  We estimate a multinomial logit model of transitions from wage and salary employment to self-employment or retirement, focusing on the effects of wealth, health, and health insurance on these transitions.  Other covariates of interest include job characteristics, retirement expectations, and spouse's characteristics.	Lynn	 Karoly	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos
2003	102	Retirement, Pensions and Health Insurance	The Distributional Consequences of Removing the Retirement Earnings Test before the Normal Retirement Age: Results from a Microsimulation Analysis	In 2001, Rep. E. Clay Shaw introduced legislation that would repeal Social Security's Retirement Earnings Test below the Normal Retirement Age.  This study examines possible distributional consequences of such a reform using a dynamic microsimulation model, Modeling Income in the Near Term (MINT3).  Advocates of the proposal argue that it would remove work disincentives and reduce the Social Security system's complexity.  Opponents speculate that the proposal could increase poverty among the aged if many workers elected to claim their Social Security earlier than they otherwise would have.  We simulate the consequences of the reform using a series of assumptions about the size of earnings and Social Security claiming responses.  Our results suggest that the reform is likely to shift retirement income from later years of retirement to earlier ones.  While in the aggregate early gains sometimes offset the later losses, certain population subgroups could be particularly vulnerable under the reform.	Melissa	M. Favreault	Jillian	 Berk	Caroline	 Ratcliffe
2003	102	Retirement, Pensions and Health Insurance	How Differentials in Health Status among Elderly Americans Impact Annuity Valuation	Private annuity markets have expanded in the U.S. as a result of population aging and the growth in defined contribution plans.  Nevertheless, further increases in the demand for annuities have been hindered by the effect of adverse selection. In this paper I use AHEAD/HRS data and an increment-decrement life table model to examine how health status impacts annuity valuation in the U.S. I start by comparing different health indicators to determine the best predictors of mortality among the elderly. Based on a map of trajectories among states of health I then estimate several money’s worth measures to assess (1) the magnitude of expected transfers among annuity purchasers of different health status and (2) the insurance value of life annuities by health status.  Finally, I demonstrate the consequences of changes in mortality and health transition rates for the money’s worth of life annuities.	Cassio	M. Turra
2003	102	Retirement, Pensions and Health Insurance	Annuities and Retirement Satisfaction	This paper uses a large-scale nationwide panel survey of the elderly to document how Americans experience retirement.  We find that most retirees are very satisfied with their overall situation, but the degree of satisfaction varies substantially with retirees’ characteristics.  In particular, people in better health and with more financial resources tend to be more satisfied.  Holding financial resources and other factors constant, we find that retirees who can pay for more of their retirement expenses from lifelong guaranteed pensions (vs. accumulated savings) are more satisfied.  Retirees with lifelong annuities also tend to maintain their level of satisfaction during retirement, whereas those without tend to become less satisfied over time.  The findings have important implications for the wellbeing of future retirees, who are increasingly reliant on defined contribution pension plans rather than traditional lifelong pensions.	Constantijn	(Stan)  Panis
2003	103	Mortality and Emerging Health Threats	Popular Perceptions of Emerging Influences on Mortality and Longevity: Statistical Savvy or Befuddled Deduction?	While there is a slowly growing literature on the new environmental and pathological threats to human survival and longevity, much less is known about how these threats are perceived in the popular imagination. During fieldwork in rural Bangladesh and the state of West Bengal in India on the changing costs of and motivations for reproduction, we included some questions on perceptions of changing mortality. We found that child mortality levels were perceived to have fallen drastically in recent times,  but for the middle-aged and the old the past was seen as a better time in terms of health and survival. The decline in adult health is attributed to environmental  decline and lifestyle changes associated with modernization. The paper explores the objective validity and subjective reasons for this unexpected  world-view.	Sajeda	 Amin	Alaka	Malwade  Basu
2003	103	Mortality and Emerging Health Threats	The End of Declining Mortality: An Example from Southern Zambia	In stark contrast to prevailing trends during most of the twentieth century, mortality conditions in large parts of Africa are worsening.  This is likely the result of the combined effects of structural problems and a worsening epidemiological profile.  In particular HIV/AIDS is taking large numbers of lives and will continue to do so for some time.    This work utilizes 40 years of vital statistics information collected from a rural population in Southern Zambia to examine sex and age-specific trends in mortality and fertility from 1957 through 1995.  Coincident increases in young-adult mortality and decreases in fertility may be evidence that HIV/AIDS was already having a substantial impact on this population during the late 1990s.    Because these data describe only birth and death, more definitive analysis is not possible, and rigorous investigation into the structural changes giving context to the impacts of HIV is out of the question.	Samuel	J. Clark
2003	103	Mortality and Emerging Health Threats	Health Impact of Lifestyle Changes in Kerala	Although overall health status of Kerala has improved, morbidity remains high. Tertiary diseases in the state are on the rise. There have been important changes in the socio-economic life of Kerala in the last few decades due to large-scale migration to the Middle-east As a result of remittances into the state, people’s habits and practise of daily life have significantly changed. The extent to which these changes have impacted on health has not yet been the subject of systematic study. It is important to identify population sub-groups most affected by these changes. If tertiary diseases and morbidity remain high, there is a risk that the achievements of public health may not translate into real health benefits. Also, for a relatively poor state like Kerala public funding to address tertiary disease care would be a major task. The study would help inform policy makers about potential measures to address this problem.	Saseendran	 Pallikadavath	William	 Stones
2003	103	Mortality and Emerging Health Threats	Navigating AIDS in Rural Malawi	Navigating AIDS in Rural Malawi       Susan Cotts Watkins  University of Pennsylvania     In this paper, I describe how rural Malawians are attempting to navigate safely the rapids of AIDS.   Although it seems reasonable to expect that those living in high-prevalence countries of sub-Saharan Africa would be both willing and able to avoid death from AIDS, there is considerable pessimism about the future of these populations in the media as well as by academics. Our longitudinal study (described at www.pop.upenn.edu/networks) suggests that this pessimism is premature.  Prevention programs define only two harbors as places of safety: strict marital fidelity (or chastity for the unmarried) or consistent condom use. Both these rules are considered difficult to follow and incompatible with the good life.  However, in informal networks men and women are moderating these rules and formulating unexpected strategies of prevention.	Susan	 Watkins
2003	104	Cohabitation	How Do Marriage, Cohabitation, and Single Parenthood Affect the Material Hardships of Families with Children?	This paper examines the effect of marital and family status on the experience of material hardship, using data from the 1996 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).   It is not clear that marriage should reduce economic hardship relative to cohabitation and single parents in multi-adult households.  The study analyzes the relationship between marital and family status and such key indicators of hardship as the inability to meet essential expenses, poor housing conditions, neighborhood problems (including crime, schools, public services), and not having enough resources to buy adequate amounts of food.  The results indicate marriage does lower material hardship, even among households with similar incomes, income stability, and demographic and educational characteristics.  Moreover, the reduced hardship associated with marriage extends both to low-income and to less-educated women, despite their less promising marriage market.	Robert	 Lerman
2003	104	Cohabitation	Children’s Economic Well-Being in Cohabiting Parent Families: An Update and Extension	More children are spending time in cohabiting parent families; however, our understanding of children's well-being in this family type is limited.  We examine the economic circumstances of children in cohabiting families and assess how cohabiting partners’ income influences children's financial well-being.  We extend prior work by providing updated assessments of well-being; employing detailed measures of family structure that include biological relationship of children to adults; examining racial and ethnic variations; and investigating four indicators of well-being: poverty, public assistance, food insecurity, and housing insecurity.  We use the 1999 National Survey of American Families, which includes data on over 34,000 children, including 965 children in cohabiting two biological parent families and 1,047 children in cohabiting stepparent families.  Estimates of child poverty in cohabiting families vary dramatically from about 10 percent to nearly 40 percent depending on the type of cohabiting family and whether we employ legal or social definitions of family in calculating poverty status.	Wendy	D. Manning	Susan	L. Brown
2003	104	Cohabitation	Father Involvement in Fragile Families: A Comparison of Married, Cohabiting, Visiting, and Nonromantic Family Structures	Children benefit from their fathers~{!/~} involvement in their lives; however, the amount of father involvement is contingent on the father~{!/~}s relationship with the child~{!/~}s mother. Therefore, we may expect that father involvement will differ by relationship type. This research explores father involvement in cohabiting family types, comparing them with married, visiting, and nonromantic family structures, and comparing the mother~{!/~}s responses with the father~{!/~}s. Analysis of the father~{!/~}s involvement during the pregnancy, hopes for father involvement after the child~{!/~}s birth, and the importance of fathering actions reveals that cohabiting parents report more father involvement than other unmarried parents. Fathers tend to express a desire for more involvement than mothers wish for, an effect stronger for married and nonromantic couples than for cohabiting couples. The pattern of results suggests that family structure at the child~{!/~}s birth plays a significant role in the father~{!/~}s involvement with his child.	Bryndl	 Hohmann-Marriott
2003	104	Cohabitation	Union Transitions of Unmarried Families: What Explains the Differences by Living Arrangement?	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families study to explain why cohabiting parents are almost three times more likely to marry and half as likely to separate as romantically involved parents who do not coreside (referred to as visitors).  I analyze the effect the couple’s background characteristics and human capital, and the mother’s reports of attitudes, relationship quality, father’s investment in the child, and marriage expectations have on the differences in union transitions.  The results suggest that higher marriage expectations among cohabitors account for most of the difference in marriage, whereas marriage expectations and greater father investment in the child among cohabitors explain the different rates of separation.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2003	105	Innovations in Population and Household Forecasting	Forecasting the Components of Life Expectancy	Introduction: The purpose of this paper is to forecast life expectancy by using a newly developed decomposition method. The decomposition method separates the change over time of life expectancy into two components. Based on past trends of these components a forecast of the life expectancy is calculated.     Data and method: The first component of the decomposition corresponds to an average of the improvements in mortality over the examined period. The second component accounts for the average number of life-years gained per life saved. We apply the method to data from many countries covering the twentieth-century.    Result: The patterns suggested by the component trends are used to forecast the future dynamics and life expectancy. The forecast includes probability intervals. The findings contribute to the understanding of the dynamics of the components involved in the change of life expectancy. It also contributes to the debate on future trends of life expectancy.	Vladimir	 Canudas Romo	James	W. Vaupel	Francesco	 Lagona
2003	105	Innovations in Population and Household Forecasting	Integration of Estimates within Population Projections	The inclusion of estimated data in a projection allows increased accuracy in the early years of a projection, and the estimation within the model of back-projected rates and flows. These provide a demographic database for better judgement of likely future rates. The forecast is trained using all the available information including that beyond the base year.    Estimates provide constraints on a population projection. Simple mathematical solutions will be illustrated with reference to the generic projections software POPGROUP. This software (http://www.geocities.com/popgp2002/) was developed by and for local government in the UK, and is used additionally in academic teaching.    A variety of applications for regions of the UK will end the paper:   (a) integrating vital statistics into a projection for local areas.  (b) integrating post-census population estimates to improve migration assumptions.   (c) integrating diverse datasets available for a projection of ethnic groups.   (d) integrating housing plans into a population projection.	Ludi	 Simpson
2003	105	Innovations in Population and Household Forecasting	Past, Present, and Future Patterns of First Union Formation in the United States	Until now, many scholars have documented current and historical patterns and trends in cohabitation and marriage, without any attempt to project future such patterns and trends in first union.  The current study will extend our knowledge by applying the parametric models in the context of first union formation.  Our goals are the following:  to summarize in terms of descriptive statistics the trends over birth cohorts in the age at the formation of first union; to document differences among subgroups in these trends; to contrast these patterns and trends with those found for the formation of first marriages; and, to compare model fit among various semi-parametric and parametric models in order to find the most appropriate model suited to capture the patterns of first union over time.  The benefit of applying parametric models is that we will be able to project the remaining first union experience among relatively young birth cohorts.	Hsien-Hen	 Lu	Neil	G. Bennett	David	E. Bloom
2003	105	Innovations in Population and Household Forecasting	U.S. Households Projection by Race Using Demographic Rates as Input	Classic headship-rate method is not linked to demographic rates, projects a few household types without size, and does not deal with other household members than heads. ProFamy new method uses demographic rates as input and forecasts much more detailed household types, sizes, and living arrangements for all members of population. Testing forecasts using ProFamy and observed U.S. demographic rates in 1990s shows the discrepancy between the forecasts and 2000 census observations are reasonably small, which validates the method.          Using pooled data from CPS, NSFH, NSFG, and SIPP (total sample size of 394,791 individuals) for estimating trends of the demographic rates, 1990 census micro file, and ProFamy, we prepare projections of U.S. households from 1990 to 2050. Projections of educational guess and scenarios with assumptions of high divorce, low mortality, low fertility and combination are performed to analysis the possible impacts of changes in demographic rates on U.S. households of different race groups.	Yi	 Zeng	Wang	 Zhenglian
2003	106	Biodemography of Human Fertility	Young Ovaries Extend the Life Expectancy of Old Ovariectomized Mice: Biological and Demographic Implications for Humans	We tested the hypothesis that the input of young ovaries will increase the life expectancy in old ovariectomized (OX) CBA mice by transplanting ovaries from young (2 mo.) donor females into pre-pubertally OX 5-, 8- and 11-mo.-old females. The main finding was that remaining life expectancy at 11 mo. in the 11-mo. transplant cohort was 60% greater than that of the OX control cohort and nearly 40% greater than the intact control cohort. Only 20% of the 11-mo. transplantation cohort died in the 300-day period following ovarian transplantation, whereas nearly 65% of the OX control cohort died during this same period. The longevity response of the mice was strikingly similar to the outcome of experiments on nematode worms where the germ-line cells and/or somatic gonads were ablated. Thus  our results suggest that mice and, by extension, other mammals (including humans) can regulate their own aging rate via gonadal signaling.	James	R. Carey	Shelley	 Cargill	Hans	 Muller	Gary	 Anderson
2003	106	Biodemography of Human Fertility	Do Late Children Indeed Enhance Female Longevity? Findings from the European Royalty (1790-1939)	For some human populations a statistical association between late reproduction and female longevity has been reported. The causality behind this is unclear.   We compare pairs of sisters from the European Royalty (cohorts 1790-1939 (n=1648)), both at least reaching age 45, with at least one child. We control for social status: all subjects were very wealthy, enjoying the best medical care of their time; and genetics: in this inbreeding population, subjects were sharing more genes than average siblings.  We identified 201 such sister pairs. In 101 cases, the sister, who had her first child later in life, lived longer than her sister, in 100 cases she did not. Also, in 97 cases, the sister who had her last child later in life, lived longer, in 104 cases she did not. We conclude that for females, neither a late first birth nor a late last birth is a life prolonging event.	Ulrich	 Mueller
2003	106	Biodemography of Human Fertility	Dads and Cads: Parental Cohabitation and the Human Sex Ratio at Birth	Evolutionary theory predicts that parents may bias the sex ratio of their offspring according to environmental conditions. Here, I test the prediction that parents may tend to produce males under conditions forecasting two-parent care, and females under conditions forecasting one-parent care. Using individual-level longitudinal data pooled from four public-use US surveys, I find that parents who were living with an opposite-sex partner or spouse were more likely to have a male child than parents who were living apart. The effect is small, but statistically significant (p       	Karen	 Norberg
2003	106	Biodemography of Human Fertility	Kin Effects on Fertility. Evidence from Bejsce’s Parish Register Reconstitution Study: 18th-20th Century, Poland	The standard biodemographic hypothesis states that individuals should enhance reproductive performance of their relatives. This hypothesis originates in the inclusive fitness theory, which predicts that kinsmen have genetic incentive to assist reproduction of biologically related individuals because such assistance indirectly contributes to their own reproductive performance. The paper aims to provide a partial verification of this hypothesis through estimation of the siblings’ effect on completed fertility and parity transition risks of women from the historical European population. The data are based on reconstitution of parish registers from Bejsce, located in south-central Poland for period 1740-1968. To estimate these effects, we have applied regression models for count outcomes and techniques event history analysis. We have found strong overall effect of siblings on fertility both in terms of the effect on completed fertility and parity specific transition risks. However, much weaker evidence supports hypothesis that siblings influence number of ego’s surviving offspring.	Krzysztof	 Tymicki
2003	107	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences II	Unintended Childbearing and Children's Cognitive Ability and Achievement	This paper analyzes unintended childbearing and children's cognitive ability, paying particular attention to the ways in which families change after an unintended birth.  Multilevel OLS and logistic regression analyses of NLSY and NLSY-C show a strong relationship between unintended status births and negative family change.  Relative to an intended birth, after an unintended birth family income declines, families are less likely to own their home, have a savings account, and own their car.  Mothers with an unintended birth are also less likely to live with their spouse or partner after the birth, and are more likely to be living with their parents.  In spite of these rather dramatic negative family changes, children's cognitive ability is resilient to these family changes, at least in terms of the measures used in these analyses (the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, and the Peabody Individual Achievement Test).	Jennifer	 Barber	Elizabeth	 Cooksey	Linda	 Young-DeMarco	Dawn	S. Hurst
2003	107	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences II	Fertility, Marriage and Happiness in Low Fertility Contexts: Evidence from a Study of Danish Twins	Understanding the determinants of why individuals and couples desire  children in below-replacement fertility contexts is of considerable  importance for assessing future trends in low and lowest-low fertility  countries. In this paper we therefore estimate the contributions of  fertility and marriage to subjective wellbeing---or  ``happiness''---using a unique data set from Denmark that includes  monozygotic (identical) and dizygotic (fraternal) twins.  The specific  feature of our data then allow us to control for many unobserved  endowments (genetic dispositions, family background, socialization,  etc.) that affect the fertility/marriage behavior and simultaneously  happiness. To our knowledge, the proposed analyses in this paper will  yield the first \emph{causal} estimates of the contributions of  fertility and marriage to subjective well-being and happiness. In  addition, our analyses are likely to reveal important aspects of the  valuation of children across gender and across different time points  in an individual's life-cycle.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2003	107	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences II	The Mystery of the Childless Woman: An Insight into Childlessness in Italy	This paper is intended to get an insight into childlessness in Italy. The aim of the paper is twofold. Firstly, we assess the relevance of childlessness in Italy both in a comparative and historical perspective, using aggregated data.   The second part of the paper is dedicated to identify different profiles of childless women. In particular, we are interested in assessing whether and at what extent childlessness is the result of a deliberate choice or rather the consequence of continuous postponement or a sort of side effect of other situations e.g. partnership instability. In doing so we examine the results of a specific-purpose CATI survey conducted in 2002 on about 1,000 childless women at the end of their reproductive lives, living in five Italian towns. Focus groups techniques on childless women in the same towns have also been applied in order to substantiate the quantitative results of the CATI survey.	Massimo	 Livi Bacci	Letizia	 Mencarini	Silvana	 Salvini	Maria	Letizia  Tanturri
2003	107	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences II	The Emergence of Sub-Replacement Family Size Ideals in Europe	Much of the recent literature on post transition fertility takes as a point of departure the remarkably stable levels of stated family size ideals over the last three decades.  In Europe even as period fertility rates have fallen well below replacement, family size ideals of 2 or more children have been the norm. In this paper, we present the first evidence of the emergence of sub-replacement fertility ideals. Specifically, we show that in the Eurobarometer 2001 survey women in German-speaking parts of Europe have average ideals of close 1.7 children per family.  This paper studies the consistency and the credibility of these new findings which - if they are indeed indications of a new trend - may imply a further downward spiral of achieved fertility.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Maria	Rita  Testa
2003	108	Income and Public Policies and Child Well-Being	How Welfare and Employment Policies Affect Children of Different Ages	Summary  Using experimental data from fourteen different welfare and work programs, we assess whether impacts on children’s achievement and behavior depend upon their stage of development. We find favorable impacts, particularly for programs that boost family income, for children ages 2-4 at the time of random assignment. In contrast, impacts were most negative among children transitioning into adolescence. We intend to determine to what extent changes in maternal employment, family income, and welfare dependence account for the pattern of impacts.	Elizabeth	 Clark-Kauffman	Greg	J. Duncan	Pamela	 Morris
2003	108	Income and Public Policies and Child Well-Being	Family Income and Child Outcomes in Canada	A positive relationship between income and child outcomes has been observed in data from numerous countries and surveys.  In Canada, as well, children from poor families have worse behavioural, emotional and cognitive outcomes than do children from non-poor families.  A key question for researchers and policy makers concerns the extent to which this empirical link represents a causal relationship.    We use data from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth to implement a series of empirical strategies for estimating the size of the effect of income on child outcomes. Our results indicate that this effect may indeed be positive but that it is also likely to be smaller than the conventional estimates.	Martin	 Dooley	Jennifer	 Stewart
2003	108	Income and Public Policies and Child Well-Being	The Effect of Neighborhood Poverty and Migration on Behavior Change in Children	Research suggests that children are affected by their surroundings. Poor neighborhoods lead to fewer resources, less access to socioeconomically advantaged neighbors, and more behavioral challenges.  Families in poor neighborhoods can undertake many strategies to improve the life chances of their children.  One such strategy, which may reduce the prevalence of problematic behavior, is to move into a more affluent neighborhood.  Residential mobility programs such as Gautreaux and Moving to Opportunity were designed to address this concern. The current research uses the NLSY linked mother-child files and the 1990 U.S. Census to assess the effect of residential mobility and neighborhood poverty on changes in childhood behavior problems between 1988 and 1994. Findings reveal that moving increases child behavior problems, regardless of the poverty level of the origin and destination neighborhood.  The largest increase is witnessed for those children who move 'down' from nonpoor to poor neighborhoods.	Darcy	W. Hango
2003	108	Income and Public Policies and Child Well-Being	Parents Who Won't Pay: Expected Parental Contributions and Postsecondary Schooling	The Expected Parental Contribution (EPC) parents are asked to make toward their child's postsecondary education is determined according to a federal financial aid formula based on parents' ability to pay.  However, not all parents are willing to make their expected contribution.  Using High School and Beyond survey data from the U.S. Department of Education, this paper shows that schooling outcomes for children whose parents who do not make their expected contributions are lower than for children whose parents do.  It also estimates the impact of financial aid policy on families' behavior and conducts a simulation to determine whether changing the EPC to reflect actual parental transfers would improve schooling outcomes for children with under-contributing parents.  Simulation results indicate, however, that while scholarship and grant awards for students with under-contributing parents would increase, the overall effect would be to worsen, rather than improve, schooling outcomes for these students.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski
2003	109	Population and Environment: New Approaches and Methodologies	An Integrative Model with Agent-Based Artificial Intelligence and GIS (IMABAIG): Simulating Spatio-Dynamics of Rural Households and the Associated Impacts on Giant Panda Habitats in the Wolong Nature Reserve (China)	This paper reports on the development, implementation, and results of an agent-based model simulating the impact of a growing rural population on the forests of the Wolong Nature Reserve for giant pandas (China). The local households follow a traditional Tibetan lifestyle, in which fuelwood consumption has caused panda habitat degradation. By keeping track of the life history of individual persons and dynamics of households, this model has equipped household agents with “knowledge” about themselves, other agents, and the environment, and allow them to interact with each other through activities based on a set of artificial intelligence rules. The households and environment co-evolve over time and space, resulting in macroscopic forest/habitat dynamics. Aside from helping local policy making, this approach may provide researchers with a tool to study how overall landscape patterns emerge as a result of actions of many individuals by integrating different disciplines at varying scales.	Li	 An	Marc	 Linderman	Ashton	 Shortridge	Jianguo	(Jack)  Liu
2003	109	Population and Environment: New Approaches and Methodologies	Turning Influential Data Points into Ethnographic Informants: Elaborating Links between Population Dynamics and Environmental Consumption	This paper outlines a mixed-method approach to studying the effects of population dynamics on environmental consumption at the micro-level and offers new insights into the complex nature of the relationship.  We use regression diagnostics, performed on recently developed models of survey data from Nepal, to identify influential cases.  We then study these cases intensively for insights into why the current models are not explaining their behavior well.  Next, we use the findings from our fieldwork in Nepal to inform our models of environmental consumption, adjusting them to provide a more comprehensive reflection of behavior and achieve better statistical fit to available data.  The multi-method approach provides an example which can be applied to a wide range of demographic studies and the specific substantive results add to the growing literature on population and environment connections at the micro-level.	Lisa	D. Pearce	William	G. Axinn	Indra	 Chaudhary
2003	109	Population and Environment: New Approaches and Methodologies	Spatial Configuration of Malaria Risk on the Amazon Frontier	This paper seeks to identify the local determinants of malaria transmission on the Brazilian Amazon, considering social, economic, behavioral, and environmental issues, and accounting for the possible autocorrelation in the spatial distribution of malaria rates. The analysis is focused on the Machadinho settlement project, located in the Western part of the Amazon.  Field surveys were realized in the area in 1985/87 and 1995. Additionally, key information was obtained through the application of GIS and Remote Sensing techniques. In order to analyze such complex and heterogeneous data, a three-step methodological approach is proposed, combining spatial statistical analysis, geostatistical tools, and grade of membership models (fuzzy sets). The findings from this study facilitated the proposal of a set of strategies that should be implemented in new and extant settlement projects, targeted in both time and space, to reduce the costs and improve the effectiveness of malaria control.	Marcia	C.  De Castro
2003	109	Population and Environment: New Approaches and Methodologies	Health and Haze: The Immediate and Medium Term Effects of Smoke Inundation on the Health of Adults in Indonesia	In the last half of 1997, smoke from the worst forest fires  in decades blanketed parts of Borneo, Sumatra, and  peninsular Malaysia for several months.  This paper measures  the immediate and medium-term impact of the fires on the  health of the Indonesian population by combining  population-based household survey data from the Indonesia  Family Life Survey (IFLS) with satellite measures of smoke  levels.  This paper offers three advances over previous work.  First, because we use data from Indonesia, we are able to  examine directly the setting where exposures were heaviest.  Second, because our data are population-based, rather than  based on the subset of individuals who appeared for  inpatient or outpatient health care, our results are  representative of the general population.  Third, because  our survey contains an array of health status measures, we  are not limited to considering only the health outcomes of  mortality and respiratory morbidity.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Douglas	M. McKee
2003	109	Population and Environment: New Approaches and Methodologies	Population in Greenhouse Gas Emissions Projections: Bridging Scenario-Based and Fully Probabilistic Approaches to Representing Uncertainty	Integrated assessments of climate change begin with an assessment of the possible paths for future emissions of radiatively active gases from human activity.  Future emissions will be driven by many factors with complex interlinkages and are therefore subject to deep uncertainty.  The primary approach to managing this uncertainty has been the use of alternative scenarios conditional on particular storylines about future development trends.  This approach has many benefits but does not provide any indication of the likelihood of alternative outcomes. I propose a new approach that may serve as a bridge between scenarios and fully probabilistic methods: conditional probabilistic projections.  As an illustration, I produce a modified version of widely used emissions scenarios by incorporating into them conditional probabilistic population projections. The resulting projections provide a fuller representation of uncertainty and an opportunity to investigate the effects of learning over time about how the long-term outlook for emissions may change.	Brian	C. O'Neill
2003	110	The Evidence for Declining Disability Rates among the Elderly	Secular Trends in Physiological Capital: Implications for Equity in Health Care	Over the past three centuries physiological capital has accumulated rapidly in OECD countries. Enhanced physiological capital is tied to long-term reduction in environmental hazards and to the conquest of chronic malnutrition. As physiological capital has become more equally distributed, socioeconomic disparities in the burden of disease have decreased. Implications for health care policy are: (1) enhanced physiological capital has done more to reduce inequities in health status than has wider access to health care; (2) so far, more advanced medical treatment has mainly contributed by retarding depreciation in individuals’ physiological capital; (3) prenatal and early childhood care and environmental issues are key for interventions aimed at enhancing physiological capital and at affecting its rate of depreciation; (4) lifestyle change is the most important issue affecting health equity in rich countries; and (5) greater access to clinical care should be promoted through aggressive outreach, since expanded insurance coverage alone is inadequate.	Robert	 Fogel
2003	110	The Evidence for Declining Disability Rates among the Elderly	Resolving Inconsistencies across National Surveys in Old-Age Disability Trends		Vicki	A. Freedman
2003	110	The Evidence for Declining Disability Rates among the Elderly	The Case for Accelerating Decline in Disability among the Elderly		Kenneth	G. Manton
2003	110	The Evidence for Declining Disability Rates among the Elderly	Declining Disability Internationally		Timothy	A. Waidmann
2003	111	Immigrant Adaptation	Hispanic Intermarriage: Assimilation and Marriage among U.S. Immigrants	Foreign-born Hispanic intermarriage with native populations is an important indicator of immigrants’ social and economic integration into U.S. society.  Unlike earlier waves of European immigration, Hispanic immigrants face barriers to integration into U.S. society, partly due to their low socioeconomic status as well as continuous flows of Hispanic immigration into this country.  We evaluate the hypothesis that marital assimilation of Hispanic immigrants is a function of preexisting patterns of social and economic assimilation.  Specifically, we: (1) examine patterns of intermarriage between foreign-born Hispanics and native-born Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites between 1990 and 2000, (2), identify barriers to Hispanic intermarriage in major U.S. metropolitan areas, and (3) reveal how these barriers changed between 1990 and 2000. Our research provides insights into patterns of intermarriage among non-native Hispanics and identifies various marriage market opportunities and constraints that affect the pace of marital assimilation.	J.	Brian  Brown	Daniel	T. Lichter
2003	111	Immigrant Adaptation	The Role of Peers in the Adaptation Processes of Immigrant Youth	This research examines the role of peer context in the adaptation processes of immigrant youth using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health.  We document differentials in school achievement and substance use by immigrant status and explore peer composition and peer climate factors as potential mediating mechanisms that may explain the acculturation of immigrant youth.  Consistent with prior research on immigrant advantage, first generation adolescents have higher school achievement and less use of substances than second and third+ generation youth.  We explore the extent to which peer networks of immigrant youth are largely made up of foreign-born and co-ethnic friends, thereby reinforcing the immigrant advantage.  To the extent that immigrant youth have native-born, non-Hispanic white friends, we expect this advantage to be eroded through acculturation.  We also contrast the normative climate of peer networks by immigrant generation to examine peer exposure to native attitudes and norms of behavior.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Guang	 Guo	Kathryn	 Harker
2003	111	Immigrant Adaptation	How Remitting Affects Authorized and Unauthorized Mexican Immigrant Integration in the United States	In addition to augmenting policymakers’ and financial service providers’ desire to know more about the characteristics of foreign-born remitters, increasing levels of remittances have raised questions about the financial tradeoffs involved. This paper employs the 2001 Los Angeles County Mexican Immigrant Legal Status Survey (LA-MILSS) to investigate the determinants of migrant remittances and the tradeoffs households make when remitting that may affect their members’ integration in the United States.  Specifically, we first estimate how various demographic characteristics (including immigrant residency status and duration of U.S. residency), neighborhood environment, and social network quality influenced whether and how much Mexican households remitted during the year preceding July 2001. Results permit us to address an emerging theoretical debate concerning whether remitting attenuates with integration or whether the new transnationalism is likely to increase remittance flows. We conclude by discussing whether remitting reduces Mexican immigrant households’ opportunities to invest in home ownership and education.	Enrico	A. Marcelli	B.	Lindsay  Lowell
2003	111	Immigrant Adaptation	The Process of Naturalizing: Contrasts for Asian and Latin American Immigrants	This study investigates gender and admission criteria in naturalizing for U.S. immigrants of 1978, 1985, and 1990 from six countries.  From alternative continuous-time hazard models over duration, the underlying hazard functions are the Gompertz for Cubans, Mexicans, and recent El Salvadorans and the log-logistic for Chinese, Indians, and Filipinos.  Latin Americans began more slowly than Asians but they continued to naturalize in the second decade.  Models controlling for unobserved heterogeneity were preferable for Asians and Cubans.  Employment-sponsored immigrants were most likely to naturalize, and immediate relative spouses also showed high propensities to naturalize.  For Mexicans, early Cubans, and recent Salvadorans, women naturalized sooner than men, but, in contrast, Indian men, Filipino men, and early arriving Chinese men naturalized sooner than women.  These models according to the underlying hazard function are more definitive for explaining naturalization with changing gender roles and origin contexts over time.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield	Xiaohe	 Xu	Bunnak	 Poch	Thomas	M. Kersen
2003	112	Health and Mortality Differences within the Hispanic Population	Hispanic Pregnancy Outcomes: Differentials over Time and Current Risk Factor Effects	Based on recent linked birth/infant death files for the U.S., we trace changes in pregnancy outcomes for five specific Hispanic populations in comparison with non-Hispanic whites (“Anglos)” from 1989-91 to 1995-97. Over this period, infant mortality rates declined, while rates of low birth weight and prematurity rose.  In 1995-97, the lowest prematurity rates were found among Anglos, but rates of low birth weight and infant mortality were lowest among Mexican Americans and Central/South Americans, respectively. Logistic regression models, show that, net of controls, the odds of both low birth weight and prematurity were greater for every Hispanic group than for Anglos in 1995-97.  However, the risk of infant mortality was either lower for every Hispanic group or statistically equivalent to the Anglo risk.  When birth outcomes were included as controls, odds of infant mortality were lower for every Hispanic group and significantly lower for four out of the five.	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song
2003	112	Health and Mortality Differences within the Hispanic Population	A Re-Examination of the Hispanic Mortality Paradox	This paper reviews, critically evaluates, and empirically tests two mechanisms, buffering effects and migration selection, associated with the so-called Hispanic paradox of better adult health and mortality among Hispanics living in the United States.  We employ two data sets; the National Health Interview Survey-Multiple Cause of Death linked data file spanning the period 1989-1997, and the Mexican Health and Aging Study.  We estimate parametric mortality hazard models incorporating individual heterogeneity to address the effects of ethnicity.  We estimate increasingly complex models to verify that indeed, once strategic socioeconomic conditions are controlled for, Hispanics experience, by and large, a survival advantage.  We conclude with a strong statement about the importance of migration based selection and suggest that a large part of what appears to be a Hispanic advantage is indeed an advantage and, in some cases, the result of mechanisms that bolster social support that somehow confer better health and lower mortality risks.	Elizabeth	 Arias
2003	112	Health and Mortality Differences within the Hispanic Population	Health and Chronic Disease Epidemiology among Latino Adults	This research evaluates whether the three largest Latino groups are participating in the national trend in delaying morbidity until late life.  Data from the 1997-2000 National Health Interview Surveys are used to examine ethnic differentials in the relationship between age and three indicators of chronic disease morbidity: number of medical conditions, number of functional limitations, and activity or participation restriction directly due to chronic conditions.  In early adulthood, Mexicans and Cubans have better health profiles than whites, whereas Puerto Ricans experience health disparities. Mexican health disparities emerge and widen in middle age, and persist into old age.  Cubans' health advantage and Puerto Ricans' health disparity disappears in middle age, and older Cubans and Puerto Ricans have health profiles similar to older whites.  The data suggest that Mexicans are NOT participating in the compression of chronic disease morbidity, whereas Puerto Ricans and Cubans appear to be delaying morbidity to later ages.	Barbara	 Zsembik
2003	112	Health and Mortality Differences within the Hispanic Population	Casting Light on the Hispanic Mortality Paradox: A Study of Age Patterns of Mortality at Older Ages	This paper uses new estimates of adult Hispanic mortality, based on Medicare-NUMIDENT data, to examine age patterns of mortality among Hispanics between 1980 and 2000. A standard mortality model for low-mortality populations is employed to compare mortality patterns of Hispanics with other aging populations. We evaluate how mortality patterns of Hispanics at older ages differ from patterns of several low-mortality populations with highly reliable data during two distinct periods: 1980-89 and 1990-99. In addition, we examine the possibility that the mortality pattern of Hispanics in the United States follows a more general Latin American pattern.  Finally, we investigate the contribution of cause-of-death structures to the variation in the age pattern of mortality between Hispanics and other populations at older ages. Our analysis casts light on some of the explanations for the Hispanic mortality advantage.	Cassio	M. Turra
2003	113	Demography of Schooling and Educational Attainment	How Do Mothers’ Educational Attainments Affect the Educational Attainment of the Next Generation?	When researchers estimate the “intergenerational effects” of parents on offspring based on associations between offsprings’ and parents’ characteristics, they seldom specify how parents’ characteristics cause the socioeconomic attainment of the next generation.  If, for example, mother’s education is a cause of her child’s attainment, then what is the effect on children of raising or lowering the schooling of a group of women?  The association based on a sample of offspring can at best show the impact of changing a woman’s attainment level conditional upon her marrying and giving birth.  The full impact of a woman’s education on her offspring’s education is weighted by the number and timing of her children and whether, when, and whom she marries.  This paper applies new models for the effects of women’s educational attainment on children to data from Indonesia and compares conventional estimates of intergenerational effects with those based on a fuller demographic model.	Robert	D. Mare	Vida	 Maralani
2003	113	Demography of Schooling and Educational Attainment	Mother’s or Teacher’s Education? Educational Stratification and Grade Progression in Brazil	This paper deals with the determinants of grade progression in primary education in Brazil.  The determinants of two grade progressions are studied: from zero to one year of schooling and from four to five years of schooling.  A hierarchical (multilevel) logit model is estimated for the determination of grade progression.  At level one, we consider only standard SES variables.  At level two, average teachers’ education is calculated for each cell.  A test confirms the hypothesis that both intercept and mother’s education coefficients are random in level two cells.  In terms of the fixed effects of level two, teacher’s education affects the intercept positively and, at the same time, affects the mother’s education coefficient negatively.  This important result indicates that mother’s education is a substitute for teacher’s education in the determination of grade progression for first grade.	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Cibele	C. César	Juliana	 Riani
2003	113	Demography of Schooling and Educational Attainment	Dynamics of Family Structure and Progress through School in South Africa: Evidence from Retrospective Histories	This paper uses new survey data containing retrospective life history calendars for South African youth to analyze the dynamics of grade advancement and family living arrangements.  The analysis is based on the first wave of the Cape Area Panel Study, which surveys 4800 respondents age 14-22 in metropolitan Cape Town.  While previous research has suggested that grade repetition plays a major role in explaining school outcomes in South Africa, this is one of the first large household surveys to provide detailed information about grade repetition.  Preliminary results indicate that males are twice as likely to repeat grades at early ages, with grade repetition explaining most of the growing female advantage in schooling in South Africa.  The paper will use the data to analyze the impact of variables such as race, gender, parental schooling, and family structure, on grade repetition, school enrollment, and cumulative grade attainment.	Kermyt	G. Anderson	David	 Lam
2003	113	Demography of Schooling and Educational Attainment	Rural-Urban Educational Inequality in Contemporary China	Under the hukou system  all Chinese households were categorized as either agricultural or non-agricultural - or as rural or urban - households. Rural and urban residents enjoyed different entitlements, including access to educational opportunities. This paper examines the effect of the Chinese household registration status on rural-urban inequalities in educational attainment. With the data from the survey of Life Histories and Social Change in Contemporary China (1996), I employ endogenous switching regression methods to disentangle the effect of hukou from the effect of other factors. I found clear evidence of the causal effect of hukou status on educational inequality. Those of rural hukou status at age 14 receive significantly lower education than do those of urban hukou status at age 14, net of residential location and family origin. The difference can be attributed to the state, which uses education as a tool to legitimatize the rural-urban social divide.	Xiaogang	 Wu
2003	114	Gender and Demographic Processes	How Pervasive Is Gender Discrimination in Childhood Care and Nutrition in India?	Strong preference for sons in India is well documented, but evidence on female disadvantage in childhood feeding and health care is inconclusive. This paper examines gender differentials in indicators of childhood feeding, immunization, health care, and nutritional status of young children (      	Vinod	 Mishra	Tarun	K. Roy	Robert	D. Retherford
2003	114	Gender and Demographic Processes	Gender Differentials in Motives, and Incentives for Migration, Peru 1997: The Role of Wages, Employment, Marriage, Networks, and Relative Deprivation	The traditional view in the literature has been that female migration is primarily motivated by marriage while male migration by income factors.  This paper explored the extent to which marriage probabilities, own wage, spouse’s economic prospects, employment probabilities, migrant networks and relative welfare are important incentives in migration decisions. Data for this paper primarily comes from the Peru Living Standards and Measurement Surveys 1997. The main estimation technique is multinomial logits. I compared actual reasons for migration, for those that migrated, with projected incentives for migration to determine the extent to which incentives are predictors of actual decisions of individuals. Results indicate that incentives for migration projected using few key observed factors are good indicators of actual reasons for migration among migrants. There are clear interesting gender differences in these migration incentives.	Vajeera	S. Dorabawila
2003	114	Gender and Demographic Processes	Take Your Mat and Go!: Rural Malawian Women's Strategies in the HIV/AIDS Era	The images of women currently dominating the UNAIDS literature paint a picture of vulnerable women who need considerable outside help to enhance their status, power, and negotiation skills.  Using depth interviews from rural Malawi, I examine the extent to which women themselves express having power within their households, specifically perceptions of their ability to protect themselves from HIV/AIDS. Interviews with their spouses expound on men’s acknowledgement of their wives’ autonomy in this area. According to both spouses’ narratives, women often advocate for themselves relating to HIV/AIDS protection. The strategies and timing they use, however, are not always consistent or fruitful. Although women talk to their husbands about the “dangerous disease out there,” respondents articulated that the suggestion of condom use with a spouse shows a lack of trust. An atmosphere of distrust is described as worse than simply ending the marriage, a strategy to which some women may be resorting.	Enid	 Schatz
2003	114	Gender and Demographic Processes	Integrating Gender into Reproductive Health Outcomes: Does It Make a Difference to Outcomes?	At the 1994 ICPD, gender-based barriers were identified as barriers to reproductive health.  We present findings from a 2002 analysis that integrating gender into RH programs makes a difference to outcomes.  We have distinguished three types of gender integration:  exploiting gender inequalities to pursue reproductive health goals; accommodating gender differences; and seeking to overcome barriers by transforming gender norms to promote equity.   Through review of evaluations of interventions and interviews with experts, this paper assesses gender-integrated interventions in four areas: maternal morbidity/mortality, unintended pregnancy, HIV/STDs, and men’s involvement.  In our analysis, we present gender-based barriers in each area and provide examples of strategies that have been used to overcome them, making a distinction between initiatives that work with or work around gender norms and those that challenge them. The evidence supports using a gender perspective in reproductive health program design and suggests a number of model programs as best practices.	Carol	 Boender	Diana	 Santana	Diana	 Santillan	Karen	 Hardee
2003	115	Family Relationships, Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective	Family Organization, Disability, and Mortality in Rural China, 1749-1909	We investigate interrelationships among household organization, disability, and mortality in rural northeast China from the middle of the eighteenth century to the beginning of the twentieth.  We begin by examining how family organization, in particular household and kin group structure, affected the chances of being identified as disabled for adult males.  To test the claim that the extended family in China acted as a safety net for vulnerable members, we then examine how family organization conditioned the mortality impact of being registered as disabled.  We focus on the effects on the mortality disadvantage of disability of the presence or absence of kin who could provide assistance, including spouses, siblings, or adult children.  To investigate these questions, we apply discrete-time event-history techniques to longitudinal, individual-level household registration data from rural Liaoning province in China between 1749 and 1909.	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	Z. Lee
2003	115	Family Relationships, Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective	Maternal Mortality on the Croatian-Bosnian Border 1700-1900	Maternal mortality on the Croatian-Bosnian border 1700-1900 was high. It was exacerbated by episodic military mobilizations and by secularly increasing wage labor, both of which withdrew male labor from family farming. We hypothesize that both the episodic and secular withdrawals of male labor placed extra burdens on on pregnant/parturient women and on those who would care for them. We focus especially on effects of kinship connections in autarkic patrilineal joint households. The presence of unmarried husband's sisters lowered the mortality risk of wives; the labor of these sisters was a public good in the household. The presence of husband's brothers' wives exacerbated the mortality risk; such women were rivals competing for household resources. The existence of natal kin, living in other households, seems to have no effect. We conclude that knowledge of local structures and preferences is necessary to understand the behavior of actors and of demographic outcomes.	Eugene	A. Hammel	Aaron	 Gullickson
2003	115	Family Relationships, Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective	Does Health Mediate Mortality in Families?	For more than a century demographers exploring the degree to   which parental survival predicts child survival have regularly found that   children inherit the life spans of their parents only to a limited   degree.  Yet similarities in the environmental backgrounds of parents   and children and shared genetic material suggest that the   association should be stronger.  One possible explanation for the failure of   parent-child pairs to show the expected strong association is that   the mortality association is mediated by health.           The study population consists of males under observation   for their health experience during adulthood with up to four generations   in the same family.  This will be a preliminary   research report, which will try out some possible ways to look for shared   health experience within families and between parents and their   children.  Strong associations will suggest that either, or both,   environmental or genetic factors played a role.	James	C. Riley
2003	115	Family Relationships, Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective	Two Centuries of Marriage and Mortality in the United States: An Analysis of New Family History Data	This paper estimates the relationship between marital status and mortality using a large sample of family histories from the United States.   The data under analysis contain birth, death and marriage dates on a sample of family-linked individuals.  Using both linear models of life expectancy and parametric and semi-parametric hazard models, the analysis finds strong and consistent benefits of marriage that are highest in early adulthood, but diminish steadily over the life course.  The effects of being never married and widowed are similar, and protective effects of marriage exist for both men and women, though they are stronger for men.  The marriage effect is also shown to be relatively stable across birth cohorts.   Sibling-level random effects are incorporated into both the linear models and the parametric hazard model.  In general, the random effects have little impact on the coefficient estimates.	Sven	E. Wilson
2003	116	Why Networks Matter	A Blau Space Primer: Networks and Niches in Sociodemographic Dimensions	This paper describes some theoretical and empirical results in the analysis of social networks at a large scale of aggregation.  The theoretical results argue that sociodemographic characteristics organize  social contacts and the flow of socially transmitted information in society, through the operation of the homophily principle.  The paper briefly traces the origin of Blau space, suggests some changes in the dimensionality of the space that have occurred, and then illustrates the application of ideas of Blau space by arguing that the mechanisms of competition and propagation in the sociodemographic dimensions of Blau space can help us to explain the dynamic behavior of many disparate social entities, including both  the concrete and the nascent: firms, groups, associations, events, cultural artifacts, markets, social circles, collectivities, occupations, social movements, roles, identities, attitudes, beliefs, lifestyles, institutions, meanings, human cognitive structure, disease, and other socially transmissible quantities.	Miller	 McPherson
2003	116	Why Networks Matter	Social Cohesion and Connectivity: Diffusion Implications of Relational Structure	Networks matter, at least in part, because relations that bind  collectivities together provide conduits for flows of everything from ideas to diseases.  This paper reviews the key relational-structure property that captures social cohesion (node-connectivity), and extends the discussion to group membership.  While contemporary work on group  membership has focused on participation volume, I show that membership patterns can have dramatic effects on social cohesion independent of the number of organizations people belong to.  This distinction allows for increasing community cohesion in the face of decreasing local participation.  Implications for diffusion, collective action and dynamic extensions are discussed.	James	 Moody
2003	116	Why Networks Matter	Networks from Genealogies and Linked Censuses: Why do they matter?	Networks of kinship and marriage, whether from ethnographic research, linked censuses, or genealogies of sufficiently large populations, provide crucial measures for delimiting the boundaries and intersections of socially cohesive subgroups. New methods are available for this type of boundary delimitation in large networks of all types, including structural endogamy, or cohesion in genealogical networks that occurs through marriage. Membership within common cohesive subgroups, even on a large scale, may provide a delimitation of population subgroups based on structural rather than attribute data. These delimitations may be relevant to the formative processes involved in social class, ethnicity, diffusion, social mobilization, cultural and property transmission, and elite structure. The redundancies of both number of independent paths between members of a cohesive block and the robustness of its connectivity (the minimum number of its members whose removal would disconnect the group) insure that even large cohesive blocks with sparse ties and structural holes where face-to-face ties are missing can exert extensive social influence not only on members, but through interlock with other institutions (e.g., political or institutional officeholding, occupational specializations) and thereby on other populations. Predictive cohesion theory is a new body of theory that spells out and tests the expected consequences of structural cohesion and (in the case of kinship networks) structural endogamy. An important part of the theory relates to those members of a population whose ties are not cohesive, and how lack of cohesion impacts on migration, lack of participation in community activities and organizations, lack of influences, and lower reception of information and potential resources that circulate in cohesive communities.	Douglas	R. White	James	 Moody
2003	117	New Approaches to Family Planning Service Delivery and Research	The Impact of a Microfinance Program on Client Perceptions of the Quality of Care Provided by Private Sector Midwives in Uganda	Objective: To assess the impact of a microfinance program on the perceived quality of care received by clients and client loyalty to the clinics.    Methods:  A quasi-experimental study with a pre-test post-test design was used.  Exit interviews were conducted at 15 intervention and 7 comparison clinics.  Baseline exit interviews were conducted between November and December 2000.  Five-days of business skills training were provided to midwives and loans (averaging $454) were given during January and February 2001. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to assess the impact.    Results:  The intervention resulted in a significant net improvement in clients’ perceptions of the quality of care received.  The intervention was also associated with a higher level of client loyalty.      Conclusions: A microfinance program that provides business skills training and revolving loans midwives can increase client loyalty by increasing client perceptions of the quality of care they receive.	Sohail	 Agha	Asma	 Balal	Francis	 Ogojo-Okello
2003	117	New Approaches to Family Planning Service Delivery and Research	The Costs of Expanding an Intervention to Improve the Quality of Care in Ministry of Health Clinics in Egypt	Some studies suggest that improvements in quality of care increase contraceptive continuation rates, but there are no data on the costs of achieving these changes.  FRONTIERS, is testing the impact of an intervention to improve client-provider interaction (CPI) which is thought to improve quality of care and continuation of contraceptive use in Egypt and Peru.      Quality was assessed through interviews with clients and observation of interactions.  We designed spreadsheets to identify and record inputs used in planning the intervention, training providers and supervisors, and overseeing the initial months of service delivery.  We carried out activity sampling to determine how providers spent their time and the length of CPIs.      We present data to assess the ability to afford the intervention and its cost effectiveness.  Specifically we calculate the costs per client reached by the intervention as well as the incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) under various assumptions.	Barbara	S. Janowitz	Stirling	 Cummings	Ibrahim	 Kharboush	Laila	 Nawar	Sara	 Loza	Susan	E. Adamchak
2003	117	New Approaches to Family Planning Service Delivery and Research	Provider Motivation in Social Franchises for Reproductive Health	Four reproductive health franchises in three countries were surveyed.  Providers, family planning clients, and women from the local community were interviewed.  Clinical vignettes were used to measure provider skill.    Results were analyzed using theories of financial motivation and organizational behavior from transaction economics.   Comparisons of providers in all four franchises were analyzed to test the accuracy of motivational aspects of membership and the results on behavior, particularly compliance with quality guidelines.     We found family planning services to be highly profitable for members of the franchises, and quality within active franchises to be higher than the quality of services provided in passive ‘network’ franchises, where regular follow-up does not exist.  We find that franchise membership is correlated with higher quality services, and that there is evidence to indicate that quality improvements are a result of membership.    We conclude with hypotheses regarding quality management techniques applicable to this model of service delivery.	Dominic	 Montagu	Kristin	 Bradbury	Bella	P. Uttekar
2003	117	New Approaches to Family Planning Service Delivery and Research	Are People Willing to Pay for Contraceptive? Implications on Policy	Due to decreased donor support for family planning programs, governments in developing countries are moving away from providing free family planning services.   In order to set appropriate prices for contraceptives it is important to know the willngness of people to pay for the service. This paper uses the 1998 KDHS data to explore whether and how much people are willing to pay for contraceptives and the differentials in the amount people would be willing to pay for contraceptive pills.     Preliminary results suggest that 57% of the respondents are willing to pay for contraceptive pills. Women who never married, have paid jobs and desire to have more children are willing to pay more for contraceptives pills than their counterparts. Of the women willing to pay, 56% and 84% are willing to pay at least Kshs 25 (US$0.32) and Kshs 10 (US$0.13) per packet respectively.	Gloria	 Chepngeno	Frederick	 Mugisha
2003	118	Spatial Variation in Sub-Saharan Africa's Fertility Transition	The Southern Region Leading the Way! Regional Fertility Trends in Mozambique	Fertility declines have recently been documented for several countries in sub-Saharan Africa. However, little is known about fertility trends in Mozambique. This article attempts to fill the gap in Mozambique's demography by assessing the nature and magnitude of fertility decline, using the 1980 and 1997 censuses and the 1997 DHS. The TFR in Mozambique fell from 7.1 births per woman in 1980 to 6.1 births per woman in 1997, with marked differences between the three major regions. TFRs for 1980 and 1997 by region are 6.7 and 6.4 for Northern Region; 7.9 and 6.7 for Central Region; and 6.2 and 5.1 for Southern Region. These apparent declines are, however, refuted by both DHS birth history and census reconstructed birth history analyses, which show a fertility decline only in Southern Region. Contributing factors to these trends, including regional differences, are sought by looking at proximate determinants of fertility.	Carlos	 Arnaldo
2003	118	Spatial Variation in Sub-Saharan Africa's Fertility Transition	Education, Fertility Decline, and the Timing of the Second Birth in Sub-Saharan Africa	The first birth is commonly seen as the onset of a reproductive career, yet in some contexts the second birth constitutes a larger transition in women's status. In much of Africa, educated women now have substantially lower fertility than do the less educated, due largely to lower rates before age 25. Average ages at first childbearing explain only some of this differential; more important is the fact that educated women are more likely than the uneducated to maintain a long interval between the first and second births. By contrast, later birth intervals are not systematically longer among the educated. This paper uses DHS data from 16 sub-Saharan countries alongside ethnographic field data to investigate the role of the first space in understanding African fertility differentials and African fertility decline. I argue that a long first space may enable educated women to combine the potentially conflicting roles of student and mother.	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2003	118	Spatial Variation in Sub-Saharan Africa's Fertility Transition	Social Border and Fertility Transition in Senegal	The 1999 ESIS data was used for the spatial analysis of fertility levels with an emphasis on the influence of ethnicity in the context of the ongoing fertility transition in Senegal. The concept of social border was tested with an aid of the geographic information system. The results of analysis show that a large portion of the variability in fertility between the two major ethnic groups, Wolof and Fulani, is accounted for by where people live, and a smaller fraction is accounted for by socio-demographic characteristics independent of location and ethnicity. In socio-cultural settings of Senegal, ethnicity is rather a minor determinant to explain the variations of the onset as well as the pace of the fertility transition, even though ethnic influence on reproductive behaviors should not be forgotten. The implications of these results for understanding the role of socio-cultural boundaries during the course of fertility transitions are discussed.	Keita	 Ohashi
2003	118	Spatial Variation in Sub-Saharan Africa's Fertility Transition	Where Does It Pay for Households to Restrict Their Fertility? Testing the Quality-Quantity Trade off	The economic theory of fertility transition states that the quantity of children demanded is lower where the price of child quality is lower. We operationalize the price of child quality as the strength of the relationship between household economic resources and child survival to test whether fertility is lower in regions where economic status is a stronger predictor of child survival. We use DHS data to undertake a two-step procedure where we first regress child survival measures against a household asset index and its interaction with regional dummy variables, to derive the regional price of child quality. In the second stage we regress each woman's age-adjusted fertility against the measures of regional price of child quality. We note a downward trend relationship between the regional total fertility rate and the regional price of child quality. Our results support that fertility declines can be attributed to investments in child survival.	Feng	 Zhao
2003	119	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences	Determinants of Repeat Unintended Pregnancy	In the U.S., the rate of unintended pregnancy is high and the incidence of repeated unintended pregnancies is substantial.  Henshaw estimates that in 1994, 48% of women 15-44 had one unplanned pregnancy and 28% had more than one.  To improve  understanding of the determinants of unintended pregnancy, it is necessary to explore these relatively unstudied questions: What factors are associated with repeat unintended pregnancies?  What factors distinguish women who have repeated unplanned pregnancies from those who do not?  In this paper, we address these questions using data from the Longitudinal Study of Contraceptive Choice and Use Dynamics (baseline and three follow-up surveys conducted from 1993 to 2000).  We conduct survival analysis to examine the effects of individual, relationship, and household factors, as well as time-varying contraceptive use, on the probability and timing of repeat unintended pregnancy.	Christina	I. Fowler	Helen	P. Koo
2003	119	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences in Rural South India	The paper focuses on attitudes and preferences of women about the desired number of children and sons and daughters, and the perceived ideal duration of birth intervals and proximate determinants postpartum amenorrhoea, postpartum abstinence and sexual abstinence in general. Also, the paper discusses attitudes, subjective norm and perceived behavioural control (model Fishbein and Ajzen 1990; Ajzen 1992) about the use of modern contraceptive methods.   The paper describes data collected through survey and in-depth interviews in Dharwad taluka, Karnataka in 1997-98.   Preferences and attitudes are compared to actual behaviour. Data on preferences about the duration of birth intervals and proximate determinants e.g. indicate that women prefer longer durations. Also, women indeed want more sons than daughters. But, despite son preference, daughters are wanted as well.	Inge	 Hutter	N.V.	 Rajeswari	J.S.	 Hallad	B.M.	 Ramesh
2003	119	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences	Pregnancy Wantedness, Maternal Psychosocial Factors, and Birth Outcomes	This research examines the association of pregnancy wantedness, maternal stress, depression, and coping on preterm birth (PTB), using the Pregnancy, Infection and Nutrition cohort from central North Carolina, 1995-2001. Measures included four questions about pregnancy wantedness/timing, and standardized life events, depression, and coping scales.  PTB, defined as delivery prior to 37 completed weeks' gestation, accounted for 13% of the births. In unadjusted log-linear analyses, pregnancy wantedness was associated with six of eight coping styles, depression, and stress among these women.  Pregnancy wantedness and depression were unassociated with PTB, but high levels of stress and distancing coping style were associated.  Our results suggest pregnancy wantedness may interact with coping and depression among these women.  The results of additional modeling of pregnancy wantedness with coping, stress, and depression interactions will be reported.  This research considers pregnancy wantedness in light of maternal psychosocial variables and examines their combined influence on pregnancy outcomes.	Lynne	 Messer	Nancy	 Dole	Jay	S. Kaufman	David	A. Savitz
2003	119	Fertility Attitudes and Preferences	The Influence of Attitudes toward Contraception on the Adoption of Permanent Methods to End Childbearing	This study uses a micro level perspective to assess how attitudes towards contraception affect the use of permanent methods to end childbearing.  My primary goal is to test the hypothesis that attitudes toward contraception affect the subsequent adoption of a permanent method.  I divide attitudes into four sub-categories engendering separate hypotheses for each.  The categories are: (1) attitude in general (2) attitude toward side effects (3) attitude toward accessibility (4) attitude toward effectiveness.  Next, through the inclusion of desired family size as an intervening variable that could affect both attitudes toward contraception and the adoption of a permanent method, I examine whether or not the effect of attitudes on behavior operates through family size preference or functions independently.  This study uses panel data which capture individual attitudes at time 1, and behavioral outcomes at time 2, thereby eliminating problems of time order.	Keith	D. Robinson
2003	120	Gender, Health and Mortality	Cause-Specific Contributions to Sex Differences in Adult Mortality among Whites and African Americans between 1960 and 1995	This paper investigates sex differences in adult mortality among whites and African Americans between 1960 and 1995. In recent years sex differences in life expectancy increased for blacks and declined for whites. To gain insights into why sex differences are larger for blacks than whites and why trends have diverged in recent decades, we investigate the contribution of cause-specific mortality trends to trends in overall mortality by race.  We focus our analyses on ages 15 to 64, because these ages make the largest contribution to sex differences in life expectancy at birth. We further break the age range into two groups: ages 15 to 34 and 35 to 64 because the contribution of various causes of death to overall mortality varies by age.	Irma	T. Elo	Greg	L. Drevenstedt
2003	120	Gender, Health and Mortality	The Influence of Cross-Gender Conversational Networks on Responses to AIDS in Rural Malawi	In this paper, we examine the influence of husbands' (wives') social networks on their spouses responses to AIDS. Social networks in the high prevalence countries of sub-Saharan Africa are quite gendered: women talk with women, men with men. Communication between husband and wife, however, may bridge the gender gap. We use data from a longitudinal survey conducted in 1998 and 2001 for a sample of 1500 ever-married women and 1000 husbands, as well as a variety of sources of qualitative data that provide information on the content of conversations in social networks and between spouses.   We utilize for our analyses several different methodologies, including (a) content analyses of qualitative data, (b) regression analyses of the influence of social interaction and spousal communication on AIDS risk perceptions and AIDS-related behaviors, and (c)  fixed effects models to control for unobserved factors that are likely to determine social networks (where possible).	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2003	120	Gender, Health and Mortality	Gender, Lifetime Socioeconomic Environments, and Health among the Elderly: The Cases of Taiwan and Japan	This study examines how lifetime socioeconomic environments are related to the health status of elderly men and women aged 65 and older in Taiwan and Japan.  Despite ample evidence on strong associations between socioeconomic status and health across many societie, gender and age differences in the associations are still inconclusive.  This study hopes to contribute to the research by focusing on gender patterns among the elderly in two East Asian societies, Taiwan and Japan.  In addition to respondents' own SES indicators, this study also examines the socioeconomic characteristics of respondents' parents and spouses, deceased or living.  As the health status of the elderly is considered cumulative outcomes of lifetime experiences, this study highlights those indicators that reflect long-term experiences.	Yean-Ju	 Lee	Yasuhiko	 Saito	Yi-Li	 Chuang
2003	120	Gender, Health and Mortality	Gender, Education and Mortality across Age: Does Schooling Have the Same Effect on Mortality for Men and Women?	This paper explores the effect of education on mortality by sex.  Existing research suggests that the association between education and health may be weaker for women, because comparable levels of schooling bring higher returns to men in terms of mediators thought to explain the education-health relationship (e.g. income, prestige).     I use NHANES panel data spanning 20 years, with a baseline sample of 14,407 respondents aged 25-75.  Discrete time logit models of mortality are used to model interaction effects of sex and education.  We also allow the effects to vary across age in a three-way interaction model.  The main finding is the absence of statistically significant difference in the impact of education on mortality for men and women in all models.  I found that despite possible differential returns to education by gender, each additional year of schooling brings comparable benefits in terms of decreased mortality to men and women.	Anna	 Zajacova
2003	121	Father Involvement and Its Impact on Child Development	Does In-Hospital Paternity Establishment Affect Father Involvement?	In 2001, 33% of all births in the U.S. were to unmarried mothers and 52% of children in the OCSE caseload were born outside of marriage. These families are much more likely to be poor and receive public assistance than those with previously-married mothers.  Recently, federal legislation has focused on these trends by enhancing states’ ability to establish paternity for these children.  Since 1994, voluntary acknowledgement of paternity, especially in-hospital procedures, has increased dramatically; however, child support receipt for children born outside of marriage continues to be quite low.  In this paper, using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we first describe the prevalence and determinants of in-hospital paternity establishment.  Next, we examine the extent to which in-hospital paternity establishment within a city increases the city’s overall paternity establishment rate. Finally, we estimate the independent effect of in-hospital paternity establishment on father involvement and child support payments.	Irwin	 Garfinkel	Ronald	 Mincy	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy
2003	121	Father Involvement and Its Impact on Child Development	Fathers in Fragile Families: How Involved Are They, and Does It Matter for Children?	This paper uses new data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to describe the involvement of unmarried fathers with their one-year-old children and to analyze how father involvement is linked with child wellbeing. A descriptive portrait of resident and nonresident fathers is presented with respect to their social, demographic and economic characteristics, as well as their involvement with children. Then, regression models are estimated to predict child outcomes in several domains as a function of father involvement, controlling for a range of key independent variables, including fathers’ residential status and the quality of parents’ relationship. Finally, implications of the findings for research and public policy are discussed.	Marcia	 Carlson	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2003	121	Father Involvement and Its Impact on Child Development	How Multiple Domains of Fathering Affect Children's Educational Success	This paper examines the process by which different types of resources from fathers contribute to children's school success. Special attention is given to the impact of father's social capital, as compared to that of his financial and human capital. A conceptual framework for how father's resources affect children's well-being is proposed.  The analysis is based on data collected from a national sample of American children aged 6-12 who lived in intact families that participated in the 1997 Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Measures of paternal social capital include father-child relationship, father-mother relationship, father's co-parenting behavior, and father's community involvement. Children's cognitive achievement is measured with the Woodcock-Johnson Achievement Test scores [W-J].  Father's education, income, monitoring behavior, the extent to which they provide co-parenting support to the mother, and the cognitive stimulation in the learning environment outside of school are found to be strongly associated with children's test scores.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung
2003	121	Father Involvement and Its Impact on Child Development	Father Involvement and Youth Transition into Risky Behaviors in Immigrant and Native-Born Families	This study explores how father involvement is related to adolescent risk behaviors among youth in first and second-generation immigrant families and US native-born families. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth (1997 - 1999) and discrete time regressions, we test three hypotheses:  1) high levels of father involvement are related to a reduced likelihood of engaging in risk behaviors; 2) immigrant status (being first or second-generation youth) reduces the likelihood of involvement in risky behaviors; and 3) father involvement interacts with immigration status, race, or gender in its effects on youth risk behaviors.   Findings indicate that father involvement,and being an immigrant youth (1st or 2nd gen)is associated with reduced risky behaviors.Two-way interactions indicate that father involvement does not interact with gender, race or youth immigration status in predicting risky behaviors.	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Jonathan	 Zaff	Kristin	 Moore
2003	122	Measurement and Methods in Asking Questions about Sex	Men's Reports of Contraceptive Use: The Effect of Question Variation and the Extent of Uncertainty	Accurately measuring sexual risk behavior among men and women is important for monitoring exposure to unplanned pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections.  Men's reports of contraceptive use at a given occurrence of sexual intercourse may differ from women's and can be affected by survey design as well as real uncertainty.   The 2001 pretest of the first male National Survey of Family Growth included methodological experiments on (1) the effect of question format on method use at last sex and (2) uncertainty surrounding method use at first sex.   Preliminary results show that (1) asking separate questions about male and female method use elicits higher reports of method use than asking a single question and (2) about half of men who report no female method use at first sex are uncertain about that report.  Analyses will explore these findings and draw comparisons to female reports of method use.	Joyce	C. Abma	Laura	E. Porter	Freya	L. Sonenstein
2003	122	Measurement and Methods in Asking Questions about Sex	Consistency in the Reporting of Sexual Behavior among Adolescent Girls in Kisumu, Kenya: A Comparison of Interviewing Methods	The goal of the proposed paper is to build on earlier research in Nyeri District, Kenya where the use of audio computer assisted self-interviewing (audio-CASI) was first investigated for collecting data on sensitive behaviors. The data to be used are based on a household survey of unmarried adolescents in Kisumu district in Kenya including approximately 2,100 unmarried adolescents between the ages of 15 and 21. The results obtained from Kisumu district will be compared with data from Nyeri district. In addition to describing differentials by district and interview mode in the reporting of sexual behavior, the paper will evaluate differences in reporting along a continuum of questions from less to more sensitive, evaluate the consistency of responses between the question “have you ever had sex” and more specific queries of sexual activity, and evaluate the consistency of questions asked at two points in time over the course of the interview.	Paul	 Hewett	Barbara	 Mensch	Annabel	 Erulkar
2003	122	Measurement and Methods in Asking Questions about Sex	Sex in Geneva, Sex in Lilongwe and Sex in Balaka	In the midst of Malawi's AIDS epidemic, there are three contrasting interpretations of women's sexuality.  One is disseminated by global actors such as the World Health Organization in Geneva; the second is the response offered by educated, urban Malawians situated in Lilongwe, the  third is that formulated by the indigenous population in rural Balaka District.  Our central conclusion is that in Geneva and Lilongwe women are perceived to exchange sex for money, whereas in Balaka women are perceived to have sexual desires.      Results of a study of 145 ever-married women and men in rural Malawi provide insight into underlying sexual dynamics by incorporating a unique combination of qualitative and quantitative methodological approaches.    Findings indicate that a dichotomous epidemiological model, which emphasizes women as reservoirs of infection and men as vectors of transmission, is only a partial explanation. A methodological comparison suggests that extramarital partners are under-reported on household surveys.	Linda	A. Tawfik	Susan	 Watkins
2003	122	Measurement and Methods in Asking Questions about Sex	Same-Sex Relationships and Sexual Orientation in Canada: Data, Concepts, and Methodological Issues	Recent developments in family settings and living arrangements, and their impact on the societal and legal recognition of these emerging phenomenon, have challenged our theories of family behaviors and have resulted in a variety of new data needs.   In Canada, changes to both federal and provincial legislation resulted in the collection of the first ever national estimates of same-sex relationships.  Similarly, changes to human rights legislation prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation have incited Statistics Canada to explore approaches to the collection of reliable data on sexual orientation.  This paper presents results from the 2001 Canadian Census on same-sex relationships.  Comparisons will be made with data from other countries, including the United States. The paper will also discuss concepts, methods and results from qualitative and quantitative tests of potential questions on sexual orientation.	Pierre	 Turcotte	Viviane	 Renaud
2003	123	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development II	Educational Reversals and Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa	In sub-Saharan Africa, primary school enrollment rates began declining in many areas in the 1980s. Although levels of development help determine the pace of fertility transition, low levels reached by economic reversals may provoke a different response than the same levels attained by economic progress. The first cohorts that are less educated than their predecessors are beginning their reproductive lives; therefore, this analysis considers the effect of declining primary school enrollment rates on adolescent fertility. I first demonstrate that at the province level, education trend matters net of education level as a determinant of adolescent fertility. Then I assess the whether the individual-level relationship between education and fertility differs in contexts of education decline from other contexts. Provinces experiencing education decline are likely to be those most severely affected by economic hardship, and therefore the effects associated with education decline are likely to describe crisis-led fertility transitions.	Laurie	 DeRose
2003	123	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development II	A General Equilibrium Self-Employment Theory Based on Human Capital Differences		Gerardo	 Jacobs
2003	123	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development II	Educational Enrollment and Trend of Parental Investment on Education during Economic Reform Period in Vietnam	Since the reform policy of Doi Moi  was initiated in the late 1980s, the Vietnamese economy has begun to recover from the decades of colonial rule, wars, and failed central planning in the 20th century. It has been growing concerns that the market economy has generated widening inequality. There are reports of widening inequality as the private sector has played an expandable role in education as individuals have more choices and higher household income. At the household level, increasing fees for service in education may affect children’s educational enrollment due to the constraints in household budget.   This paper will examine determinants of educational enrollment in Vietnam in order to answer these questions: Who goes to school? What type of family support do children receive? Do children work while they are studying and what type of job? And for those not in school, what SES condition leads them to be out of school during their school age?	Phuong	l. Nguyen
2003	123	Investments in Education, Demographic Processes, and Socioeconomic Development II	Universal Education and Fertility: A Nigerian Experiment	Investments in the education of young girls and women can play a crucial role in the process of economic development. In this paper, we use an unusual policy experiment to study the impact of a large-scale expansion in female education on fertility outcomes.  In September 1976, the Nigerian government launched an ambitious Universal Primary Education (UPE) program, which provided free primary education throughout the country, and was funded at the federal-level. Prior to the nationwide program, only two regions in the country had provided free primary schooling.  Results from Nigeria suggest that changes in schooling costs can lead to an increase in female schooling and lower fertility outcomes.  The improvements in female educational attainment and demographic outcomes appear to be higher among cohorts (and regions) that had higher rates of exposure to free schooling.  We consider alternative explanations for results including changes in social norms and attitudes towards female education.	Una	Okonkwo  Osili	Bridget	Terry  Long
2003	124	Measurement Issues in Aging Research: Self-Report, Biomarkers, ADLs/IADLs, Active Life Expectancy	The Contribution of Biomarkers versus Self-Reported Measures for Understanding Self-Rated Health	This study examines the importance of biomarkers for understanding self-ratings of health status, based on recent data that comprise a broad range of clinical information together with extensive self-reports of physical and psychological well-being.  Ordered probit models are estimated on a sample of 928 respondents aged 54 and older who participated in an ongoing national survey in Taiwan.  Most of the biomarkers are significantly associated with self-rated health, even in the presence of control variables. The largest effects pertain to body mass index, ratio of total to HDL cholesterol (among men) and presence of the e4 allele of the APOE gene (among women).  Yet, many of the self-reported measures of physical health reveal as large, if not larger, impacts.  Although this analysis has demonstrated the importance of biomarkers for self-rated health, the results also suggest that the clinical measures are less powerful predictors than self-reports about diverse aspects of well-being.	Noreen	 Goldman	Dana	A. Glei	Ming-Cheng	 Chang
2003	124	Measurement Issues in Aging Research: Self-Report, Biomarkers, ADLs/IADLs, Active Life Expectancy	The Accuracy of Self Reported Anthropometric Measures and Self Reported Diabetes in Nationally Representative Samples of Older Adults in Mexico	Surveys of older adults include questions on self-reported  conditions and anthropometry.  Experience in developed countries shows that self reported conditions possess reasonably high validity. By contrast, in developing countries, these problems are virtually unexplored.   In this paper we use two data sets to explore the accuracy of self reported diabetes, height, and weight among older adults in Mexico. In the first survey (ENSA) we have access to results from  two glucose tolerance tests (fasting and non-fasting) and to  self reportes. In the second survey (MHAS) administered to a  representative sample of older adults, measures of body weight and stature were collected jointly with self-reports. We focus on the following four issues:(a) the degree of concordance between self report and objective measures; (b) individual determinants of discordance (c) biases in estimates of determinants of diabetes and obesity stemming from self-reports; (d) estimation of conditional correction equations that adjust self-reports.	Alberto	 Palloni	Beth	 Soldo	Rebeca	 Wong
2003	124	Measurement Issues in Aging Research: Self-Report, Biomarkers, ADLs/IADLs, Active Life Expectancy	Self-Reported Health among Older Bangladeshis: How Good a Health Indicator Is It?	Logistic regression methods with adjustments for multi-stage sampling are used to examine the factors associated with self reported health (SRH) in 2921 men and women ages 50 and over in rural Bangladesh. The results indicate that  SRH incorporates multiple dimensions of health status, severity, co-morbidity, and trajectory in a similar fashion for both men and women and for different age groups. Older individuals  are more likely to report poor SRH than their younger counterparts, and women report significantly worse SRH than their male peers at each age group. In both cases, this disadvantage can be fully accounted for by differences in measured physical performance, ADL limitations, chronic and acute morbidity. Moreover there appear to age independent norms of the relationship between measured physical performance and self reported health.	Omar	 Rahman	Arthur	J. Barsky
2003	124	Measurement Issues in Aging Research: Self-Report, Biomarkers, ADLs/IADLs, Active Life Expectancy	Self-Rated Health and Subsequent Health Outcomes: Do the Relationships Extend to a Low Income Setting?	Although a relationship between poor self-reported health status and excess mortality risks has been well-established for industrialized countries, almost no research considers developing countries.  We use data from Indonesia to show that in a low-income setting, as in more advantaged parts of the world, individuals who perceive their health to be poor are significantly more likely to die in subsequent follow-up periods than their counterparts who view their health as good.  This result characterizes both men and women remains after inclusion of measures of nutritional status, physical functioning, and symptoms of illness.  We also address the relationship between self-reported health status and subsequent measures of health status that are less extreme than mortality, including activities of daily living, Body Mass Index, hemoglobin levels, and lung capacity.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Nathan	 Jones
2003	125	Inequality and Education in Developing Countries	Educational Determination in Brazil and Its Effect on Inequality Transmission	Education is by far the most important factor in the transmission of inequality in Brazil.  Significant resources have been devoted to improving education for all Brazilians, yet the the effect of these policies on the transmission of inequality has not been fully examined.  This paper sets out to accomplish three objectives for the population of Brazil.  It documents the intergenerational correlation of education.  It describes the extent to which the opportunity for educational attainment is limited by socio-economic status.  It distinguishes the roles of enrollment probability and rate of grade progression in the determination of inequality in educational attainment.      The data come from the 1976 through 1999 PNAD household surveys.  The national-representativeness of this survey allows for unbiased estimates of the intergenerational correlation of education, and the large sample size allows for the flexible semi-parametric estimation of the effects of parental education and family income on educational attainment of 15-year-olds.	Christopher	E. Dunn
2003	125	Inequality and Education in Developing Countries	Subsidy to Promote Girls’ Secondary Education: The Female Stipend Program in Bangladesh	Bangladesh's female secondary school stipend program, introduced in the mid-1990's, provides  full tuition and a stipend to rural girls enrolled in secondary education. This paper estimates the impact of this program on school enrollments using both school- and household-level survey data.  We rely on variation in the timing of program introduction across districts to identify its effects. Community fixed-effects methods applied to panel data on households are used to sweep out unobserved community-level heterogeneity.  Results suggest that the female stipend program increased girls’ secondary education substantially. The results are strengthened by confirmatory results from an analysis of school-level information..  Although both data sets used in the analysis of the FSSAP have their deficiencies, they both strongly suggest that this program has clearly benefitted girls’ school enrollment, perhaps at the cost of boys.	Shahidur	 Khandker	Mark	 Pitt	Nobu	 Fuwa
2003	125	Inequality and Education in Developing Countries	Living Arrangements of Orphans in Sahelian Countries	Important investments in Sahel have reduced slightly the levels child mortality but life expectancy still very low. The number of children without surviving biological parents is increasing and orphans are becoming an important social problem. Because Sahelian societies are mostly patriarchal, becoming fatherless or motherless will have different effects on the well-being of the child.This paper first examines the levels, trends, spatial and socioeconomic variations of the survival status of the parents, living arrangements of orphans and the type of household were children are more likely to reside. We describe characteristics of these children with a special focus on education and economic activities. The paper uses the recent censuses from Chad, Mali, Niger and Senegal made available by the ACAP. These countries collected information on survival status of each biological parent to estimate adult mortality but the potential of this information for the research on child well-being is rarely exploited.	Richard	 Marcoux	Amadou	 Noumbissi	Tukufu	 Zuberi
2003	125	Inequality and Education in Developing Countries	Does Economic Inequality Matter Even when Average Incomes Are Low: An Analysis of Educational Attainment in Rural India	In the belief that the distribution of income might not matter when average income is low, developing countries have largely been ignored in the spurt of empirical analysis examining the social consequences of economic inequality. In my paper, I take a step towards redressing this gap in the research literature by examining the consequences of economic inequality on educational attainment in India. Data from the National Family Health Surveys conducted in 1992-93 and 1998-99 is used along with relevant state and village level variables. The effect of inequality is found to vary with the nature of the democratic political process and education policies are found to play a crucial mediating role. However, policy is not the only way through which inequality and polity affect educational attainment – the non-linear relationship between household wealth and education, the role of incentives and general equilibrium effects are also discussed as possible mechanisms.	Ankur	 Sarin
2003	126	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Trends in Childhood Accident Rates: The Relative Contributions of Maternal Human Capital and Access to Medical Care		Latika	 Chaudhary	Janet	 Currie	V.	Joseph  Hotz
2003	126	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Cleaning up Their Act: The Impacts of Marriage, Cohabitation and Fertility on Licit and Illicit Drug Use	Mounting evidence suggests that health risk behaviors such as illicit drug use change in response to marriage, childbirth and other demographic events (Bachman, Wadsworth, O’Malley, Johnston, and Schulenberg, 1997; Umberson, 1987; 1992).  However, much of this evidence is either cross-sectional or fails to track longitudinal changes surrounding the actual occurrence of a life event.  Our study uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to relate changes in smoking, binge drinking, marijuana use and cocaine use to the first occurrence of cohabitation, marriage, nonmarital and marital births. Preliminary results indicate that all four life events are linked to substantial decreases in at least some of the risk behaviors.  Illicit behaviors appear more responsive to events than do licit behaviors, changes are much more pronounced for marital than nonmarital births and somewhat more pronounced for marriage than for cohabitation. Women’s responses are stronger than men’s for several of the behaviors.	Greg	J. Duncan	Paula	 England	Bessie	 Wilkerson
2003	126	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Reproductive and Family History and Health in Later Life: Associations between Childbearing History, Health and Mortality among Women in England and Wales, Results from a Record Linkage Study	Parenthood represents a major domain of most people's lives with important implications, including implications for health. However results from studies of this have been conflicting. We analyse associations between parity, timing of births and mortality after age 50 and an indicator of morbidity for different birth cohorts of women in England and Wales (1911-40) using data from the ONS Longitudinal Study. This is a record linkage study including census and vital registration data for a 1% sample of the population. In the cohorts analysed, nulliparous women and women who had a birth before age 20 had significantly higher mortality (after control for marital status and a range of socio-economic characterisitcs). Mothers with two children had the lowest mortality. Nulliparity and early age first birth were also asociated with having a long term illness in 1991. Having a late birth (after age 39) was associated with lower mortality risks.	Emily	 Grundy	Cecilia	 Tomassini
2003	126	Family Relationships, Health, and Mortality	Gendering, Psychic Rewards and the Effects of Husband’s and Wife’s Work on Each Other’s Health	We develop a theoretical model of the process by which a workers work experiences can have substantial but different health effects on the worker and the worker’s spouse. This model is built on the pathogenic properties of psychological stress. Because work is a highly gendered activity, and because workers and their spouses are of opposite gender, the model predicts differences between the effect of husband’s work on wife’s health and wife’s work on husband’s health. At the empirical level, this paper reports analyses of the effects of husbands and wives perceptions of their paid and unpaid work characteristics on their own and each others health changes based on the first two waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH). We find gender differences in work effects that are consistent with our reasoning about effects of husbands and wifes work characteristics on each others health.	Ross	M. Stolzenberg	Kristi	 Williams
2003	127	New Immigrant Destinations	The Rise of New Immigrant Gateways: Historical Flows and Recent Settlement Trends	The 1990s brought an unprecedented number of immigrants to the United States.  More than 11 million additional immigrants were added to the population during the decade.  Census 2000 shows that a significant number of immigrants are finding their way to and settling in new places that have seen little immigration to date.  Using historical Census data, this paper examines the urban destinations of immigrants during the entire 20th century and classifies cities and metropolitan areas into a typology of immigrant gateway types that describe the ebb and flow of past, present and future receiving areas.	Audrey	 Singer
2003	127	New Immigrant Destinations	Charting the Age of Immigrant Populations in U.S. Urban Areas, 1990-2000	Immigration is now an important source of urban population growth in U.S. making it increasingly important to distinguish between immigrant populations and their characteristics. A critical question is how new immigrant urban populations differ from older immigrant urban populations in their characteristics and needs. One key attribute is the foreign-born population’s average length of U.S. residence. We develop a typology of nativity-specific urban-immigrant populations characterized by their duration in the U.S., the percentage that has in the previous five years and the change in these measures between 1990 and 2000. We develop several typologies: 1) old urban-immigrant enclaves that are not receiving a new inflow; 2) old urban-immigrant enclaves that are receiving a new inflow; 3) young urban-immigrant enclaves that have emerged during the 1990s due to new immigrant flows and 4) young urban-immigrant enclaves that have emerged during the 1990s due to older immigrant flows to new destinations.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2003	127	New Immigrant Destinations	Persistence and Change in Immigrant Destinations: A Pacific Northwest Case Study of New Immigrants to Portland, Oregon	An increasing number of immigrants are going to new destinations, including smaller towns and metropolitan areas that have historically received few immigrants.  This paper reviews perspectives on why new immigrant settlement location patterns evolve and presents a case study of the settlement process of the two largest groups of new immigrants in the metropolitan Portland area.      The paper’s empirical analysis consists of two parts.  The first part uses census data to examine immigrant settlement destinations in the nation's largest metropolitan areas.  We examine persistence and change over time for places of immigrant settlement.  The second portion of the paper focuses on the metropolitan Portland area as a new immigrant destination with a sizeable in-flow of foreign-born newcomers into a formerly highly homogeneous native-born population.  We report initial research on two groups of new immigrants in Portland: Vietnamese and newcomers from the former-USSR.	Barry	 Edmonston	Susan	W. Hardwick	Sharon	M. Lee
2003	127	New Immigrant Destinations	Pro- and Anti-Immigrant Sentiment in a Meatpacking Town: A Content Analysis	Pro- and Anti-Immigrant Sentiment in a Meatpacking Town: A Content Analysis    Residents in a community experiencing new and rapid demographic change develop opinions and feelings about the transition they and their town are experiencing.  These opinions and attitudes find their way into the community’s newspaper through letters and opinions that residents express.    This research is a content analysis of the pro-and anti-immigrant sentiment in a Midwestern meatpacking town newspaper.  The analysis examines opinion pieces, letters to the editor, and the comments published from an anonymous call-in phone line.  The substantive content of the opinions will be examined as well as change over time.  The analysis will give some insight into the role that a newspaper may play in the process of community demographic change as well as the balance or lack of balance in what publishers and editors choose to print.	Sandra	C. Burke
2003	128	Women's Empowerment and Demographic Processes	The Effect of Women’s Status and Autonomy on Birth Intervals in Cebu, Philippines	New evidence shows that birth intervals of 3 to 5 years are healthiest for mothers and their babies. We look at whether women's autonomy affects the length of birth intervals using data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey in the Philippines. Among the sample of 853 married, fecund women, between ages 26-40, who report not wanting another child, 35% had a conception between the 1994 and 1998 surveys.  Using Cox models to assess time to next conception, we find that more autonomous women have longer intervals.  Wives who decide alone whether to use contraception have a median time to next conception of 4.4 years while when husbands decide alone, the time to conception is 2.2 years.  This difference remains significant after controlling for age, parity, wealth, and other factors. Supporting women's autonomy will compliment efforts to improve health outcomes through increasing birth intervals.	Ushma	D Upadhyay	Michelle	 Hindin
2003	128	Women's Empowerment and Demographic Processes	Women's Autonomy and Child Survival: A Comparison of Muslims and Non-Muslims in Four Asian Countries	I evaluate the hypothesis that higher infant and child mortality among Muslim populations is related to the lower autonomy of Muslim women using data from 15 pairs of Muslim and non-Muslim communities in India, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand.  Higher Muslim mortality is found in most settings in Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand but not in India.  There is no consistent tendency for women’s autonomy in various spheres to be lower among Muslims compared to non-Muslims.  Either across or within settings, the association between women’s autonomy and mortality is weak and measures of autonomy or socioeconomic status are of limited import for understanding the Muslim disadvantage in child survival.	Sharon	J. Ghuman
2003	128	Women's Empowerment and Demographic Processes	Married Youth and Their Mothers: Do Empowered Mothers Foster Gender-Equitable Relationships and Better Reproductive Health among Young People in Rural Bangladesh?	This study combines qualitative and quantitative methods to investigate the effects of women's empowerment on the timing of their children's marriages and initiation of childbearing, and on their children's marital relationships. The research sites are 6 villages where the authors have been working since 1991.  In the paper we test several specific hypotheses, including the following: daughters of empowered women are likely to marry later than other women, and sons are less likely to marry girls under the legal minimum age at marriage; sons of empowered women are less likely than other men their age to use physical violence against their wives, and more likely to believe that a married woman has the right to refuse her husband when she does not wish to engage in sex; and young married women with empowered mothers-in-law are more likely to have greater freedom of movement.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Lisa	M. Bates	Farzana	 Islam	Md.	Khairul  Islam
2003	128	Women's Empowerment and Demographic Processes	Does Divorce Risk Depend on Spouses' Relative Income? A Register-Based Study of First Marriages in Sweden in 1981-1998	A frequently presented explanation to the macro-level relationship between increasing female labor-force participation and increasing divorce rates has been the so-called ‘independence effect’: if the wife earns more than her husband she gains less from marriage. It has also been argued that in a modern society with more egalitarian gender attitudes this effect may have become less important. We used a large register data set and intensity regression models to test the 'independence effect' in Sweden, a country where egalitarian gender views dominate, and where female labor-force participation and divorce rates are high. We found quite strong support to the ‘independence effect’: there was a positive linear relationship between the share of wife’s income and divorce risk. We also found that the higher the total income of the couple the lower their divorce risk, but this relationship appeared less strongly.	Guiping	 Liu	Andres	 Vikat
2003	129	Economic Foundations of Marriage	Economic Opportunity and Marriage Formation in the United States, 1850 – 1920	The age at first marriage in the United States is well documented for the twentieth century, and researchers have paid considerable attention to patterns, particularly the marriage boom of the post-World War II era and dramatic turn in recent decades.  Demographers know considerably less about marriage patterns in the nineteenth century. This paper will draw on theories of marriage formation from historical demography, economics and sociology to analyze some of the trends in marriage patterns between 1850 and 1920.  This was a period of substantial economic change in the United States; industrialization and the diminishing farm opportunities altered the economic future of young adults.  In order to test theories about the role of economic opportunity in marriage formation, this multi-level analysis will use census microdata to measure the effects of various individual and local characteristics on the timing of first marriage for young men and women.	Catherine	A. Fitch
2003	129	Economic Foundations of Marriage	The Earned Income Tax Credit, Premarital Pregnancy, and Duration to Marriage	The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a refundable tax credit paid to low-income families who work, with the largest credits going to families with children.  The increasing role of the tax system as a means for transferring income to families raises the concern that, like welfare, there may be unintentional incentives implicit in the EITC that discourage marriage.  The structure of the EITC may lead to “marriage penalties”; however, the EITC may also subsidize marriage.    	Large expansions in the EITC during the 1990s provide an excellent source of variation for investigating whether the EITC influences family structure.  Wel use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to consider the question of whether the EITC influenced family structure decisions.  We control for characteristics like welfare generosity in the respondent’s state, age, education, and number of children, in addition to controlling for the change in the individual’s EITC incentives for marriage	Stacy	 Dickert-Conlin	Scott	 Houser	Yun	 Li	Jan	 Ondrich
2003	129	Economic Foundations of Marriage	The Relationship between Union Formation and Labour Force Participation: A Comparative Analysis of Italy and Spain	This paper focuses on the relationship between union formation and employment transitions in Italy and Spain. Both countries have experienced a strong decline in marriage rates during the nineties, and it has been argued that this is a consequence of difficult labour market conditions among young individuals. In this paper we investigate the relationship between these processes with the aim to establish to what extent a tight youth labour market actually influences young individuals to delay their union formation. We use data from the ECHP to model employment and union as joint processes. The results show that although many of the traditional family formation patterns exist, young women are increasingly gaining independence through their work career, and tend to delay marriage as a consequence. For men stable employment is crucial in terms of starting their own family, implying that poor labour market conditions would have negative effects on marriage rates.	Lucia	 Coppola	Arnstein	 Aassve
2003	129	Economic Foundations of Marriage	Dollars, Dependency and Divorce: Assessing Five Perspectives on the Effects of Wives' Income on Divorce	This research assesses the predictive utility of five perspectives that have guided previous research on the effects of wives' income on marital stability. Hypotheses are tested using event history methods and 1980-1997 panel data for 1,704 individuals from the Marital Instability Over the Life Course study. The association between wives' percentage income and the odds of divorce is an inverted U-shape in which wives' perceived economic independence and the odds of divorce are highest when wives contribute between forty and sixty percent of the total family income. When wives' contributions are lower, increases in income are significantly associated with wives' greater perceived independence and greater odds of divorce. When wives' contributions reach approximately sixty percent, their perceived economic independence fails to increase and the odds of divorce decline. These findings underscore the need for greater attention to issues of economic dependence in understanding marriage and divorce.	Stacy	 Rogers
2003	130	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in Europe and Asia	The Impact of Attitudes on the Transition to Marriage among Cohabiting Couples in Sweden	Cohabitation among unmarried couples is very prevalent in Sweden. Yet, marriage seems to remain a positive option for a majority of the cohabiting couples. This paper analyses whether, and in which way, values matter in explaining the transition to marriage among cohabiting couples in Sweden. We use a unique data set which combines survey data on attitudes among young adults in Sweden with register data on marriages occurring in the 2½ years following the survey.  Our preliminary findings show clearly that attitudes matter. Among the 17 attitudinal scales constructed, several were found to be highly significant. The three most important, with a positive impact on marriage, were 1) importance of economic success and autonomy at work, 2) general satisfaction with own living conditions, and 3) regarding marriage as romantic and indicating a serious relationship. The only significant interaction between gender and attitudes was the attitudinal scale stressing the provider role.	Eva	 Bernhardt	Guy	 Moors
2003	130	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in Europe and Asia	Values and Norms Related to: Contraception, Fertility and Family. The Case of Poland	The last ten years of political and social transformations in Poland have had undoubted impact on demographic attitudes and behaviors.   Paper presents  descriptive analysis of the  survey results “The evaluation of changes in attitudes and behaviors in young and middle-age generations in Poland and their influence on the process of formation and dissolution of family, union and household”, which was conducted in Poland in 2001.  Evaluation of norms and values is related to contraception, fertility and family includes both  sexes and gender aspect. Descriptive analysis of survey’s results is preceded by a description of  the theories and hypotheses on: fertility and values, life course destandarization  and values, children and values, gender,  religion and values. In the paper special attention is given to the approach taking into consideration the present situation of Poland – as a country in the transition.	Ewa	 Fratczak	Janusz	 Balicki
2003	130	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in Europe and Asia	Twenty Years Hence: Changes in Young Filipino Women’s Attitude toward Premarital Sex and Unmarried Childbearing since the 1980s	Drawing from a series of national cross-sectional youth surveys, this paper documents the changing attitude of young women toward premarital sex and unmarried childbearing from the 1980s. Initial results show that young Filipino women have become liberal over time. They have become more approving of premarital sex and they perceive the society, their family, neighbors, and friends to be more accepting of young unwed mothers. Moreover, characteristics that used to be defining the liberal from the non-liberal are disappearing.	Maria	Midea M. Kabamalan
2003	130	Values, Attitudes, and the Family in Europe and Asia	Age at Marriage of Girls in India: Vision and Reality	Using data based on 53,410 marriages of 1995-1999 from all but two districts in India, this study examined the current position of age at marriage (AM) vis-à-vis the cherished vision of India to have the girls married off only after they attain 20 years of age, at least not before 18 years (legal minimum AM being 18 years). Marriages are classified into child (10-14), early (15-17), acceptable (18-19) and preferred (20+). Encouragingly, almost two-thirds of the total marriages are either acceptable or preferred. Child marriages are not uncommon particularly in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. This is a district level study. Median AM showed less than a third of the 504 districts in the below legal minimum AM category and almost three-fifths of these districts are concentrated in the above mentioned four states. Low economic status and low female literacy rate appears to depress age at marriage.	D.	Radha  Devi
2003	131	Youth Employment and Unemployment	Schooling and Work among Youth in the Context of HIV/AIDS in South Africa	Although South Africa has one of the highest levels of educational attainment in Sub-Saharan Africa, it has not achieved the literacy rates observed in other middle income countries.  Much of this deficit is due to historical policies of apartheid which enforced separation of population groups.  Since the dismantling of this system in 1993, school attendance has increased.  Despite high rates of school attendance—even among older teens—educational attainment remains a challenge; many South African children progress slowly through school.  Using data collected in 2001 under “Transitions to Adulthood in the Context of AIDS in South Africa” study, this paper examines factors influencing school advancement among youth age 14-24 in KwaZulu-Natal.  Population group affiliation and relative poverty emerge as key influences, with the latter being more important for females than males.  Pregnancy is the other major factor inhibiting school advancement among females.	Kelly	 Hallman	Monica	 Grant
2003	131	Youth Employment and Unemployment	Youth Employment and School Performance: Replicaton and Elaboration	Research on high school students’ paid employment typically finds that hours worked per week is negatively related to students’ school performance.  To explain this association, many observers take a zero-sum (or time-use) perspective that suggests that students who work more hours per week necessarily spend fewer hours per week on school related activities (like homework, studying, or school-related curricular activities).  A second explanation for this association is more social psychological in orientation, and suggests that students who work intensively actively select themselves into long work hours because they are disengaged from school or see their paid employment activities as a wiser long-term investment of their time and energies.  For methodological reasons, adjudicating between these two perspectives has been difficult.  In this paper we build on the work of Warren (2002) and use a unique data set that allows us to test the merits of these competing hypotheses.	Jennifer	C. Lee	Jeremy	 Staff
2003	131	Youth Employment and Unemployment	Adolescent Schooling and Work in Vietnam Post Doi Moi	Vietnam has been experiencing a period of economic change over the last 15 years. The extent to which adolescents have been affected by this change is in many ways still uncertain. This paper investigates the role of three general groups of determinants: individual characteristics, family characteristics, and community factors, to understand their influence on decision-making regarding schooling, domestic duties and income-generating activities of boys and girls. To disentangle the relationship between an adolescent’s work and schooling, we examine four possible outcomes: 1) continued schooling, 2) dropping out and working, 3) working but continuing schooling, or 4) neither working nor going to school. We use data collected in 1999 by the Population Council, which includes information from 2,126 adolescents aged 13-22, and 24 community surveys. The study included six of Vietnams 61 provinces, which covered a range of abiotic, biotic, and cultural factors in the three regions of the country.	Sara	 Peracca	Soumya	 Alva
2003	131	Youth Employment and Unemployment	Labor Market Transitions for Young Adults in Korea in a Comparative Perspective: The Roles of Gender and Education	Using the data from the Korean Labor and Income Panel Study (KLIPS), we first present summary data on labor market activities among Korean young adults such as number of jobs held, years of work experience, time spent on current job and time spent on longest job by education and gender. Using the published data for American young workers, we highlight distinctive features of each labor market. We then present hazard models of movement out of the first job separately considering voluntary and involuntary moves. We identify which demographic groups have higher rates of job separation and examine the extent to which individual resources and job characteristics as well as employment history affect job stability. Special focus is on the extent to which educational attainment and gender affect career establishment, given that previous literature has shown the distinctive pattern of linkage between education and labor market outcomes among Korean women.	Gary	 Sandefur	Hyunjoon	 Park
2003	132	Social and Economic Factors in Birth Spacing and Delay	Getting a Piece of the Pie?: Declining Teen Birth Rates during the 1990s	This study seeks to examine whether declining teen fertility rates in the United States during the 1990s were responsive to the unprecedented economic expansion of that decade.  First, national birth certificate data were used to determine fluctuations in first and second birth rates among black and white women aged 10 to 29 between 1970 and 1999.  Second, Poisson regression models were estimated to assess the relationship between rates of first and second births and state specific unemployment among young black and white women during the time period from 1970 to 1999.  Falling unemployment rates in the 1990s were associated with decreased fertility among African American women aged 15 to 24.  Young black women, especially older teens, may have adjusted their reproductive behavior to take advantage of expanded labor market opportunities.	Cynthia	G. Colen	Arline	 Geronimus	Maureen	G. Phipps
2003	132	Social and Economic Factors in Birth Spacing and Delay	Young Mothers, Only Children: An Analysis of Lowest-Low Fertility in Ukraine	The phenomenon of lowest-low fertility, defined as a Total Fertility Rate below 1.3, is now emerging throughout Europe. Many arguments explaining this phenomenon assume that much of lowest-low fertility is due to postponement of first births, as well as rational responses to economic uncertainty and gender inequality. This investigation challenges these explanations with the case of Ukraine, which in 2000 had a TFR of 1.1. Although Ukraine has undergone enormous political and economic transformations in the past decade, it has maintained a young age pattern of fertility and nearly universal childbearing. Using official statistics, the Ukrainian Reproductive Health Survey, and qualitative data, this study analyzes these trends and the reasons underlying childbearing decisions. In combination, these analyses provide evidence that there is more than one pathway to lowest-low fertility.	Brienna	 Perelli
2003	132	Social and Economic Factors in Birth Spacing and Delay	Second Birth and Women's Employment: A Fallacious Mutual Impact? Evidence from Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal in the 1990s	Heterogeneity among women in their propensity to combine paid work and mothering, as well as other unmeasured attributes, may affect both, the rate of second birth and the rates of participation in paid work. In this paper, I use a modeling strategy that accounts explicitly for the endogeneity of these processes, by taking into account the correlation between the unmeasured factors across processes. A longitudinal sample of the European Community Household Panel is used for the analyses. The results show that those women who are more likely to have a second birth are also least likely to enter paid work, and more likely to exit from paid work. However, those women who exit from paid work are also least likely to have a second birth, suggesting that women experiencing difficulties in keeping jobs have lower fertility. Employed and unemployed women have lower second birth rates.	Pau	 Baizán
2003	132	Social and Economic Factors in Birth Spacing and Delay	Fertility Regulation and Economic Resources: Evidence from Indonesia	Substantial international aid is spent reducing the cost of contraception in developing countries, as part of a larger effort to reduce total fertility and increase investment per child worldwide.  The efficacy of such programs, however, remains uncertain, as non-random placement of subsidies and insufficient cross-sectional price variation have thwarted prior attempts to estimate the effect of (monetary and non-monetary) contraceptive costs on fertility behavior.  Exploiting the enormous price variation induced by the economic crisis in Indonesia, this paper employs longitudinal data from the Indonesian Family Life Survey to pin down the effect of contraceptive price, accessibility, and availability on contraceptive use and method choice over the life course.  Results indicate that monetary costs are not an important determinant of contraceptive use, although a change in the relative price of available contraceptive technologies may influence the selection of contraceptive method.	Christopher	 McKelvey
2003	133	Excess Female Mortality and Morbidity	Can Vitamin A Equalize Gender Differentials in Child Survival? Evidence from Nepal	In 29 villages in the Sarlahi district of Nepal in 1989.  Vitamin A was administered to 15,225 children age 6 to 60 months and placebo was administered to 14,834 comparable children.  We compared the rate ratio of child death across gender, SES groups and caste between the Vitamin A and placebo groups.  The female: male mortality rate ratio in the untreated group was  1.39 (95% CI: 1.09 -  1.78) compared to the vitamin A group rate ratio of  1.05    (95% CI: 0.79  - 1.39) p=0.13 for difference between groups.  The ratio of mortality between caste other than Brahmin or Chatriya and Brahmin/Chatriya in the untreated group was  2.72 (95% CI:  1.7-   4.58)     compared to the vitamin A group rate ratio of 1.84 (95% CI: 1.21  - 2.89) p=0.21.  We conclude that universal treatment with vitamin A tends to make child death rates across gender, and caste more similar.	David	 Bishai	Samir	 Kumar	Michael	 Koenig	Hugh	 Waters	Joanne	 Katz	Keith	 West
2003	133	Excess Female Mortality and Morbidity	Female Excess Mortality among Older Adults in Historical Italy	Currently in developed countries, males have greater mortality rates relative to females at every age level.  However, this pattern of excess male mortality across the lifespan is a recent phenomenon, which only began to emerge for developed countries since the 1930s.  During the 19th century, excess female mortality in one form or another existed in every European country and in the United States and varied by period, place and age.  National and province-level vital statistics and population census data are used in this analysis to investigate regional variation in age and sex-specific mortality differentials in older adults (aged 50+) in Italy during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.  Preliminary analysis suggests the presence of excess female mortality among older adults in historical Italy and that this pattern of sex mortality differentials existed for age, period, and geographic region even after controlling for a variety of socioeconomic and demographic factors.	Mary	Alice  Ernish
2003	133	Excess Female Mortality and Morbidity	Explaining Gender Disparity in Child Health in Haryana State of India: Combining Qualitative Data with Analysis of the National Family and Health Survey (NFHS)	The strong preference for sons over daughters and resulting discrimination against daughters in India is well known, though the preference is not uniformly observed across different regions of the country. India exhibits wide variations in the degree of sons' preference, with strong son preference found in northern India than in the south.   Using data from the ethnographic survey carried out in Haryana State and the second National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), this paper aims to update the documentation and examine patterns of gender disparities for children in Haryana state of North India in health outcomes.  Specifically it addresses the following questions: Are there gender differences in child health status, disease incidence, and use of preventive and curative health care services?  If so, does the extent of promale bias depend on socioeconomic status, caste, religion, education, rural/urban residence of the head of the household?  The findings challenge a number of established ideas.	Santosh	 Jatrana	Suresh	 Kumar
2003	133	Excess Female Mortality and Morbidity	Gender, Context, and Infant Mortality in Rural China	Linkages between gender and mortality are everywhere to be found, but sex-biased parental behaviors such as infanticide, neglect, and abandonment make the connection unusually direct. The effects of sex preferential behavior on infant mortality are fairly well documented in the demographic literature on South Asia, but less well understood in China where the phenomenon is, if anything, more important and more dramatic.  We apply multilevel survival models to clustered data from the 1990 census of China to further specify the characteristics and contexts that link gender to infant survival.  We find that infant mortality is strongly patterned by parents’ strategizing about the number and sex of their children, with risks extending to boys as well as girls.  Moreover, we find that excess female mortality reflects village environment or culture as well as the characteristics of individual families, mothers, and infants themselves.	William	M. Mason	William	 Lavely
2003	134	High and Declining Fertility	Fertility of Palestinian Women in Gaza, West Bank, Jordan and Lebanon	This paper provides a largely descriptive account of the reproductive behavior of Palestinian women in four settings: the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Jordan and Lebanon.  Trends and differentials in fertility and contraception are examined, using high quality household survey data.  Comparisons between refugees and non-refugees are made.  The findings indicate that fertility has begun to drop everywhere but Gaza, owing mainly to a postponement of marriage and an increase in the proportion of women remaining single.  Fertility is lower among the refugees than the non-refugees in every setting, with the proportion married generally lower and age at marriage higher among the former as compared to the latter.  Variations across countries in fertility and contraceptive use far exceed those between refugees and non-refugees within the same setting.  There is evidence that the refugees living in camps have higher levels of fertility and demand for children than those residing outside the camps.	Marwan	 Khawaja
2003	134	High and Declining Fertility	Fertility Transition in Mongolia in a Period 1960-1998	At first, the paper aims to identify periods of fertility transition in Mongolia and find out its place among other countries. Then it attempts to fit it into fertility transition theories that exist up to now. The paper attempts to identify direct and indirect determinants of fertility decline in Mongolia for a period of 1960-1998.     Data are drawn from the Reproductive Health Survey of Mongolia conducted in 1998 and from Population and Housing Census 2000.     Preliminary findings suggest that changes in fertility can be divided into three periods: a)pre-transition – 1960-1975; b) the onset of transition – at around 1976; c) post - transition – 1976-1998.  The later can be split into two periods: centrally planned (socialist) and market economy. Fertility decreased substantially after 1990. Postponement of age at first marriage and child death were influential factors of the fertility changes for the whole period.	Gereltuya	 Altankhuyag	Ian	D. Diamond
2003	134	High and Declining Fertility	How Does the Interaction between Readiness, Willingness, and Ability Affect the Use of Contraception in India?	In this paper we focus on the interaction of the three main components of diffusion processes (Lesthaeghe 2001): readiness, willingness, and ability, and their relationship with fertility transition and family limitation in India. The data we used are the Indian Second National Family Health Survey conducted in 1998-99. Our micro-level study is based on logistic models for the three components as alternative dependent variables. Probabilities obtained can be read as measure of resistance to changes. Using women’s predicted probabilities of belonging to one of each of the three main groups, we estimate the number of women having one observed precondition who also possess one or both of the other two. With the approach introduced we examine the interactions between preconditions that we otherwise could not investigate, and we can provide a complete description of the mechanism of diffusion and of the power of preconditions for the generalized use of contraception.	Mariachiara	 Di Cesare
2003	135	Demography and Public Policy	Long-Run Effects of Birth Rates Changes on Welfare Participation	Although welfare caseloads are usually analyzed in terms of the economy and public policy, recent changes in birth rates may also be relevant.  This study estimates the effect of recent declines in childbearing on recent declines in the AFDC/TANF caseload by treating childbearing as a proximate determinant of welfare participation.  Birthrates can have both short- and long-term impacts on the caseload, and we model changes to capture entering and exiting participants.  This paper 1) Estimates the impact of first birth timing on the duration of AFDC/TANF use, including variations among women; and 2) Estimates the impact of changes in the birth rate on changes in the caseload beyond available birth rate data by synthetically aging recent cohorts of women.  Data come from the PSID, the National Vital Statistics System, and the California Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System.  Results will illustrate how recent changes in childbearing rates relate to the welfare caseload.	Amy	G. Cox	Jacob	A. Klerman
2003	135	Demography and Public Policy	Welfare Reform, Family Structure, and Migration: Moving to Benefits: Moving from Restrictions	The thesis of this study is that with increased state welfare benefit and eligibility inequalities, the 1996 welfare reform act has not only enhanced incentives for poor families to move,  but also created disincentives to stay in race to the bottom origin states. We posit that family structure moderates the effect of state welfare policy inequalities on migration behavior.       We use merged data from three different sources: the 1996-1999 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, the Urban institute's Welfare Rules Database, and state economic characteristics from Current Population Surveys. We separately model destination (pull) and departure (push) effects of welfare policy measures and selected covariates in a multi-level, discrete-time event-history migration model. Preliminary evidence provides general support for the thesis that changes in state welfare policy have precipitated the interstate migration of poor families in the U.S.	Gordon	F. De Jong	Deborah	 Graefe	Tanja	 St. Pierre
2003	135	Demography and Public Policy	The Effect of Child Support Enforcement on Domestic Violence among Married and Cohabiting Couples	Some advocates worry that stronger child support enforcement may increase domestic violence by keeping violent couples together.  Theory, however, is ambiguous on this issue.  While stronger enforcement may encourage marriage and parental contact, which increases the opportunity for violence, it also increases women's bargaining power, which may reduce violence. This paper examines the relationship between child support enforcement and violence among married and cohabiting couples.  We use state level data constructed using the Current Population Survey matched onto individual level data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, which interviews approximately 5,000 new parents and follows them through the first year of their child’s life.  We find that living in a state with stricter child support enforcement is associated with a significantly higher probability of violence among cohabiting couples, although there is some evidence that selection plays a role.	Angela	R. Fertig	Sara	 McLanahan	Irwin	 Garfinkel
2003	135	Demography and Public Policy	Does the Family Cap Alter Children’s Living Arrangements? The Case of New Jersey	This paper will examine changes in family structure that can be attributed to welfare reform, particularly family caps.  We will look at the case of New Jersey and its Family Development Program (FDP), a welfare reform program that included a family cap. The program was implemented using an experimental design with random assignment of 8,373 welfare recipients to the FDP group and a control group, and data are available on these individuals for a period of four years (1992-1996).  We will augment the experimental study of family cap effect on children’s living arrangements with a quasi-experimental, pre and post family cap analysis.  The latter analysis will employ data on the entire New Jersey welfare caseload spanning the six-year period 1991-1996.  We will compare the experimental and quasi-experimental estimates of family cap effect and discuss policy implications.	Radha	 Jagannathan	Michael	J. Camasso
2003	135	Demography and Public Policy	Minor Mothers' Living Arrangements and School Enrollment following Welfare Reform	The 1996 welfare reform laws required parents who were under the age of 18 to live with their parents and to remain enrolled in school in order to be eligible for welfare benefits.  These welfare reform policies were implemented with little knowledge of the actual effects on minor parents.  This paper will use a diference-in-difference analysis technique to examine whether living with parents and school enrollment increased among minor mothers following welfare reform.  	Heather	L. Koball
2003	136	Demographic Processes in Brazil- Recent Trends and Interpretations. Sponsored Jointly by Brazilian Population Association	Brazilian Population Ageing: Differences in Well-Being by Rural and Urban Differences	This paper discusses the relationship between ageing and dependence and the role of the Social Security policy in Brazil. Four dimensions of elderly life are considered: familial arrangements, health conditions, economic activities and income.  It was seen that Brazilian elderly are living longer and better. Poverty and the proportion of elderly without any earnings whatsoever decreased dramatically.  Relative better life conditions experienced by the elderly population are contrasted with the effects of the difficulties faced by the young population.  This means unemployment, violence, drugs, teen-age pregnancy, marital disruption, etc. There has been an increase in the time adult children spend as dependents of their parents. The composition of the families with elderly living in has changed to become more complex than the expected “empty nest”. As a  result, there has been a change of status for the elderly, modifying their traditional role of dependent to that of provider.	Ana	Amelia  Camarano
2003	136	Demographic Processes in Brazil- Recent Trends and Interpretations. Sponsored Jointly by Brazilian Population Association	What Will Happen to Brazilian Fertility?	I examine the prospects for continuing declines in Brazilian fertility and the forces that are likely to shape future fertility trends. I also consider the reasonableness and soundness of the assumptions about future fertility that the United Nations uses to estimate projections for Brazil. I then discuss what we know about trends and socio-economic differentials in Brazilian fertility, the evolution of its proximate determinants and how these affect the assumptions being made by the UN regarding   future fertility trends. I also present the best guesses of Brazilian demographers about Brazil’s population future in the coming decades.  Finally, I speculate about the forces that will shape Brazilian fertility in the future, by emphasizing the role of its demographic legacy and current behavior, the current sterilization law and public policies and the role of gender relations and public support.	Ana	Maria  Goldani
2003	136	Demographic Processes in Brazil- Recent Trends and Interpretations. Sponsored Jointly by Brazilian Population Association	Demographic Dynamics in Brazil's Major Ecological Regions	Demographic Dynamics in Brazil’s Major Ecological Regions    Brazil has one of the world’s greatest ecological and demographic diversities.  Widespread international concern for the environmental integrity of the Amazon is matched, in Brazil, with concern for other important ecological regions, principally the savanna-like cerrado and the Atlantic Rainforest.  Other regions, such as the semi-arid caatinga, ecologically unique and demographically dense, are also important.  While the advanced stage of Brazil’s demographic transition and its extensive territory mean that the overall ratio of population to environment will continue to be favorable, where the population lives and works will be of increasing importance.  What regions are capable, from a sustainability perspective, of receiving more population; which may at least offer their current populations sustainable livelihoods; and which are so pressured that solutions must be sought in other regions?	Daniel	Joseph  Hogan
2003	136	Demographic Processes in Brazil- Recent Trends and Interpretations. Sponsored Jointly by Brazilian Population Association	Scheduled Cesarean Sections in Brazil: Why so Many?	Brazil presents a high rate of cesarean section deliveries overall, and an astronomical rate (70%) in the private sector where one quarter of all births take place.  The large majority (64%) of these procedures are scheduled in advance.  The question that concerns us here is the motivation for scheduling cesarean deliveries in advance of spontaneous or induced labor, and the ethical considerations that doing so presents.  While elective cesarean section may be scheduled for the convenience of either the woman, the physician, or both, serious medical and ethical reservations have been raised about this practice.  And what if, as appears to be the case in Brazil, the woman really wants to deliver vaginally?  In this paper, we present data from a prospective survey to assess the problematic medical practices that underlie scheduled cesareans in four metropolitan areas.	Joseph	E. Potter	Kristine	 Hopkins	Ignez	H.O. Perpétuo	Anibal	 Faundes
2003	136	Demographic Processes in Brazil- Recent Trends and Interpretations. Sponsored Jointly by Brazilian Population Association	Trends in Inequalities in Under-Five Mortality: Evidence from São Paulo, Brazil, 1970-1991	In this paper I examine the effects of social and economic development on inequalities in under-five mortality for the state of São Paulo, Brazil, over a twenty-one year period during which much of the infant and child mortality transition unfolded.  I investigate whether the improvements in infant and child survival were accompanied by declining inequalities.  I focus on inequality in under-five mortality by household wealth and by mother’s education and use microdata from Brazilian censuses conducted in 1970, 1980, and 1991.  I find that inequality according to household wealth underwent a clear decline over the study period.  Inequality according to mother’s education first declined and then increased, with a net rise over the study period.  When I control for background demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, inequalities in under-five mortality according to household wealth remained roughly constant.  On the other hand, inequality according to mother’s education increased substantially.	Narayan	 Sastry
2003	137	Households and Families in Transition	Remaining Single: A Continuing Trend in Thailand	This paper documents and analyzes the increasing proportions of Thai women and men who remain unmarried into their forties. The analysis uses data from microdata samples of the 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 Thai censuses, and is supplemented by focus group data.  We explore differences among socioeconomic groups using census data and supplement those findings with data from focus groups of married and unmarried males and females. The census data indicate that the move away from marriage, either through a delay in age at marriage, or through not marrying at all,  continued through the 1990s for both sexes, but is now more pronounced for men.  These changes could be a result of a number of processes, some involving choice and some involving marriage market constraints.  Changing preferences regarding marriage are examined using focus group data, and less directly, by examining trends in the proportions never-married across socio-economic categories.	Philip	 Guest	Lindy	 Williams	Anchalee	 Varangrat
2003	137	Households and Families in Transition	Tranformations in Latin American Families in the Last Decades: A Socio-Demographic Perspective	The objective of this paper is to review the most significant socio-demographic changes in Latin American families during the second half of the 20th century. Three main issues are addressed: transformations in union formation and dissolution patterns, in connection with the proximity of a second demographic transition; convergence toward small, nuclear families, and the nature and growth of women-headed households. we not only summarize existing knowledge, but also bring together updated information and explore the connection between social inequality and changing family patterns. Some of the main conclusions are: a) there is insufficient evidence to sustain that a second transition is taking place; b) nuclearization is underway, but the importance of extended units –and the scant presence of single-person households- continue to be a distinctive trait of the Latin American family system, especially among the poor, c) women-headed households are clearly on the rise, possibly in diverse social sectors of our societies.	Brígida	 García	Olga	 Rojas
2003	137	Households and Families in Transition	The Impact of Economic Reforms on Family Division in China	Sweeping economic reforms have taken place in China since the late 1970s. The imprint of industrialization on family structures has been well noted.  It is argued that economic development erodes the tradition of extended families and leads to convergence of all family forms to nuclear families.  Indeed, the traditional extended family system is undergoing tremendous changes in China.  Coresidence of parents and adult children has reportedly become less favored by both generations. While there is some evidence supporting this trend of “modernization” at the macro level, much less known is about when and how individual extended families split into nuclear families, a process known as family or household division.   In this paper, using a longitudinal dataset, China Health and Nutrition Survey, I explore specific ways that the economic reform influences the division of existing extended households, operating through changes in economic opportunities at the individual, household and community level.	Feinian	 Chen
2003	137	Households and Families in Transition	Intra-Household Spillover Effects of a Health Program: Evidence from Rural Bangladesh	This study investigates the intra-household spillovers generated by a Maternal and Child Health program in rural Bangladesh. The impact of this program on the health of non-targeted individuals living in targeted households is examined. A theoretical model is developed to describe the mechanisms through which this spillover can occur; i.e. through an income effect, a household public good effect and a contagion effect. Using a reduced-form demand approach and data from the Matlab Health and Socio-Economic Survey of 1996, results indicate a significant spillover impact on the health of the non-targeted elderly women. This paper therefore concludes that the health program generates positive externalities, which if not accounted for, can lead standard cost effectiveness analyses to understate their true benefits. This raises important issues for the design of public policy programs.	Anoshua	 Chaudhuri
2003	138	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Sexual Activity	Non-Coital and Coital Sexual Behaviors of Adolescents in the U.S.	This study examined cross-sectional and longitudinal relationships between adolescents' non-coital behaviors (kissing, making out, breast touching, genital touching, oral sex) and coitus.  Data are from a national survey of 2,003 adolescents aged 12 through 17 years, with two waves of data collection one year apart.   Responses to questions about non-coital behaviors at baseline were used to classify respondents into five ordered stages, which were highly predictive of the likelihood of having engaged in vaginal intercourse.  Furthermore, among those who had not had vaginal intercourse at baseline, the highest level of non-coital behavior reported at baseline was predictive of the highest level of sexual behavior attained at follow-up. Several predictors of non-coital behaviors and coitus differed significantly.  Results show that non-coital behaviors occur in an orderly way, and the stage an adolescent has reached at a given point in time is highly predictive of the likelihood of intercourse a year later.	David	 Kanouse	Rebecca	 Collins	Marc	 Elliott	Sandra	 Berry	Sarah	 Hunter	Angela	 Miu
2003	138	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Sexual Activity	Sexual Initiation among Brazilian Adolescents: Trends and Socialization Influences	Using individual and household-level data from the 1986 and 1996 Brazil Demographic and Health Survey and Cox proportional hazard modeling, this paper explores the socialization influences and mechanisms that underlie Brazilian adolescents’ transition into sexual activity.  Adolescent sexual health trends, including an earlier age at first sex, doubling of adolescents initiating sexual activity pre–maritally, earlier age at first birth and a rising age at marriage have resulted in more teen births in Brazil occurring among unmarried women.  Between 1986 and 1996, the age–specific fertility rate for 15–19 year olds increased by 12% despite a decline in fertility in all other age groups.  Results indicated that more family and household–level influences were significantly associated with the timing of first sex in 1996 than in 1986, even with more secondary socialization influences also being significant.  Religiosity and being employed in skilled labor were the most consistently and strongly associated with a later age at first sex.	Claudia	 Gras
2003	138	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Sexual Activity	Adolescent Couples' Sexual Activity and Pre-Romantic Social Ties to Partners	Objectives:    To explore the influence of pre-romantic social ties on sexual risk behaviors.    Methods:    Using data from 6,972 adolescents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we examined associations between pre-romantic social ties between partners (i.e., friends before the romance began, acquaintances but not friends, or never met before) and several sexual risk behaviors using logistic regression analyses.    Results:    The odds of having intercourse were significantly lower for respondents with romantic partners who were already their friends (OR = 0.69).  Adolescents who did not know their partner before their romantic involvement had significantly lower odds of discussing contraception or STIs (OR = 0.56) and of ever using a condom with that partner (OR = 0.64), and higher odds of a pregnancy (1.74).  Respondent’s gender was a significant effect-measure modifier for some outcomes.    Conclusions:    Being friends or acquaintances before being romantic partners is associated with safer sexual behavior.	Christine	E. Kaestle	Carolyn	Tucker  Halpern
2003	138	Causes and Consequences of Adolescent Sexual Activity	The Effects of Sexual Activity on Adolescent Well-Being	Until recently, the average age at which young people in the United States began having sex had steadily decreased. Naturally, this trend has generated a good deal of research on adolescent sexual activity. Most of this literature concentrates on determining what affects early sex rather than what early sex affects among teens. However, in 1996 Congress enacted a new abstinence-only education initiative proporting that sexual activity among teens has harmful psychological, social and physical effects. The extant literature supports the proposition that teen sex exposes adolescents to pregnancy and STDs, and that these outcomes should be considered “harmful.” However, there is little empirical evidence on the psychological and social effects of teen sex. Using two waves of data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this paper investigates the effects of sex on adolescent mental health, attitudes and values, and relationships with parents.	Ann	 Meier
2003	139	Early Life Conditions and Health/Mortality over the Life Course	Then and Now: Recent and Childhood Parental Loss and Depression in Late Adulthood	This paper examines the effects of recent parental death (within the last year) and childhood parental death (before the respondent was age 19) on depression at age 51-61. While we examine the effects for both genders, we only find effects for women. For women, the recent experience of parental death does not increase the risk of current depression. However, the death of a parent during childhood does have a lasting effect particularly if it occurred between ages 5 and 12. This result remains after the inclusion of known risk factors for depression such as SES and marital status.  The effect of early parental death manifests itself both directly and indirectly via its adverse effects on lifetime socioeconomic status. Our empirical analysis suggests that depression may in part be determined by early life events that continue to have lasting effects long after the immediate trauma subsides.	Steven	 Haas	Karen	 Swallen
2003	139	Early Life Conditions and Health/Mortality over the Life Course	The Long-Term Health Consequences of Childhood Physical Abuse: Evidence from a Large Sample of Middle-Aged Men and Women	In this project we explored the relationship between self-reported childhood physical abuse and adult health, and found significant detrimental effects decades after the abuse took place.  We ran OLS and logistic regression analyses using the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.  Childhood physical abuse was associated with adult depression, anxiety, anger, somatic symptoms and diagnosed medical conditions.  These effects were not explained by age, sex, family background, living with a single parent, or growing up with an alcoholic.  We also explored four pathways through which abuse might affect adult physical health: emotional, behavioral, cognitive, and social.  We found that these pathways did indeed mediate some of the relationship between childhood abuse and the number of symptoms or diagnosed medical conditions.  In sum, we found that childhood physical abuse has negative health consequences even into midlife.	Kristen	W. Springer	Molly	 Carnes	Jennifer	 Sheridan	Daphne	 Kuo
2003	139	Early Life Conditions and Health/Mortality over the Life Course	Cumulative Life Experiences, Emotion, and Mortality Risk Partitions	The relationship between cumulative adverse and advantageous life experiences and mortality risk is not well understood.  We categorized individuals in a sub-sample of the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (n=98) into life experience pathways based on their detailed responses to surveys, interviews, and writing samples collected in multiple waves over their life course.  These individuals were then assigned into sex-specific mortality risk partitions based upon biological assessments that reflect wear and tear across multiple physiologic systems collected around age 59-60.  Individuals with negative life experiences are almost 3 times more likely to have biological markers that correspond to a high mortality risk compared to someone with positive life experiences.  Further, there is a sex difference with regard to the relationship between emotional responsiveness and mortality risk among people with positive life experiences.  Future research into determinants of health should control for emotional responsiveness as well as other social characteristics.	Lauren	 Hale
2003	139	Early Life Conditions and Health/Mortality over the Life Course	Do the Differences in Life Span by Month of Birth Persist among Cohorts Born Today? Evidence from the Minnesota Twin Family Study	Low birthweight and fast catch-up growth in the first months of life causes higher susceptibility to cardiovascular disease later in life. Malnutrition in-utero and/or exposure to infectious disease probably are the causal mechanisms. Life span after age 50 depends on the month of birth and seasonal differences in nutrition and the incidence of infectious disease are the most likely causal factors. Since nutrition and the incidence of infectious disease vary seasonally one would expect a seasonal pattern by month of birth in birthweight, current weight, current height and current systolic blood pressure. This hypothesis is tested on the basis of the Minnesota twin family study. The month-of-birth patterns are compared with the differences in life span by month of birth for decedents aged 50+ who were born in Minnesota. The results for male twins suggest that in contemporary cohorts differences in life span by month of birth do persist.	Gabriele	 Doblhammer	Kaare	 Christensen
2003	140	School Supply, School Quality and Educational Expansion	School Availability and School Participation in 21 Developing Countries	This paper uses 24 DHS datasets to investigate the impact of making schools available on enrollment, and how it might vary with gender or poverty.  The approach is to estimate country level multivariate models school participation to child, household, and community variables–including distance to schools.  Potential non-linearities in the relationships are explored and interactions allow for differentials for girls and poor children.    The results support the notion that school participation and school availability are significantly associated—with gender effects in countries in Western, Central, and Northern Africa.  However, the magnitudes of the associations are small.  Simulating big reductions in distance yields only small increases in school participation, and only small reductions in within-country inequality.    The potential bias due to endogenous school placement is explored in countries where data can be matched over time.  None of the results from these three countries are consistent with substantial bias in the cross-sectional estimates.	Deon	P. Filmer
2003	140	School Supply, School Quality and Educational Expansion	Global Patterns of Education Inequality by Gender and Rural/Urban Residence	The international comparison in this paper shows that within the enormous diversity of national education experience, there are important, common patterns.  First, the transition from no schooling to practically universal adult primary school achievement takes most countries about 60-80 years; no country has achieved this transition in less than 50 years.  Second, boys start schooling before girls, causing an education gender gap but, it appears without exception, females later catch up to males.  The gender gap is largest in the middle of the transition.  Third, the same pattern holds for urban-rural education differentials.  The latter two results imply that education inequalities are the effect of lags rather than persistent differences, and that the large education inequalities characterizing many Asian and African countries today will disappear as education becomes more universal. The paper identifies which countries exhibit large male-female and urban-rural education gaps, and which manage to have only small gaps.	Annababette	 Wils
2003	140	School Supply, School Quality and Educational Expansion	Education and Occupational Attainment: The Indian Paradox	This paper examines the impact of education of occupational position of Indian men and women aged 30-50.  By using National Sample Survey data from 1983, 1987-88 and 1993-1994, we show that the link between education and ability to obtain professional/administrative positions or even clerical/manufacturing positions has weakened over time, just as school enrollments have been growing. This suggests that increasingly, while higher education is a necessary condition for middle class jobs, it is not a sufficient condition. These results cast doubt on investments in education as an important route for economic development as well as suggest some interesting directions in research on social stratification in developing countries.	Sonalde	 Desai	Maitreyi	B. Das
2003	140	School Supply, School Quality and Educational Expansion	High Stakes Graduation Tests and High School Dropout in Texas and Florida, 1979 – 2001	In many states high school students who fail to pass state-mandated graduation proficiency tests do not obtain diplomas and do not graduate.  Despite the laudable goal of improving education by motivating teachers and students to achieve higher standards, detractors point out that there are serious potential downsides to high stakes testing policies of this sort, especially if poorly implemented.  In this research I ask two questions.  First, I ask whether high stakes graduation tests influence high school dropout decisions.  Second, I ask whether the effects of these tests on high school dropout are experienced disproportionately by low-SES or race/ethnicity minority students.  In the present paper I use 1979-2001 October CPS data for 16-19 year olds in Florida and Texas, states in which high stakes graduation testing practices have been well documented (and have been the source of a great deal of controversy and litigation).	John	R. ("Rob") Warren
2003	141	Immigrant Adaptation in Europe and Australia	Intermarriage and Immigration in Denmark	This paper examines the occurency of mixed marriage in Denmark and its association with the immigration process.Besides considering general features of intermarriages between Danish and immigrants,  this study also look at in-depth two ethnic groups:Turkish and Pakistani. Special attention is given to the length of residence in Denmark (1st or 2nd generation) and the age of those who intermarry vis a vis those who marry partners of their own groups. Additionally, this study also examine diversities on spouse-age differences within the two types of marriages. Data are provided by Denmarks Statistics and cover the years 1994 and 1999. Preliminary results indicate surprising small influence of length of residence on the propensity of immigrants to intermarry and significant differences in age of partners of intermarriages between Danish females and immigrant males.	Vera	L. Botelho	Helle	 Aagaard-Hansen
2003	141	Immigrant Adaptation in Europe and Australia	Becoming German: Naturalization Processes among Labor Migrants in a Hesitant Immigration Country	Becoming German: Naturalization Processes among Labor Migrants in a hesitant immigration country  The aim of this presentation is to assess the logic of the decision to naturalize for first and second generation labor migrants in Germany and to explain why some immigrants acquire citizenship and others do not, even though they are entitled to naturalize.  It will be shown that an explanation that refers to differences in the legal rights different migrant groups acquire by naturalizing is not satisfying in explaining differential naturalization rates.  Instead, special emphasis is put on the role of immigrants' social and cultural adaptation in the process of becoming a citizen - a factor that is often neglected in naturalization research.  Data are drawn from the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) and from a quantitative survey among 1200 Turkish and 1200 Italian mostly second-generation migrants in Germany.	Claudia	 Diehl
2003	141	Immigrant Adaptation in Europe and Australia	Occupational Concentration and Mobility of Asian Immigrants in Australia	Using data from the 1996 and 2001 censuses in Australia, this paper investigates the occupational attainment of a number of Asian immigrant groups in Australia.  It pays special attention to the patterns of occupation concentration and trends of occupation mobility over time.  The Asian immigrant groups studied include Vietnam, Mainland China, the Philippines, India, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia.  The study provides comprehensive explanations of the extent to which country of origin explains the differences of Asian immigrants' occupational patterns, and of the extent to which this pattern is explained by other characteristics. This paper also draws linkages between immigrants' country of origin and various sectors and occupations in the Australian labour markets.  In addition, this paper compares the Asian immigrants with locally born residents over time.  The comparison provides explanations to such questions as to what extent that the act of migration per se has affected immigrants' labour market performance over time.	Fei	 Guo	Nick	 Parr
2003	141	Immigrant Adaptation in Europe and Australia	Sponsorship of Relatives for Migration and Immigrant Settlement Intention	The paper examines how important family reunification is in immigrants' decision to settle permanently in their country of destination. Using longitudinal data for a cohort of recent immigrants to Australia, it examines whether migrants' permanent settlement intention reported soon after arrival is related to their sponsorship patterns and intention to sponsor, and whether family sponsorship patterns and intention in turn have an effect on immigrants' permanent settlement/return migration decisions. The results show that a significant relation exists between sponsorship of close family members for migration and permanent settlement intention and that the relation is particularly strong among skilled migrants. Immigrants who have sponsored their parents or siblings for family reunification migration are much more likely to settle permanently than those who have not. The policy implications of the findings are discussed.	Siew-Ean	 Khoo
2003	142	New Measurement Methods in Studies of Health and Aging	Comparison of Self- and Physician-Assessed Overall Health Status by SES & Race-Ethnicity among Older Americans	Self-reported assessments of overall health are considered one of the most robust measures of health when using population surveys.  However, few studies have evaluated the association of physician- and self-assessments of overall health by SES and race-ethnicity.  Study data are from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES3) which is a nationally representative sample of the U.S. civilian, non-institutionalized population with oversampling of African- and Mexican Americans, and persons age 60 and older.  The NHANES3 conducted both in-home interviews and extensive physical exams in mobile centers.  The impact of measurement source on estimates by SES and race-ethnicity is evaluated with multivariate linear and logistic regression.  Agreement between sources is evaluated with multinomial logistic regression.  Although African Americans and whites have similar associations between self- and physician-assessments after adjusting for SES, there are substantial differences among Mexican Americans by language of interview.  Some differences are noted by educational attainment.	April	A. Greek
2003	142	New Measurement Methods in Studies of Health and Aging	Health Perceptions, Social Indicators and Crime Events	There has been an increase in the availability of data on a broad array of social indicators such as life expectancy, health and education.  Nevertheless, within a single survey, good measures of social indicators are hard to come by.  Self-reported health measures present systematic measurement error. There is lack of knowledge on how other social indicators are related to the person’s knowledge of health and the mechanisms through which they operate. This paper analyzes the correlation of the gap between subjectively reported and objectively measured health using individual anthropometric data. We find that the mental status of an individual, the exposure to personal crime events, and the individual’s attitude towards routine exercise, alcohol and smoking have different associations with individual health perception.  These correlations differ with respect to individual’s age, education and income.  The analysis is drawn from the Mexican Family Life Survey 2002.	Luis	 Rubalcava	Paulina	 Oliva
2003	142	New Measurement Methods in Studies of Health and Aging	Using Anchoring Vignettes to Improve Comparability of Self-Reported Health Measures: Evidence on Shifting Expectations for Health in Aging Populations	Longitudinal studies on health in aging populations require data that are reliable, valid and comparable across individuals and over time. One challenge to comparability arises from variation in interpretation of categorical response scales, e.g. due to changing expectations for health.  Strategies for enhancing comparability of self-reported health demand augmentation of existing survey instruments and analytical models. This paper introduces the concept of anchoring vignettes to position self-assessments on a comparable scale. Anchoring vignettes describe hypothetical individuals that respondents rate using the same questions used in self-assessments. Because levels in vignettes are fixed, variation in vignette ratings illuminates differences in response category cutpoints. We present examples of anchoring vignettes from an ongoing multi-country survey study, discuss practical issues on design, application and evaluation of vignettes, and demonstrate the use of vignettes to characterize changing norms for health over the life course and adjust self-reported health measures accordingly.	Joshua	A. Salomon	Ajay	 Tandon	Christopher	J.L. Murray
2003	142	New Measurement Methods in Studies of Health and Aging	Disability and Assistance in the U.S. and Singapore	Objectives.  Prior US research shows that older persons with disabilities prefer equipment because it maintains self-sufficiency.  Is this distinctive to the American setting?  Methods.  We conducted a pilot study in the U.S. and Singapore of older persons' attitudes about personal and equipment assistance, and definitions of disability, independence, dependence, and assistance.  Interviews of 34 older Americans (ages 70+; assisted living residents) and 30 older Singaporeans (users of community-based elder services) were done.  Results.  The American data show that less-disabled people think of independence as doing activities without help, whereas more-disabled persons have a complex view that separates help and independence.  The two groups state similar criteria for a person with disability in U.S. society.  We hope Singapore results are ready by PAA.  Conclusions.  The demographic indicator dependency does not match older persons' own perspective of dependence.   Sociologically, family norms about coresidence and assistance affect older persons' definitions of independence.	Lois	M. Verbrugge	Kalyani	K. Mehta	Maggie	 Wilkin
2003	142	New Measurement Methods in Studies of Health and Aging	The Measurement of Psychological Well-Being among Aging Adults	This project examines the measurement properties of Ryff's model of Psychological Well-Being (PWB) —-- a widely-analyzed scale designed to measure six dimensions of PWB.  We analyzed MIDUS, NSFHII and WLS self-adminstered data using polychoric correlations with weighted least squares estimation and found substantial overlap between dimensions —-- some correlations reached .970.  We ruled out several possible methodological causes for these results including question wording, question order, and negative item bias.  We also examined the WLS phone items, asked via an unfolding technique. We found smaller factor correlations, yet unexpected bimodal distributions. Given the anomalous distribution of the phone items and the consistent results across MIDUS, NSFHII and WLS using self-administered instruments, we believe the phone results are caused by a misuse of the unfolding technique and do not support the existence of a multidimensional model.  In sum, we caution researchers against using this model to explore the multidimensionality of PWB.	Kristen	W. Springer	Robert	M. Hauser
2003	143	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	Does Period Life Expectancy Overestimate Current Survival?	Bongaarts and Feeney have recently argued that life expectancy at birth (e0) is a biased measure of current survival, because it is affected in part by tempo effects resulting from a shift in the schedule of cohort mortality.  They calculate a modified life expectancy at birth, e0*, and  conclude that e0 as conventionally calculated overestimates life expectancy.    This paper argues that e0* should not be interpreted as an unbiased measure of mortality conditions of a period, net of tempo biases.  Rather, it should be interpreted as an average measure of past cohort survival.  Thus it is not surprising that, given mortality declines, current e0 overestimates e0*, but not for the reasons discussed by Bongaarts and Feeney.  Finally, this paper questions the adequacy of making a strict parallel between fertility and mortality using the tempo concept.	Michel	 Guillot
2003	143	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	A Duration Dependent Multistate Lifetable with Applications to Nuptiality	Multistate lifetables provide rich opportunities for describing complex population systems. However, their practical application has been limited by data problems, and by strong Markov assumptions.  	We will describe a program MTABLE that is capable of implementing a multistate population system based on age and duration specific estimates of transition intensities between the states. The program uses the so-called Runge-Kutta method to calculate the probabilities of transition from state to state. In the duration dependent case the lifetable calculations are carried out by stochastic simulation.  	MTABLE  can be used to calculate the distribution of the population by the time spent in a specified state. This permits the calculation of other moments, in addition to the expectation. MTABLE can also be used to calculate probabilities of exiting a particular state via another one.  	The use of the program will be illustrated with nuptiality data for the Finnish women in 1998.	Juha	 Alho
2003	143	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	A Methodological Comparison of Age-Period-Cohort Models: Fu's Intrinsic Estimator and Conventional Generalized Linear Models	Age-Period-Cohort (APC) accounting models have long been objects of attention in statistical studies of human populations. It is also well known that the identification problem created by the linear dependency of age, period and cohort (Period = Age + Cohort) presents a major methodological challenge to APC analysis and it still remains largely unsolved. This methodological problem has been widely addressed in demography, epidemiology, and statistics. This paper compares parameter estimates produced by the two solutions to the identifiability problem in age-period-cohort models, namely, Fu's intrinsic estimator method and conventional generalized log-linear models (Mason and Smith 1985), using population data on disease and mortality rates.	Yang	 Yang	Kenneth	C. Land	Wenjiang	J. Fu
2003	143	Mathematical and Statistical Demography	A Bayesian Correlated Frailty Model Applied to Swedish Breast Cancer Data	Frailty was first introduced in survival analysis in order to assess for unobserved heterogeneity. Frailty models represent an extension of the proportional hazards model in which both the frailty term and the covariate effects are assumed to act multiplicatively on the baseline hazard. Multivariate frailty models were than created with the aim to introduce mutual dependence between the lifespans of related individuals.  In our work a correlated log-normal frailty model is used in order to analyse breast cancer data from the Swedish Twin Register. An estimate of the narrow sense heritability for the individual susceptibility towards breast cancer is given via application of the ACE model.   The inferential problem is solved in a Bayesian framework and the numerical work is carried out using MCMC methods. Estimates are compared with results of traditional maximum likelihood methods. Limitations and possible extensions of the model are discussed.	Isabella	 Locatelli	Paul	 Lichtenstein	Anatoli	 Yashin
2003	144	Race and Ethnic Differences in Educational Aspirations and Attainment	Correlates of Educational Expectations: Differences by Class	Sociologists concerned with inequalities in education often puzzle over the much larger mismatch between expectations and attainment among students with low socioeconomic status (SES) than those with high SES.  While researchers have explored the obstacles to college attainment that low-SES students face, few have looked at another potential explanation for this mismatch: that high-SES and low-SES students form educational expectations differently.  Using data from the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS), I first explore whether the relationship between family characteristics and expectations is the same across SES.  Second, I consider whether test scores and grades, and the judgments of peers and teachers are more strongly associated with low-SES students' expectations than those of high-SES students.  Finally, I assess whether occupational expectations are more strongly related to educational expectations among low-SES students than high-SES students. Variation in these factors suggests that the meaning of college may differ by socioeconomic background.	Kimberly	 Goyette
2003	144	Race and Ethnic Differences in Educational Aspirations and Attainment	Minority Educational Aspirations and Expectations under the Texas Top 10% Law: New Opportunity or False Hope?	Currently over half of the Texas school-age population is either black, Hispanic, Asian, or a member of another minority group. However, these groups are dramatically under-represented in the most competitive universities in the State. The challenge of achieving a diverse student body increased following the 5th Circuit Court’s Hopwood ruling that banned the use of race in college admissions decisions. In response, the Texas legislature passed the Top 10% Law guaranteeing automatic admission to any public university to students who graduate in the top decile of their senior class. Using data from a representative sample of sophomores (n=19,924) and seniors (n=13,776) enrolled in Texas high schools during spring of 2002, we examine whether and how this law affects educational aspirations and expectations to attend college. Thus, we provide some of the first systematic evidence of how percent plans are perceived and whether they influence students’ decisions to pursue higher education.	Kim	M. Lloyd	Kevin	 Leicht	Teresa	A. Sullivan
2003	144	Race and Ethnic Differences in Educational Aspirations and Attainment	Behind the Admissions Office Doors: Factors Affecting Admission to Selective Universities	Every spring at selective colleges and universities, admissions officers make difficult decisions regarding which applicants they accept.  We research the role of meritocratic, non-meritocratic, and high school characteristics in these decisions.  We use individual-level and high school data for over 113,000 students from the National Study of College Experience for the 1993 and 1997 entering applicant pools at four selective universities.  We use a multivariate logistic regression model with admission as the outcome.  As expected, higher SAT scores and a greater number of Advanced Placement tests benefit an individual in the admissions process.  Further, black and Hispanic applicants have increased odds of admission relative to white applicants, controlling for other variables.  In addition, athletic recruitment and legacy status greatly increase the odds of admission.  Finally, we investigate the role of high school environment on admission.  This valuable work identifies admissions decision patterns that are regularly discussed but rarely tested empirically.	Lauren	 Hale	Thomas	J. Espenshade	Chang	Y. Chung
2003	144	Race and Ethnic Differences in Educational Aspirations and Attainment	Trends in Educational Attainment among Ethnic Minorities: Arabs in Israel	Arabs in Israel are a heterogeneous but largely disadvantaged minority with a history of discrimination suffered in the education and employment arenas.  Large gender gaps in educational attainment have also characterized certain sectors of the population.  In this paper, we document changes across birth cohorts in the educational attainment of Arabs in Israel.  We make comparisons both between different Arab religious groups, as well as between Arabs and the majority Jewish population.  We also analyze determinants of educational attainment, including social, economic, demographic, and community-level factors in childhood. Ours is the first systematic study and analysis of ethnic gaps in educational attainment among Arabs and Jews in Israel, and provides a picture of change over birth cohorts from the 1920s to those presently entering higher education.	Barbara	S. Okun	Dov	 Friedlander
2003	145	Socioeconomic and Health Status among the Elderly: International Studies	Subjective Social Status: Evaluation of a New Instrument	A recently developed instrument of subjective social position was designed to address limitations of earlier measures for examining social disparities in health. This measure was developed as part of a broader movement in the social sciences and epidemiology to consider not only absolute but also relative social position within a society, paying particular attention to the health consequences of relative deprivation. The principal objective of the present analysis is to evaluate the potential utility of this instrument for research on social inequalities in health. Our evaluation is based on an examination of the distribution and correlates of responses to the relevant questions in a recent survey in Taiwan, a comparison of these findings with those derived from earlier measures of subjective social status, and an examination of the association between this instrument, conventional indicators of socio-economic status (e.g. income, occupation and education) and several health outcomes.	Noreen	 Goldman	Jennifer	C. Cornman	Ming-Cheng	 Chang
2003	145	Socioeconomic and Health Status among the Elderly: International Studies	Socioeconomic Status Differentials in Life and Active Life Expectancy Among Older Adults in Beijing and Taiwan	This study examines socioeconomic status (SES) differentials in life and active life expectancy (LE and ALE) in Beijing and Taiwan in order to assess: 1) whether older adults of higher social status live longer and healthier lives; 2) whether a series of SES indicators differentiate morbidity and mortality experiences in similar ways, and; 3) whether SES differences in health are found across two samples of elders who experience both similarities and differences in their social environment.  Results based on three waves of panel data across the 1990s show strong SES effects, but variations across indicators and settings.  For instance, in Taiwan education is strongly associated with both LE and ALE, whereas assets only differentiate LE.  In Beijing, no educational differentials are found, but assets strongly predict both LE and ALE.  These and other findings challenge our current expectations while assisting in understanding the SES and health association across diverse environments.	Toshiko	 Kaneda	Zachary	 Zimmer	Zhe	 Tang	Mandy	 Li
2003	145	Socioeconomic and Health Status among the Elderly: International Studies	Mortality of Elderly People : Socioeconomic Differentials and Causes of Death in Matlab, Bangladesh	The study examined the differentials of socioeconomic variables and causes of death of the elderly (60+) people, utilizing the data available from the Matlab Health and Demographic Surveillance System, Bangladesh from 1993 to 1998. Result shows that  risk of dying is much lower among married elderly than the widows/ widowers. Elderly who were not staying with children experienced a significantly higher risk of dying, than staying with children. Survival is higher among elderly who are literate, having land and living in households with drinking water facility, than illiterate, no land, and staying in household with no drinking water facility. Sex differentials in cause-specific mortality rate are not much. Death due to most causes decreased with an increase of educational level except cardio-vascular/ malignant disease. Whereas mortality in all the cause categories were higher among the married than the widowed except senility and diarrhoeal disease and among  Hindus than the Muslims.	Golam	 Mostafa
2003	145	Socioeconomic and Health Status among the Elderly: International Studies	Socio-Economic Status and Iron Deficiency among Older Adults	Iron deficiency is widespread throughout the developing world.  We provide new evidence on the effect of iron deficiency on economic and social prosperity of older adults drawing on data from a random assignment treatment control design intervention. The Work and Iron Status Evaluation is an on going study following over 15,000 individuals in Central Java, Indonesia.  Half the respondents receive a treatment of 100 mg of iron every week for a year; the controls receive a placebo.   Compliance is monitored carefully.  Contrasting changes in outcomes for treatments with changes in outcomes for controls, we are able to pin down the causal effect of iron supplementation on economic success.  We focus on hours of work, type of work and income from work.  In an effort to identify pathways through which iron status affects economic prosperity, we also examine changes in psycho-social health as well as self-reported indicators of overall health.	Duncan	 Thomas	Jed	 Friedman	Bondan	 Sikoki
2003	146	Demographic Research on Sexual Behaviors Related to HIV	Who You Do It with Matters: Characteristics of Sexual Partnerships among Male and Female Youth in Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa	Understanding the gender dynamics of youth sexuality, and partnership patterns in particular, is important to addressing the HIV/AIDS epidemic in high prevalence countries where a significant proportion of new infections are among young people under 25. This paper will use very rich and unique panel data of both male and female youth in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa (n=2222) to examine the characteristics of male and female sexual partnerships, the changes in these partnerships overtime, and whether the secondary school life skills program has had an impact on those changes.  All analyses will be conducted separately for males and females and by race (African and Asian). Results from the first round of data collection reveal that age differences between partners vary by sex: for males mean age of most recent sexual partner is 1 year younger, while for females the mean age of partner was 4 years older	Lisanne	 Brown	Naomi	 Rutenberg	Ali	M. Karim
2003	146	Demographic Research on Sexual Behaviors Related to HIV	Does Condom Use Promote Behavioral Disinhibition? Empirical Evidence from Rakai, Uganda	There is a growing concern that condom use may lead to behavioral disinhibition offseting much of the  potential benefit from their use in preventing HIV and STDs. Using longitudinal data, this study examines the association between condom use and subsequent high-risk sexual behaviors in Rakai, Uganda. During 1995-2000, condom use with any partner increased significantly from 17% to 27%, and from 37% to 60% with casual partners. Consistent condom use remains low, but increased almost 2.5 folds from 3.6% to 9%. Individual level trajectories of high risk behaviors show that the risk of having multiple partners increased significantly over time among inconsistent condom users (time-trend OR: 1.08; 95% CI  1.04-1.12), but remained static for consistent condom users and declined among non-users (OR: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.91-0.96). The study suggests that condom users may engender a sense of protection against HIV which may deter persons from adopting safer sexual behaviors.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed	Ronald	H. Gray	Tom	 Lutalo	David	 Serwadda	Noah	 Kiwanuka	Godfrey	 Kigozi	Maria	 Wawer
2003	146	Demographic Research on Sexual Behaviors Related to HIV	Partners and Protection: HIV Risk Trajectories among Young Men	This paper traces HIV/AIDS risk behavior using data from the 1988, 1991 and 1995 National Survey of Adolescent Males (NSAM).  We construct four clusters based on condom use, number of partners, partner concurrency and sex with risky partners.  Two clusters are “low risk” on partnering measures, but differentiated on condom use.  Two others are higher-risk: one with more partners and more months with concurrent partners on average, the second with more risky partners.  In examining cluster membership across the three waves, most of the sample is persistently low risk. Membership in a high-risk cluster is associated with being African-American and living in an urban area.  It is also associated with fewer worries about AIDS, conservative attitudes towards male role ideology, and liberal attitudes about premarital sex.  Concerns about pregnancy and attitudes toward condom use do not appear to have significant association with membership in either of the two high-risk clusters.	Randy	 Capps	Freya	L. Sonenstein	Jason	 Ost	Gary	J. Gates
2003	146	Demographic Research on Sexual Behaviors Related to HIV	Risk Factors for Sexually Transmitted Diseases and HIV in a Society with High AIDS Awareness and Prevalence: An Analysis of Zimbabwe	This study examines if AIDS awareness and knowledge of ways to prevent it are sufficient to bring about modifications in behavior among sexually active women in Zimbabwe. Using data from the 1999 ZDHS, I examine the correlates of the desire to avoid risky behaviors among women such as having sex with promiscuous or STD-infected husbands and having sex during the postpartum period. I also examine the correlates of condom use and STDs. Multivariate results show that women who are less likely to think that a woman is justified in refusing sex with an STD-infected or promiscuous husband or in the period following a birth are also the same women who are less likely to use condoms. These women are also more likely to contract STDs. These results suggest that in the absence of some major changes in social norms, the expectation that women will routinely refuse sex with men when confronted with enhanced vulnerability to STD/HIV infection is probably unrealistic even if greater awareness of these diseases is present.	Amson	 Sibanda
2003	147	The American Community Survey: Current Status and Future Prospects	New Data for the 21st Century		Louis	 Kincannon
2003	147	The American Community Survey: Current Status and Future Prospects	New Data for Local Decisions		Linda	 Gage
2003	147	The American Community Survey: Current Status and Future Prospects	Is It Time for a Change in Census Data Collection?		Barry	 Edmonston
2003	147	The American Community Survey: Current Status and Future Prospects	A View from Capitol Hill		David	 McMillen
2003	148	Men’s Reproductive Behavior and Health	Childbearing History and Health in Later Life: Comparing Men and Women in Southern Sweden 1766-1895	This paper analyzes the impact of childbearing history on later life mortality for men and women using high-quality historical longitudinal micro-level data for southern Sweden. The main advantage of using historical data is that it makes it possible to investigate the experience of many birth cohorts with medium- to high fertility, thereby facilitating estimation of effects of number of births as well as timing of first and last births. The dataset also allows a comparison of the effects between men and women, which is of vital importance when assessing the likely mechanisms behind the relationship between childbearing history and health in later life. The analysis is made using survival analysis of mortality in ages 50 and older, including covariates on number of births, age at first and last births, and also controlling for various socioeconomic, demographic and family specific conditions of the individuals.	Martin	 Dribe
2003	148	Men’s Reproductive Behavior and Health	Effect of Men’s Reproductive Health Knowledge, Attitude and Behavior on Their Wives’ Reproductive Behavior in Two Rural Areas of Bangladesh	Bangladesh society is profoundly gender stratified and yet, male roles in reproductive health processes have not been rigorously investigated. This study allows us to examine the association between men’s reproductive health knowledge, attitude and behavior and their wives’ subsequent reproductive behavior using longitudinal data from International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B).    A total of 5,397 couples data from 1998 survey and women’s contraceptive use history data following 1998 survey were used in this research. Results show a significant association between husband’s fertility preference and current use of any family panning method. When socio-economic and husbands’ knowledge indicators are controlled for, the odds of using a method of contraception is 34 percent higher among couples whose husbands do not want more children compared to those whose husband want more children. It is also observed that there is a significant association between husband’s fertility preference and women’s subsequent contraceptive adoption.	Mian	B. Hossain	ABM	Khorshed A. Mozumder
2003	148	Men’s Reproductive Behavior and Health	Men’s Fertility: Trends, Correlates and Trajectories for Canadians	This study will examine the level and timing of men’s fertility behaviour, the differentials in timing by socioeconomic characteristics and life course experiences, and the varying trajectories that men follow among the domains of fertility, marital unions, education and work. It will make use of data gathered through Statistics Canada’s 2001 General Social Survey on Family History and will focus on men born between 1921 to 1971.    The level of fertility will be obtained by descriptive statistical techniques; the timing of fertility and parity progression ratios will be estimated through single decrement life tables; hazard models of analysis of the timings of fatherhood will be used to determine the factors that influence fertility; and, the trajectories covering fertility, marital union, education, and work states will be traced for birth cohorts, making use of LIFEHIST program particularly its non-Markovian technique of analysis.	Zenaida	R. Ravanera	Fernando	 Rajulton
2003	148	Men’s Reproductive Behavior and Health	Male Contraceptive Use: Significant and by Choice	Men play an important and often dominant role in childbearing and contraceptive decisions; and although their reported use of contraceptives varies globally, relatively little is known about why they use male methods.  This study examines factors associated with contraceptive use and method choice among male respondents in five Demographic and Health Surveys (Bolivia, Nepal, Tanzania, Togo and Turkey).  Vasectomy and withdrawal use is highest in Nepal and Turkey respectively, with condoms otherwise the leading method.  Socioeconomic, demographic and communication factors' influence male versus female method use and type of method differently.  Condom use is significantly associated with low parity, young age, high education, white collar occupation and media exposure.  Withdrawal use in Turkey is only associated with young parity.  Male sterilization in Nepal is associated with older age, parity of two or higher, and media exposure.  These influences contrast with those known for women's contraceptive practice and recommend further research into the dynamics of male contraceptive use.	Amy	 Tsui	Nasim	 Haque	Rob	 Stephenson
2003	149	Nonmarital Fertility	Unmarried Parenthood:Does it Matter?	Unmarried Parenthood: Does it Matter?    There have been dramatic increases in the proportions of children born outside of marriage across western nations. Children born to unmarried parents may be born to cohabiting couples or to a mother not living in a co-residential partnership at the time of the birth.  The evidence suggests that in Britain and the USA there have been increases in the proportions of children born to solo mothers.  This comparative evidence is reviewed but the main focus is an examination of the determinants and consequences of the partnership context of first birth (within marriage, a cohabiting union, outside of a union) using data collected in the 1970 British Cohort Study.  We have two main research questions. Do the men and women who become parents in these different contexts vary in their childhood and adolescent experiences and does the context matter for the subsequent life course of the parents and their children?	Kathleen	 Kiernan
2003	149	Nonmarital Fertility	The Effects of Adolescent Fertility on Adult Educational Attainment	Determining the consequences of teenage childbearing continues to be debated because of the methodological challenges posed by the causal relationship between adolescent fertility and future outcomes.  I propose to use data from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey of 1988 (NELS: 88) to address this research question.  The educational attainment of the female sample when they are about 25 years old is the outcome.  Since the data were initially collected when they were young adolescents, family background and individual characteristics were available prior to childbearing.  To address the non-exogenous nature of adolescent fertility, instrumental variables are used such as state welfare policy innovations during the early 1990s waiver period.  State-level policies on abortion and expenditures on contraceptive services are also used as instruments.  The final set of instruments includes individual-level information from the school principal in NELS: 88 about requiring sex education instruction for graduation from eighth grade and high school.	Athena	A. Tapales
2003	149	Nonmarital Fertility	Parenting across Racial and Class Lines: Assortative Mating Patterns of New Parents Who Are Married, Cohabiting, Dating, and No Longer Romantically Involved	The assortative patterns of married couples in the United States have received great attention both because of what they reveal about this country's social structure and because of their implications for the reproduction of inequality.  Married couples, however, represent a shrinking share both of American couples in general and of couples having children.  In this paper, we examine the assortative mating patterns of new parents.  Using new data from the Fragile Families and Child Well-being study, we describe the patterns of educational and ethnic pairing among new parents and look at how race and class differences between mother and father influence union  formation and dissolution.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Kristen	 Harknett
2003	149	Nonmarital Fertility	What Role Does Cohabitation Play in the Structure of the Western Family?	How much cross-national variation is there in the meaning of nonmarital cohabitation? Is cohabitation a prelude to or a substitute for marriage, or is it an alternative to being single? In this paper we use data from 17 Western nations to estimate exposure to and duration in cohabitation for both women and children. Results indicate that women are much more likely than children to be exposed to cohabitation, but that whereas incidence rates of cohabitation for children have increased over the past two decades in most countries, those for women have not. In contrast, total expected durations in cohabitation have increased for women but remained stable for children. Increases in the amount of time women spend in cohabitation have only been partially converted to children’s exposure to cohabitation, since a good deal of the increase in adult non-marital cohabitation has occurred when children are not present in the household.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake	Patrick	 Heuveline
2003	150	Employment, Child Care and Welfare: Effects on Children	Changing Effects of Work on Children’s Health 1988-98 in Ghana	During the decade from 1988-1998, female labor force participation has expanded under conditions of financial hardship in Ghana. The compatibility between women’s work and childbearing has been emphasized in literature on West Africa, but the ability to combine work and child care may change as selection into the paid labor force becomes more driven by economic hardship. I have pooled data from the 1988, 1993, and 1998 Demographic and Health Surveys to test whether the effect of maternal work on children’s growth have changed significantly over time. The analysis tests the effect of work on children’s growth for different income levels and for different household compositions. Although having another woman in the household mitigates some of the negative outcomes associated with women’s work, over the decade women in traditional occupations without household help became more likely to be involved in paid employment.	Laurie	 DeRose
2003	150	Employment, Child Care and Welfare: Effects on Children	The Impact of Maternal Work Participation on Duration of Breastfeeding among Poor Women in South India	This paper seeks to examine the impact of mother’s work participation on duration of breastfeeding among poor women in south India. The effect of work status at the time of breastfeeding on the risk of terminating breastfeeding is also analysed because work status at the time is relevant rather than work status at or just before the survey. The data are from a survey of 529 women in urban slums and rural Scheduled Caste settlements in Tamil Nadu, India. Proportional hazards analysis showed that the risk of stopping breastfeeding is significantly higher among working women than among non-working women in urban areas. But in rural areas, mother’s work participation does not show any significant effect on stopping breastfeeding. Proportional hazards analysis with work participation as a Time-Dependent Covariate confirms these results. Thus, the labour force participation of women is incompatible with breastfeeding in urban areas but not in rural areas.	Sivakami	 Muthusamy
2003	150	Employment, Child Care and Welfare: Effects on Children	Inter-relationships Between Women's and Children's Work: Effects on Children's Education in Malawi	This paper investigates the inter-relationships between women's and children's work and its implications on children's schooling. First, the paper analyzes the distribution of domestic work hours between women, men, and children in Malawi. The paper further investigates the relationship between children's long hours of domestic work and their likelihood to attend school.  Literature on child labor and schooling mostly shows the negative impact of formal child employment. However, in sub-Saharan Africa, at least 95% of child labor takes place in private homes. Few studies have quantified the effects of domestic child labor on schooling opportunities. This study is a contribution to filling this research gap. Since women and children, particularly girls, shoulder a large portion of the domestic work burden, the paper also investigates if children who live in a household comprised of more women experience lower work burdens and whether this helps the children’s education opportunities.	Flora	J. Nankhuni	Jill	L. Findeis
2003	150	Employment, Child Care and Welfare: Effects on Children	The Effects of Women’s Employment and Fertility Decisions on the Cognitive Development of Young Children: The Role of Mother’s Education	This paper investigates the effects of maternal time and  family resources on children's cognitive development. Existing studies suggest that mothers' time spent in the labor market during the first year after the child's birth  has adverse effects on the cognitive development of preschoolers. Employment during the second and third year, however, is found to be beneficial. Using a larger sample of children (NLSY79) than previous work, a behaviorally founded specification and interpretation, and controlling for endogeneity of labor supply, income, and family size, I find that the amount of time a mother spends in the labor market in the first year or subsequently has on average no statistically significant effect on the cognitive development of white (non-Hispanic), African American, or Hispanic children. Further analysis of the sample of white children reveals that maternal employment in the first year after birth is only detrimental for children of less-educated (hence poorer) women.	Frank	 Heiland
2003	151	Educational Outcomes of Children of Immigrants	Predicting Verbal Ability and GPA: Effects of Family Structure, Immigrant Status, and School Composition	Using the AddHealth we study in-home data we examine student’s GPA and Verbal Ability score.  We examine differences in academic achievement by family structure, with special attention to how family structure interactions with race and immigrant status. We show immigrant status affects students’ achievement differently depending on group and generation.  For example, students born outside the U.S. score significantly lower on Verbal ability, but significantly higher on GPA.  Second generation immigrants also score significantly higher on GPA while not differing on Verbal Ability.  There is an implication that teen immigrants, and children of immigrants are encouraged to achieve in school by obtaining a good GPA.  We also include school characteristics to see how much of the achievement variation can be attributable to aggregate-level characteristics. In particular, we focus on how family structure, race, and immigration status and their interactions have responded to variations in achievement by school characteristics.	Mary	H. Benin
2003	151	Educational Outcomes of Children of Immigrants	Dynamics of Educational Progression: Comparing Native Danes and Children of Immigrants	The share of ethnic minorities in Denmark has increased rapidly over the past decade from 4.1 % of the total population to 7.1 %. A concern voiced is that many immigrants arrive from less developed countries with low levels of human capital and that their children for this reason and due to inadequate Danish language skills perform poorly in the educational system. Using two comprehensive panel data sets drawn from administrative registers in Denmark, the paper compares the progression through the educational system from age 15 to 20 of the two largest ethnic minority groups (Pakistanis and Turks) to that of native Danes. Descriptive analyses show that these groups behave very differently. Results from a dynamic discrete statistical model analyzing the importance of family background characteristics for the observed differences are discussed. The model controls for unobserved heterogeneity.	Bjorg	 Colding
2003	151	Educational Outcomes of Children of Immigrants	Young Children in Immigrant Families: Still Divided Fates?	One in five children in primary and secondary school have at least one foreign born parent.  This paper utilizes the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study of 1998 Kindergartners (ECLS-K) that follows children as they make the initial transition into school through subsequent elementary school grades.  The paper presents descriptive analyses of the status of children of immigrant families in these first two years of school.  In addition, multivariate models of academic achievement as measured by progress through school and standardized test results are presented.  Analyses confirm that first and second generation children are more likely to come from lower SES backgrounds but they are also more likely to have families strongly supportive of their academic achievement.  Yet, despite these high expectations and even at this early age, these children do not perform as well on standardized tests as their later generation peers.	Jennifer	E. Glick
2003	151	Educational Outcomes of Children of Immigrants	Parental Involvement in Immigrant Children's Education	In this study we examine the patterns of involvement among parents of three immigrant generations, and investigate if this variation in parental involvement accounts for the differences in adolescents' school achievement by generation status.  We have found that, unlike native parents, parents of the first generation immigrant children are more likely to adopt home-based involvement but not school-based involvement or networking with other parents.  Our analysis of adolescents' math and English grades and vocabulary test scores provided mixed results on immigrant children's school adaptation.  The level of parental involvement alone does not mediate the relationship between immigrant status and achievement.  When the effectiveness of parental involvement is accounted for, the immigrant advantage in school grades disappears.   However, immigrant children's disadvantage in vocabulary test scores remains.	Suet-ling	 Pong	Lingxin	 Hao	Erica	 Gardner
2003	152	Gender and SES Considerations in Juggling Work and Family	Paid and Unpaid Work Time Patterning among Middle-Class Dual-Earner Couples	Estimating latent class models of members of 947 middle-class dual-earner couples from the Ecology of Careers Study, we find identifiable and distinctive structures of time put into paid and unpaid work – employment, housework, child-care, and care of infirm family member – for husbands and wives.  Spouses' time patterning are independent from one another.  However, husbands¡¯ time use patterning predicts wives¡¯ subsequent structure of time use two years later.  But the reverse is not the case.  The most important predictor of time use life stage in the cross-section as well as in changes over time, especially for wives.  In addition, spouses¡¯ gender ideology, annual incomes, and occupations are important in time use patterning.	Yun-Suk	 Lee	Phyllis	 Moen
2003	152	Gender and SES Considerations in Juggling Work and Family	Family Income Differences in Work-Family Spillover	This study adds to a growing literature on the work/life issues facing workers by examining the differences between high-income workers and low-income workers in negative spillover from work to family. Using data from the 1997 National Study of the Changing Workforce, we test the hypothesis that although workers of differing income levels experience work/life conflict, the nature of the conflict depends on differences in access to employee benefits that facilitate work/life balance.  We find support for past research that reveals low-income workers are less likely to have access to important work/life policies, including employer-paid health insurance, and paid time-off for vacations, holidays, and personal illness. Characteristics of the workplace mediate the effects of lack of benefits, but only for low-income workers.  Further, with respect to working conditions, the amount of autonomy on the job significantly reduces negative spillover for low-income workers, while workplace culture influences spillover for high-income workers.	Enilda	A. Delgado	Donna	 Anderson
2003	152	Gender and SES Considerations in Juggling Work and Family	Does the Use of Work-Family Policies Influence Time Spent in Domestic Labor?	Much contemporary research outlines the work/family time burden experienced by dual-earning parents.  Yet little research focuses on the family unit, rather than individual employees, to ask how couples together use work-family policies to cope with their paid and unpaid work.  In this paper, we ask whether the use of various work-family policies alters time spent in housework and childcare for mothers and fathers.  Results from a Midwestern longitudinal sample of couples show that although mothers are more likely than fathers to use work-family policies, policy use by both mothers and fathers is mostly unrelated to time spent in housework and childcare.  We do find, however, that mothers who work some of their weekly work hours at home spend more time in childcare than mothers who do not.  Also, husbands whose wives work part-time spend less time in housework than husbands of wives who work full-time.	Sarah	Beth  Estes	Mary	C. Noonan	Jennifer	 Glass
2003	152	Gender and SES Considerations in Juggling Work and Family	Working Poor Families: What Employment Characteristics Influence Their Food Stamp Participation?	The Food Stamp Program experienced an unprecedented decline in participation during the mid- to late-1990s.  In response to declining participation rates, many states are re-engineering their programs to improve accessibility, especially for the working poor.  States are making policy decisions without the benefit of knowing who the working poor are, what their employment characteristics look like, and how these characteristics influence food stamp participation.  This study uses longitudinal data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to describe the employment characteristics of working food stamp recipients and to estimate the effect of these employment characteristics on Food Stamp Program participation in the pre- and post-welfare reform periods.  We estimate logit models and fixed-effect logit models that control for the endogeneity of employment status.  Results indicate that employment characteristics (such as working traditional hours, working full-time) and food stamp recertification policies are important determinants of food stamp participation.	Signe-Mary	 McKernan	Caroline	 Ratcliffe
2003	153	Less Explored Factors Underlying Child Health and Survival	Does Race Matter? Children's Height in Brazil and South Africa	This paper examines race differences in child stunting in mid-1990s South Africa and Brazil, two multiracial societies with different histories of legal support for racial discrimination. Using data from nationally-representative household samples linked to community-level measures, the analysis shows that racial inequality in the distribution of socioeconomic resources across households and communities explains much of the racial difference in stunting in both countries. However, the results show that in South Africa nonwhite children are still at greater risk for growth faltering than white children even after these factors are controlled. The nature of socioeconomic and race differences in child growth are examined, and major determinants discussed. These findings suggest that while state-sanctioned racism may help to explain the greater racial inequality in stunting in South Africa as compared with Brazil, the eradication of nonwhite disadvantage will depend on changes in the same fundamental socioeconomic inequalities that characterize both nations.	Sarah	A. Burgard
2003	153	Less Explored Factors Underlying Child Health and Survival	Childhood Mortality and Morbidity: A Case of Rural, Urban and Urban Slum	Childhood Mortality and Morbidity:   A case of Rural, Urban and Urban Slum, India.      Abstract    This study explores the understanding the differential of childhood mortality and morbidity pattern in rural, urban and urban slum. Childhood Mortality and Morbidity largely depends on demographic, socio economic and environmental factors. The above mentioned population groups under study are having different socio-economic and environmental set-up. Principle hypothesis of this study is that the same socio-economic status may not give similar mortality or morbidity pattern. In this study, the data of  National Family Health Survey; 1998-99, India, have been used. Special attention was given to collect information on Urban Slum of Maharashtra only in NFHS. Therefore, this analysis is restricted for Maharashtra State. Differentials of under-five mortality have been investigated on the basis of information for the 20-year period preceding the survey. Prevalence of ARI, Fever and Diarrhea has been calculated to observe the morbidity pattern.	Saswata	 Ghosh	Subrato	K. Mondal
2003	153	Less Explored Factors Underlying Child Health and Survival	Cross-Cultural Variation in Family Influences on Child Health	Based on the Van Norren and Van Vianen model of child health and the family process literature, we focus on family interaction and resource variables that influence infant survival and child health. Using DHS, we analyze the influence of these factors across thirty-nine countries. In addition, we consider country level variables and their influence on child well-being. Our study addresses four questions:  First, we seek to understand which of the family and household measures is most important in predicting infant morality and child health.  Second, we examine cross-national variability in the strength of influence of family and household factors on child health outcomes. We consider which country level factors in our analyses are most important in predicting infant mortality and child health. Finally, we examine the interaction between country and the household model to see if country factors moderate the effect of household and family measures on child health.	Tim	B. Heaton	Renata	 Forste	John	P. Hoffmann
2003	153	Less Explored Factors Underlying Child Health and Survival	A Tale of Two Continents: Explanations for Death Clustering in India and Africa	This paper examines levels of infant death clustering  using DHS data from twelve sub-Saharan African countries and twelve Indian states. Levels of death clustering are regressed with state and country-level economic indicators such as GDP and Gini coefficients as well as with development measures and health service uptake statistics.    The results show that infant deaths are determined by known factors such as short birth intervals, the survival status of the previous sibling and socioeconomic factors in both regions. However, the magnitude of the estimates varies.     Infant death clustering is more marked in India than in sub-Saharan Africa. HIV prevalence is related to infant death clustering within families only in Africa, where a higher prevalence is associated with less death clustering.    Communal wealth, as measured by GNP or economic inequality indicators such as Gini coefficient are not very important in explaining infant mortality or death clustering.	Nyovani	 Madise	Zoe	 Matthews	Alison	 Whitworth
2003	154	Demography of North American Aboriginal Populations. Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society	Aboriginal Demography in Canada at the Turn of the Century: Problems, Options and Implications	Demographers in both the United States and Canada have continued to document phenomenal growth in the numbers of persons reporting Native American origins (in both the 2000 U.S. Census and the 2001 Canadian Census).  In light of this growth, the current paper provides a critical appraisal of recent demographic research on Aboriginal peoples in Canada. With a specific focus on recent efforts at estimation/projection, the current paper takes stock of many of the problems that continue to hinder demographers in documenting the characteristics of Canada's four major Aboriginal groups, (registered North American Indian, non-registered North American Indian, Métis and Inuit). With the release of data on Canada's Aboriginal population from the 2001 Canadian Census, research priorities will be discussed, including the need to immediately fill major data gaps as well as exploring the possibility of more refined models for estimation/projection.	Don	 Kerr	Eric	 Guimond	Roderic	 Beaujot
2003	154	Demography of North American Aboriginal Populations. Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society	Part-American Indians in Census 2000: Similarities and Contrasts with Part-American Indians in the 1990 Census	With the new “check all that apply” race question used in Census 2000 comes a vast change in the composition of some racial groups.  The number of Americans who reported one of their races to be American Indian jumped from 1,937,391 in 1990 to 4,119,301 in 2000.  Researchers may be tempted to assume that those 2,475,956 people in Census 2000 who reported “American Indian race only” are the same population as those who reported their race to be American Indian in the 1990 Census.  I will conduct an empirical analysis of characteristics of all of the part-American Indian groups (by race and by ancestry) to test this and related assumptions using the the Census 2000 1% PUMS data.  I will compare characteristics of various part-American Indian population groups in 1990 to the same characteristics of part-American Indian groups in 2000 to identify the areas of largest change for further investigation.	Carolyn	A. Liebler
2003	154	Demography of North American Aboriginal Populations. Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society	Aboriginal Mobility and Migration within Urban Canada: Outcomes, Factors and Implications	This study employs data on Aboriginal mobility and migration from the recent 2001 Census, along with extensive analyses based on the 1996 Census, the 1991 post-censal Aboriginal Peoples Survey (APS), and earlier censuses. Basic questions are addressed about the propensity to move, the effect of migration on population redistribution and growth, and origin – destination flows, with particular emphasis on cities. With respect to the considerable growth of Aboriginal populations in urban areas, analysis demonstrates that migration is currently not the major contributor, and, that other factors, such as ethnic mobility, are at play.  Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that the most important considerations of contemporary Aboriginal migration relate not to redistribution of the population, but rather to high rates of movement or “churn” both within and “to and from” cities.  Residential and community instability may have the greatest consequences for the well-being of Aboriginal people, especially in urban areas.	Mary	Jane  Norris	Stewart	 Clatworthy
2003	154	Demography of North American Aboriginal Populations. Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society	Abridged Life Tables for Registered Indians in Canada, 1976-80 to 1996-2000	The abridged life tables were constructed using the Chiang method based on the adjusted data on deaths and population by age and sex  from the Indian Registry for Canada and two broad regions, east and west, 1976 to 1996-2000. Prior to discussing the construction of life tables, we will address the quality of data from the Indian Registry, discuss the methods for adjusting these data due to late reporting and never reporting of events, compare and analyse the differences in e0 between the Registered Indians and total Canadian population. Given the historically lower socio-economic indicators for Registered Indians, the e0's for Registered Indians over the Canadian population are expected to be much lower. Since there is a greater proportion of Aboriginal population living on reserves in the western region in Canada, one could assume that the mortality levels ( lower e0) would be higher than in the Eastern/Central region.	Ravi	B.P. Verma	Margaret	 Michalowski	R.	Pierre  Gauvin
2003	155	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth II	Adoptive Single Parents and Their Children: 2000	Using Census 2000 sample data, this paper provides the first available national comparison of single and married adoptive parents and their children.  The literature shows adoptive families are generally better off than those of other children.  This paper compares single and married adoptive householders, as well as the adopted children living with single, compared with married parents.  Thirdly, I will compare single adoptive parents with single biological parents in order to see if the adoptive families are better off in terms of household income, the education and employment status of the householder, and tenure.  Median household income for single adoptive parents is about $3,900 higher than for non-adoptive biological parents.  This masks diversity among adoptive families, which I will subdivide.  I will use regression models to predict logged household income, to calculate the predicted household income of single biological parents if they had the same characteristics as single adoptive parents.	Rose	 Kreider
2003	155	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth II	Family Structure, Quality of Relationship, and Next Generation Parenting	The consequences of growing up in single-parent families on children’s development and their transition to adulthood have been well documented. Yet our understanding of the long-term consequences remains limited. We know little about how these children raise their offspring after they enter parenthood and the extent to which their parental behavior is affected by early family experience. In this paper, I intend to fill this gap by looking at whether adults from one-parent families have different parenting styles than adults from two-biological-parent families. I will also examine whether growing up in single-parent families leads to a poorer relationship with partner later on and whether having a better quality of the relationship with partner will reduce the negative consequences of growing up with one parent on one’s parenting practices. The analysis is based on data from the 1968-1997 Panel Study of Income Dynamics and 1997 Child Development Supplement.	I-Fen	 Lin
2003	155	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth II	Who Gets It Next? The Impact of Family Structure on the Risk of Child Abuse in Abusive Multi-Child Households	What is the impact of family structure on the distribution of child abuse within abusive households?  When abusive households include more than one child, does sibling configuration affect which sibling is victimized next? Equal probability sampling was used to extract a sample of 108 child protection family histories in Orange County, California.  Each sampled family had two or more children aged under 18, of which at least one was a substantiated victim of physical or sexual abuse.  The units of analysis comprised 680 person-incidents (230 victims plus 450 non-victims).  Cox proportional hazards regression was applied to predict physical and sexual abuse re-victimization.  Results for both physical and sexual abuse show protective effects from having numerous, or older siblings, net of adult characteristics, prior victimization, and the child's own age.  The presence of bigger brothers or sisters seems to increase a child's safety by enhancing surveillance.	Julianne	K. Ohlander	Ken	 Chew	Richard	 McCleary
2003	155	Family Structure and Outcomes for Children and Youth II	Parenting Practices as Modifiers and Moderators of Adolescents? Educational Outcomes	Recent studies argue that parenting practices can be viewed as conscious efforts to manage children?s external environments, with parents seen as adopting strategies to affect the impact of the external world by channeling their children?s activities, closely monitoring them, or removing them from negative influences. In this paper, we assess whether such parenting practices can protect adolescents from harmful effects of social environments as well as promote the positive effects of social environments. We use data from the first wave of the Survey of Parents and Youth (SPY), a national study of adolescents and their parents. We find that parental management styles differ based on features of the environment, and that characteristics of parents and children are strongly associated with parenting behaviors. Parenting strategies geared towards shaping their child?s social involvement are strong predictors of academic outcomes while restrictive parent behaviors have little impact on these outcomes.	Christopher	C. Weiss	Julien	O. Teitler
2003	156	Gender, Power, and Reproduction	Latino Men's Perceptions of Gender, Power, and Culture in Reproductive Health	This paper analyzes in-depth interviews of male immigrants of Mexican origin, examining barriers to utilization of family planning services provided by the State of California.  The study focuses on issues of gender, power, and culture and how these structural forces affect men’s access to services and their reproductive outcomes.  In addition to migration histories and current economic conditions, interviews address gender roles and expectations, decision-making and negotiation regarding family planning and sexual relationships, and acceptability of non-monogamous relationships (including the use of sex camps by migrant workers).  Cultural aspects such as the acceptability of using birth control, reasons for wanting or not wanting children, perceptions of modern methods of family planning, and constraints on women’s sexual activity are also addressed.  Finally, interviews explore men’s perceptions of institutionalized reproductive health services, such as fear of deportation if services are utilized, interactions with doctors and clinic staff, and cultural perspectives on medicine.	M.	Catherine  Maternowska	Amy	 Godecker
2003	156	Gender, Power, and Reproduction	Changes in Marriage and Childbearing Decision-Making and the Timing of First Birth in Rural China	This empirical study investigates whether and how the pattern of family decision-making about marriage and childbearing influence the timing of first birth in rural China during the decades prior to 1990, based on data from a survey that interviewed both wives and husbands. This study finds that the first birth intervals decreased significantly over the decades under study. This decline is associated with the transition from traditional arranged marriages to marriages decided by the couple, and with the decrease in parents~{!/~} participation in decisions about childbearing. The first birth intervals also show a strong negative relationship with women~{!/~}s age at first marriage and the husband~{!/~}s level of education. Both wife~{!/~}s and husband~{!/~}s income do not show strong influences on the first birth. The findings of this study may imply a quiet revolution in sexuality in the traditional rural China during the recent decades.	Ying	 Hong
2003	156	Gender, Power, and Reproduction	Is It Big Talk or Women’s Power? Spousal Communication and Perceptions of Childbearing Desires in a Pare Community in Northern Tanzania	This paper aims to determine the influence of marital relations on spousal communication and the spouses’ perceptions of each other’s childbearing desires. Specifically, we examine whether women who are empowered within their marital unions have more voice in childbearing decisions or whether these women only talk as if this were the case.    The research methodology consisted of an ethnographic study, in-depth interviews and a community-based survey.      Preliminary analysis suggests that higher education, Christian religion and spousal communication about childbearing decisions are associated with agreement between the wife’s and the husband’s perception of their partner’s childbearing desires.  These characteristics are associated with a more egalitarian marital union and the empowerment of women. However, in a high number of unions in which agreement was expressed by both husbands and wives, the decision was made by the husband. This indicates that while talking differently, empowered women submit to the husband’s decision-making power.	Ulla	 Larsen	Marida	 Hollos
2003	156	Gender, Power, and Reproduction	Bridewealth and Male Dominance: Reproductive Decision Making among Couples in Uganda	Despite the volume of work on the role men play in marital fertility decisions, there has been little effort to obtain direct empirical estimates of the effect of men's preferences on reproductive behavior (Dodoo, 1998). The existing studies point to the gendered difference in fertility preference as an indicator of relative dominance.     However, fertility preference in sub-Saharan Africa is rooted in the cultural construction of gender and in the nature of marital formation.  For instance, the payment of bridewealth in many African societies generally underscores the collective nature of a marriage contract between two lineage groups (Caldwell, 1987).  This payment is likely also to creates unequal relationships between husbands and wives, and reinforce men’s control over women’s social and private lives. In this paper, I employ the Uganda 1995\96 negotiating reproductive outcomes to examine whether fertility preference is conditioned by cultural factors such as bridewealth payment.	Tom	O. Owuor
2003	157	Differential Mortality	Body Mass, Smoking, and Overall and Cause Specific Mortality among Older Individuals	Few have examined the interrelationships among body mass, smoking, and overall and cause-specific mortality among older individuals. We employ data from the National Health Interview Survey linked to the Multiple Cause of Death file, and Cox proportional hazard models, to estimate these relationships among U.S. adults aged 60 and older. Compared to those who are normal weight, overweight and slightly obese individuals experience lower overall mortality, but face higher risks of death due to heart disease and diabetes. Conversely, underweight individuals face increased risks of death even after accounting for sub-clinical illness, potentially because of frailty or smoking status. Revealing these complex associations among body mass, smoking, and overall and cause specific mortality informs public policies that aim to improve the health of our increasingly obese elderly population.	Patrick	M. Krueger	Richard	G. Rogers	Robert	A. Hummer	Jason	D. Boardman
2003	157	Differential Mortality	Cardiovascular Risk in the 1990s: Do Changes in Socioeconomic Effect Accompany Changes in Prevalence?	We use two national probability survey examinations of the US population to compare prevalence of four key risk factors for cardiovascular disease at the beginning and end of the 1990s among middle-aged and older adults. We ask whether education and income differentials have changed for smoking, obesity, high cholesterol and high blood pressure during the 1990s with changing prevalence. We hypothesize that socioeconomic  differentials will increase when risk factors decline. Because heart disease develops gradually, changes in the prevalence and socioeconomic determinants of these risk factors are likely to influence trends in mortality for decades.  We are particularly interested in cholesterol because effective, expensive new medications were introduced in 1987. We find that smoking has declined, obesity has increased, high cholesterol has declined, and high blood pressure has declined for men. For smoking, obesity and cholesterol, we generally find the hypothesized inverse associations between changes in prevalence and socioeconomic effects.	Diane	S. Lauderdale	Ronald	A. Thisted
2003	157	Differential Mortality	Racial Differences in Causes of Death: Double Jeopardy for Blacks, but for Which Causes?	The double jeopardy hypothesis posits that the racial gap in health increases across age.  Early research testing the hypothesis used subjective health measures, but more recent research has criticized the use of subjective measures because they tend to be age-sensitive and relative.  Research using objective measures has found some support for the hypothesis.  In this research, we examine the hypothesis in terms of causes of death.  Using data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, we estimate Bayesian multiple-decrement life tables for two categories of causes of death:  circulatory system diseases (CSDs) and all other causes (OCDs).  We find that the racial gap widens across age for CSDs but not for OCDs.  The implication is that, even using objective measures, mixed support may be found for the hypothesis, if we use health measures that are strongly associated with one or another particular disease.  Additional analyses and implications are discussed.	Scott	M. Lynch	J.	Scott  Brown
2003	157	Differential Mortality	Does Education Have the Same Effect on Mortality of Blacks and Whites across Age?	A substantial body of research has documented the inverse relationship between education and mortality.  Most existing studies control on race, in effect constraining the influence of education to be the same for both races.  In this paper, I relax this constraint and examine whether education has the same effect on mortality for blacks and whites.    I analyzed panel survey of 14,000 respondents from four NHANES survey waves spanning 20 years, using discrete time logit models to incorporate time-varying variables and to model our primary coefficient of interest, education by race interaction.  The gross effect of education was significantly stronger for whites than for blacks.  The difference was explained by income and other sociodemographic variables, suggesting that it was due to lower returns to education in income for blacks.   I also found that the effect of schooling attenuates with age, and the trend doesn’t differ significantly by race.	Anna	 Zajacova
2003	158	Intergenerational Exchanges and Aging	Intergenerational Coresidence and Income Shocks: Evidence from Germany	This paper investigates intergenerational coresidence of elderly parents with their adult children in Germany using the GSOEP for the period 1984-1998. I take advantage of 15 years worth of panel data on West Germans to examine changes in residency patterns over time and exploit the economic shock accompanying the reunification of East and West Germany to assess the responsiveness of coresidence to economic changes. The empirical analysis provides evidence that financial variables and changes in these variables are important factors in the living arrangement decisions. Both in West and East Germany, greater independence comes with greater financial resources indicating that independence is a preferred outcome.  In addition, the reduction of economic barriers induced by reunification has increased dramatically the propensity of Eastern elderly to live independently. Over time the living arrangement behavior of East Germans is converging towards the living arrangement behavior of West Germans.	Enrica	 Croda
2003	158	Intergenerational Exchanges and Aging	Reciprocity in Relationships: Socio-Economic and Health Influences on Intergenerational Exchanges between Mature Parents and Their Adult Children in Great Britain	In this paper data from a two-wave (1988 and 1994) nationally representative British data set are used to analyse exchanges of support between parents aged 55-75 and their adult children. I examine the influence of receipt of help from children on parents’ provision of help to children and socio economic, demographic and health differences in both provision and receipt of help.     Results show that higher parental income was associated positively with helping children with money and with providing other kinds of help. Being a tenant, disability and older age were negatively associated with provision of help.  Odds of receiving help from a child were  raised among married tenants and were positively associated with parental disability and age. Provision of help was strongly associated with receipt of help, and vice versa, indicating a strong reciprocal element to intergenerational exchange.	Emily	 Grundy
2003	158	Intergenerational Exchanges and Aging	Financial Reciprocity and Elder Care: Understanding Multiple, Interdependent Resource Transfers	We developed nested logistic regression models for a sample from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study to examine the influence of parent-to-child financial transfers and economic resources on child-to-parent financial transfers, caregiving, time help and co-residence as multiple, interdependent transfers from middle-aged adult children to their elderly parents.   We find strong positive effects of prior parent-to-child financial transfers in the models of caregiving, time help, and co-residence but no effect on child-to parent financial transfers.  Coresidence, caregiving, and  time-help are complements but we do not find  interdependence between child-to-parent financial transfers and caregiving or time-help.  Caregivers have less education and more long-term health problems than their peers.  We interpret the effects of parents' incomes and net worth as evidence about motives for transfers to them, and find compensatory altruism for financial transfers but exchange motives for time help.  We speculate about the relevance of our results for elder care policy.	Maurice	M. MacDonald	Sun-Kang	 Koh
2003	158	Intergenerational Exchanges and Aging	Impact of Individual, Family and Community Characteristics on Inter-Generational Support: An Analysis of the Canadian 1996 General Social Survey on Social and Community Support	Types of family cohesion are constructed using three dimensions of  inter-generational relationships:  (a) affinity, essentially comprising emotional closeness; (b) opportunity structure, referring to frequency of contact and residential proximity; and, (c) functional exchange, referring to flows of various kinds of instrumental support among family members. Canadians belong mostly to the following four types: detached (not involved in inter-generational support), functional (mainly involved in instrumental exchanges), obligatory (involved in both opportunity structures and functional exchanges), and tight-knit (involved in all three dimensions). The data are from the 1996 General Social Survey on Family and Community Support. At our request, Statistics Canada merged the survey data with the community information derived for enumeration areas from the 1996 Census. This merger allows examining the influences on inter-generational support not only of individual but also of community characteristics. The statistical methodology involves binary and multinomous logistic regressions in the framework of structural equation modeling.	Fernando	 Rajulton	Zenaida	R. Ravanera
2003	159	Land Use and Migration	Exploring the Influence of Environmental Hardship on Population Mobility in the Drylands of Argentina: The Case of the Department of Jáchal	This paper explores the role that environment hardship plays in migration decision-making, in a context where different forms of population mobility have traditionally operated as the response to the combination of deteriorating living conditions, economic vulnerability and land degradation. The data come mainly from in-depth interviews to small farmers’ households, fielded during 2001 and analyzed using interpretative content analysis. Preliminary results indicate that links between migration and desertification are elusive. Environmental hardship was hardly mentioned as a reason for moving, except in cases of drought or flooding, suggesting that the relationship is more transparent if environmental problems are acute. However, since work-related reasons are the modal ones, the structure of opportunities of the local labor market emerges as mediating factor: environmental change and degradation would trigger population mobility to the extent that they affect labor demand in agriculture, reducing it in a scenario of severe scarcity of off-farm jobs.	Susana	 Adamo
2003	159	Land Use and Migration	Impacts of Population Migration on Land Degradation in Tarim River Basin, Xinjiang of China	The potential environment repercussion associated with migration increasingly attracts attention from many researchers. This study is designed to investigate the interactions between population change and land degradation in Xinjiang of China. Taking Tarim River Basin as the focus research site, we study the process of deforestation, desertification under the pressure of large volume of in-migration flow since the 1950s, particularly in its down-stream. Exploiting digitized aerophotograph, remote sensing data and ground socioeconomic, demographic data in 1950-2000, changes in landscape by in-migrants intervention and out-migrants driven by land degradation is visualized and modeled. Moreover, the interactions between over-water-use for land reclamation by in-migrants in the upper-stream in the one hand, serious land degradation and increasing abandoned cultivated-land in the down-stream in the other hand are carefully studied. Finally, system dynamics approach is used to determine which future policies provide the best combination of development and wellbeing in Xinjiang.	Leiwen	 Jiang	Yufen	 Tong	Zhijie	 Zhao	Tianhong	 Li	Wei	 Han
2003	159	Land Use and Migration	The Use of Rapid Assessment Techniques to Acquire Baseline Data in Squatter Communities: The Case of Palawan Province, the Philippines	This paper compares specific results obtained from RAP survey approaches used in Year 1 to results obtained through probability sampling in Year 2.  Specifically we examine the response patterns and weighted results for 17 identical questions fielded in Year 1 and Year 2 of the fieldwork period. Additionally we test and compare results from analysis related to household incomes and wealth measured obtained from independent instruments. These tests will measure both the efficacy of RAP approached where there is one to one correspondence between questions and sensitivity analysis of difference in response patterns when different instruments are used in a RAP framework and a probability sampling framework. Preliminary results argue that RAP techniques provide replicable and valid results when performed under controlled circumstances. These results argue that RAP approaches can offer a viable methodology for obtaining baseline information when time, money or personnel impact the use of tradition statistical approaches	James	W. McNally	John	 Poggie
2003	159	Land Use and Migration	Migration and Land Use Change: A Case Study in Nang Rong, Buriram, Thailand	This case study focuses on migration and land use in rural Thailand. This work aims to study the change of household land in Nang Rong and to investigate the household factors as they relate to change in household land. The theory of Multiphasic Response including migration theories are used to explain population and social change. Socio-economic and political factors are also considered. The unit of analysis is a household. The analysis of longitudinal data and in-depth interviews are employed.     The summary provided that population pressure leads to the change of household structure and inevitably affects land use change. Household factors show the probability of land size to be changed. Number of migrant in a household could predict change in land size. Agricultural work was reduced due to the out-migration and non-farm income. The study reveals that migration is found as the means to reduce pressure on land.	Wannarat	 Rattanawarang
2003	159	Land Use and Migration	The Influence of the Natural Environment on Migration in Burkina Faso. A Multilevel Event History Analysis	This study evaluates the influence of environmental conditions on migration in rural Burkina Faso, while controlling for various individual and community determinants of migration. The individual data come from a retrospective migration survey conducted in 2000 in Burkina Faso and community-level data come from a retrospective community survey conducted in 2002 on 600 villages. Environmental data consists of fine-resolution rainfall data and land degradation data. Land degradation assessment is based on time-series of remote sensing data. The analyses use multi-level discrete-time event history models, and are conducted separately for men and women. Our results show that environmental conditions do influence migration, but that their effects vary by gender and according to the destination of migration. Their impact also appears to be moderate in comparison to some community-level and individual-level determinants.	Bruno	 Schoumaker	Sabine	 Henry	Cris	 Beauchemin	Bonayi	 Dabire
2003	160	Findings from U.S. Historical Censuses	Determinants of Post-Secondary School Attendance: United States 1850-1990		Dennis	A. Ahlburg
2003	160	Findings from U.S. Historical Censuses	Southern Migrants and International Immigrants: A Long-Term Comparison of Occupational Attainment in the North, 1870-1990		Trent	 Alexander	Jason	C. Digman
2003	160	Findings from U.S. Historical Censuses	The Housing Market Impact of State-Level Fair-Housing Laws 1960-1970		William	J. Collins
2003	160	Findings from U.S. Historical Censuses	Labor Force Participation by Married Women in the United States: Results from the 1917/19 Cost-of-Living Survey and the 1920 PUMS	This paper reports  preliminary research on using the 1917/19 Cost of Living Survey (COLS) in conjunction with the 1920 PUMS to model married women's labor force participation. The COLS has been widely used to study American labor market behavior in the early 20th century. However, it is not clear how representative the sample is of the urban population it sampled. I compare the characteristics of households and individuals in the 1920 census to the COLS. The COLS includes income information, but not ethnicity or race, whereas the 1920 census has ethnicity and race variables, but no income information. Using the overlapping variables I create a synthetic sample which has 1920 census weights, and includes both ethnicity/race and income data. I use this new sample to model married women's behavior, and compare these to published results used the unweighted COLS.	Evan	 Roberts
2003	161	Economic Aspects of Population Growth and Aging in Different Contexts	The Social and Economic Implications of the Future of Snowbirding in the U. S.	This paper brings together research on snowbirds, permanent elderly-migration, changing generational attitudes and aging concerns to gain insights into the evolution of the snowbird lifestyle and its economic impacts on various states and specific sectors over the next two decades.  The first section discusses three major U.S. generations since the beginning of the 20th century and their behavior relating to retirement and retirement migration in particular.  The second section describes our research on the snowbird industry in Arizona along with work done for other Sunbelt states.  The third section reviews recent economic literature and findings on the baby boom generation, housing markets, and the motor home industry.  The final section then offers some speculations and conclusions about the snowbird lifestyle for the next twenty years.	Stephen	K. Happel	Timothy	D. Hogan
2003	161	Economic Aspects of Population Growth and Aging in Different Contexts	Does Population Ageing Reduce Savings?	The elderly are considered primarily as consumers (or dis-savers) and 'dependent' on the working population. This view lies at the heart of the current concern with the dependency of the elderly.     The theoretical justification for this 'consumer' and 'dependent' view of ageing has been provided by the Life-Cycle theory of saving. The early discussions of dependency in LDCs were more concerned with the children's dependency than the elderly's on the working population. The policy message of this literature was control of poulation growth. With the ageing process well underway the dependency debate has come full circle and now focuses on the adverse impact of old age dependency on savings and investment - Malthusians win with high or low birth rate!    This paper takes a fresh look at the relationship between population age structure and savings rate across a group of developed and developing countries, using World Development Indicators of the World Bank.	Mahmood	 Messkoub
2003	161	Economic Aspects of Population Growth and Aging in Different Contexts	Economic Transition Induced Changes in Expenditure on Medical Care among Elderly in Kerala, India	Paper examines the trends and differentials in medical expenditure incurred by elderly between the period 1986-87 and 1995-96, in Kerala the state having the largest proportion of aged population as well as the strongest network of health care system in India. Expenditure on inpatient care depends on economic background of the ailing person and the income inequalities in expenditure on medical care has increased over time.  The trend was different for outpatient care services, where the cost of medical care has declined to a certain extent between these two points of time. But here also the differentials in rich were found to be spending more on health care than the poor, and this gap was found to be increasing over time. It was confirmed that though the rich were spending more on medical care than the poor, the relative burden of medical care was lesser among rich than poor.	Thandassery	R. Dilip
2003	161	Economic Aspects of Population Growth and Aging in Different Contexts	Analyzing the Developing Country Growth Collapse of the 1970s and 1980s: Demographic Influences and Regional Differences	This paper bridges two highly related, but, up to now, rather unconnected literatures: the economic growth stability literature and the population and economic growth literature. The paper seeks to shed light on two puzzles: (1) why did some countries’ growth collapse during the 1970’s, and others’ did not; and (2) why did population growth have a negligible-to-no effect on economic growth during the 1960s and 1970s, but have a negative impact in the 1980s. This paper is different from previous population-economic growth analyses by focusing on explaining the instability of economic growth in developing countries. Also, the paper suggests a new theory on how population may matter to economic growth, i.e., countries with large working populations relative to dependent ones may have more resiliency to external shocks. This study contributes to a previous paper on the developing country growth collapse by adding important demographic variables.	Brant	 Liddle
2003	162	Population and Household Forecasting in Developing Countries	Using the Lee-Carter Method to Forecast Mortality for Populations with Limited Data	The Lee-Carter method for modeling and forecasting mortality has been shown to work quite well given long time series of data. Here we consider how it can be used when there are few observations at uneven intervals. Assuming that the underlying model is correct and that the mortality index follows a random walk with drift, we find the method can be used with sparse data. The central forecast depends mainly on the first and last observation, and so can be generated with just two observations, preferably not too close in time. With three data points, uncertainty can  also be estimated, although such estimates of uncertainty are themselves highly uncertain and improve with additional observations. We apply the methods to China and South Korea, which have 3 and 20 data points, respectively, at uneven intervals.	Nan	 Li	Ronald	 Lee
2003	162	Population and Household Forecasting in Developing Countries	Constructing Dynamic Scenarios for Forecasting Demographic Variables in Developing Countries	Most population forecasting in developing countries has traditionally assumed the changes of demographic variables’ levels (e.g. TFR and IMR), while the patterns are assumed to remain constant. The fact, Bongaarts (1999) reveals that fertility trends in many developing countries are likely to be distorted by changes in the timing of childbearing (the presence of tempo effect). The same feature has been applied to mortality and migration.     The present study attempts to construct the dynamics of demographic patterns in population forecasting in developing countries, particularly on Indonesia as an example. The study focuses on the development of techniques in the context of developing countries to make optimal use of available data and to utilize different data sources. The utilization of these data is aimed at improving the baseline demographic parameters and the formulation of scenarios. The assumptions of future population are concentrated on the trends and patterns of demographic variables.	Salahudin	S. Muhidin
2003	162	Population and Household Forecasting in Developing Countries	Education Prospects in India	The scope of the project is the projections of the educational levels of attainment of the populations in fifteen administrative Indian States (representing more than 95% of the population of India) based on the 2001 census data for the period 2001-2026. In each state, the population to be projected is sub-divided into four distinct groups according to educational attainment. Each sub-population is further stratified by age (5-year age groups) and sex, and can be represented through a separate population pyramid. The key parameters of the model are fertility differentials by education and three sets of age and sex specific educational transition rates, i.e., the age-specific intensities for young men or women to move, e.g., from the category of ‘middle education’ to that of ‘higher education’. The scenarios will show (1) the potential of fertility reductions due to increase in enrollments and (2)the human capital composition in the next 25 years.	Anne	 Goujon	Kirsty	 McNay
2003	162	Population and Household Forecasting in Developing Countries	A Dynamic System for Population Projections for Very Small Areas: Projecting for Districts and Neighborhoods in São Paulo/Brazil in 2005-2010	Population projections   for  small areas are becoming more and more requested by  public and private organizations around the world as a way to improve their planning capabilities. This paper presents an  alternative method to produce population estimates  in small areas,  useful when good census data and vital statistics are available. The  presented model is an integrated method of population projections using  cohort-component method at regional level joined with  a system of differential equations to split the total population to municipal, districts or neighborhood bounds. This dynamic system uses two demographic parametersfor each one of the very small area: one related to natural increase, one related to migratory attractiveness. The paper is structured in two sections. First it presents the integrated model demographic components-dynamic system, and later is shown  an application to estimate the populations  in the near future to 96 districts of  Sao Paulo City.	Paulo	 Jannuzzi
2003	163	Transitions Into and Out of Cohabitation	The Formation of Cohabiting Unions: New Perspectives from Qualitative Data	Cohabitation has become a normative part of the life course.  Scientific knowledge about cohabitation based on surveys is approaching a standstill and we are unlikely to grasp the meaning of cohabitation from quantitative studies alone.  We collected 90 in-depth interviews with an evenly divided sample of African American, Latino and White young men and women with recent cohabitation experience.    We address the following three questions.   First, we examine the process by which cohabiting unions begin, including the language, forethought, and criteria used to define cohabitation.  Second, we assess relationship choices at the onset of cohabitation.  An assumption is that singles decide whether to marry or cohabit, when in fact marriage may not be part of the calculus.  Third, we explore cohabitors’ orientations toward marriage when their unions began.  Preliminary results suggest our data are extremely rich and will offer new insights into the processes surrounding the formation of cohabiting unions.	Wendy	D. Manning	Pamela	J. Smock
2003	163	Transitions Into and Out of Cohabitation	Why Cohabit? Analyses of the Circumstances Surrounding Union Formation	While there is extensive research detailing who cohabits and the outcomes of cohabiting unions, we still know little about why people cohabit to begin with.  This paper tests whether the start of a union is associated with the experience of other life course events, such as having a child, graduating from college, or getting a new job.  For many persons, cohabitation arises out of convenience, while for others it may arise out of deepening emotional commitment.  I argue that examining the circumstances surrounding the start of union provide clues to how cohabitation functions at the individual level and that the role cohabitation plays is dependent on individual life course stage and sociodemographic characteristics.   Analyses are conducted using waves 1 & 2 of the National Survey of Families and Households, using discrete-time hazard models. It is expected that the occurrence of a cohabitation is associated with the experience of other events.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2003	163	Transitions Into and Out of Cohabitation	Cohabitation Dissolution and Distress	Although divorce has repeatedly been shown to have a distressing effect on those involved, the mental health consequences of the end of cohabitation have largely been ignored.  Heterosexual cohabitation has dramatically increased in prevalence, such that now it is largely a normative experience, even preceding the majority of new marriages.  Cohabitation also shares some of the features of marriage, such as living arrangements and sexual intimacy, and thus like marriage, its loss may be felt profoundly.  However, until now the aftermath of dissolution in terms of individual well-being has been unexamined.  In this paper, I investigate the effect of ending a cohabiting relationship on two facets of distress: depression and alcohol abuse.  I have the advantage of longitudinal, nationally representative data to explore this largely untapped issue.	Sarah	A. Avellar
2003	163	Transitions Into and Out of Cohabitation	Trial Marriage Reconsidered: Evidence for a Positive Causal Effect of Cohabitation on Marital Stability	Previous research rejects the well-known trial marriage hypothesis, which posits that pre-marital cohabitation decreases the risk of marital dissolution.  This paper proposes a revised theoretical perspective and new statistical methods to reevaluate the empirical support for the trial marriage hypothesis.  The paper has three parts.  The theoretical part of the paper demonstrates that the trial marriage hypothesis concerns the total causal effect of cohabitation.  The methodological part of the paper shows that previous empirical estimation strategies are doubly biased toward rejection.  The empirical part of the paper suggests an improved test of the hypothesis, using Robins's marginal structural models for complex longitudinal data.  Preliminary estimates from the National Survey of Family Growth suggest that, contrary to findings established in the literature, the trial marriage hypothesis is supported by the data.	Felix	 Elwert
2003	164	Fertility Measurement and Models	Coping with Time: The Use of a Local Time-Path Calendar in the Measurement of Durations	Reproductive health surveys often face difficulties in measuring age and duration. The paper uses theories about time (e.g. Hägerstrand 1988, De Bruijn 1999, Mills 2000). The time perception of respondents may result in heaping: the phenomenon that certain dates, ages or durations are over represented. Following the calendar method used in several Demographic and Health Surveys, the current research proposes an alternative method to measure durations. The aim of the method is to reduce duration heaping by using a local time-path calendar in estimating the durations of postpartum amenorrhoea, breastfeeding, postpartum abstinence, and contraceptive use, as opposed to using direct questions for determining these durations. The interviewer goes back in time with the respondent; the memory of respondents is triggered, which enables them to think in their own time system. In a survey in South India the method was tested; the findings indicate significantly less duration heaping.	Karen	 Haandrikman	N.V.	 Rajeswari
2003	164	Fertility Measurement and Models	Multilevel Factors Influencing Fertility on the Agricultural Frontier: A Longitudinal Analysis of Women in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon	Very limited research exists that link factors influencing fertility on the agricultural frontier, which is peculiar given the topic's implications for human development, environmental conservation, and the extraordinarily high fertility typical of frontier environments, usually much higher fertility than their cohorts in migration origin areas.  This research extends Carr and Pan (2002) to test contextual factors influencing fertility in the rural agricultural frontier of the Ecuadorian Amazon. We utilize longitudinal geo-referenced data from a representative sample of household farm plots in 1990 and 1999, and linked to community data collected in 2000.  Multilevel models are used to test the contextual effects influencing fertility at the level of the community and region (e.g., road and electrical networks, road quality, health care availability, quality, and utilization), household (e.g. changes in land size, tenure status, land use), and characteristics of the woman (e.g., age, education, parity).	William	 Pan	David	 Carr
2003	164	Fertility Measurement and Models	Transformation of First Marriage Behavior of Japanese Female Cohorts: Estimation and Projection of Lifetime Measure via Empirically Adjusted Coale-McNeil Model	In this study historical development of first marriage behavior in Japan in terms of lifetime measures for female birth cohorts is reconstructed to obtain better understanding of current situation of the rapidly transforming marriage.  The measures include timing indices (mean, mode, median, and sd of age at first marriage), and eventual occurrence levels (proportion ever-married and never-married at age 50).  Two preliminary arrangements are made; empirical adjustment of the Coale-McNeil model, and estimation of annual number of first marriage in postwar period.  Then trends of the lifetime measures over cohorts born in 1935-1970 are estimated.  Interesting changing patterns in first marriage behavior relevant to the recent nuptiality and fertility decline are found.  The change was initiated with delaying marriage by cohort of 1952, followed by diffusion of never-marrying in cohorts after 1959.  Then the timing shift is gradually ending in cohorts after 1965.  Causes, implications, and prospects are briefly discussed.	Ryuichi	 Kaneko
2003	165	Reproductive Intentions, Perceptions, and Motivations	The Influence of Socio-Demographic, Behavioral, and Physiological Factors on Perceptions of Difficulty Getting Pregnant and Infertility in Malawi	The purpose of this paper is to examine perceptions of fertility problems and the possible socio-demographic, behavioral and physiological factors associated with such perceptions. Comparisons are made between the factors associated with a perception of difficulty getting pregnant and those who consider themselves or their partner to be infertile.  The aim is to identify factors associated with the perception of fertility problems, and how those factors may differ by the severity of the problem.  The paper uses survey and focus group data from the Malawi Pregnancy and STI Risk Perception and Avoidance Study, a panel study conducted from June 2000- June 2002.  Bivariate and multivariate analyses are used to show the relationship between socio-demographic, behavioral, and physiological variables on the difficulty in getting pregnant and perceived infertility.  Content analyses of focus group data are also used to add to our understanding of perceptions of sub-fecundity and infertility in rural Malawi.	Janine	 Barden-Ofallon
2003	165	Reproductive Intentions, Perceptions, and Motivations	Fertility Attitudes and Behaviours of Rural-to-Urban Migrants in China	Based on a year-long fieldwork in China in 1998, this study examines fertility attitudes and behaviours of rural-to-urban migrants. The fieldwork was carried out both in migrants' current community in Beijing and in one of migrants' home villages in Henan province.  Major findings include: 1) Fertility level of rural-to-urban migrants is slightly lower than that of their rural counterparts and considerably higher than that of urban local residents. 2) Migrants are concentrated in a segregated group of occupations and socially excluded in the community. 3) Most rural migrants tend to interact with their fellow migrants.  The cultural continuity in fertility behaviours from their rural backgrounds is evidenced.  4) Under the current social conditions in China, it is unrealistic to expect any drastic fertility behavioural changes among migrant population.  The act of migration per se does not have a significant effect on migrants' fertility attitudes and behaviours.	Fei	 Guo
2003	165	Reproductive Intentions, Perceptions, and Motivations	The Motivational Force of Cultural Schemas behind Reproductive Health Behaviour in South India	The paper discusses how cultural schemas motivate reproductive health behaviour in South India and combines a theoretical framework of cognitive anthropology (D’Andrade 1984; 1992; 1995) with empirical data collected during years of fieldwork. Within cognitive anthropology, schemas are seen as goals and to motivate behaviour of people. Schemas form ‘the person’s internal representation of his environment’ (D’Andrade 1992, p.33).   The paper focuses on two important cultural schemas underlying reproductive health behaviour of women in Indian society, i.e. the schemas on heating-cooling and on purity-pollution. Reproductive health behaviour here refers to the use of contraceptives, abortion, fecundity, menstruation, sexuality, pregnancy and delivery. Several aspects of cultural schemas, illustrated with empirical data, are dealt with such as embedding of schemas in cultural meaning systems; enhancement of social status; development of health educational material.	Inge	 Hutter
2003	166	Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants	The Changing Demography of Latinos, 1990-2000	Census 2000 data documents that the Latino population grew by 57.9 percent between 1990 and 2000.  Though Latinos historically have been concentrated in a few states, Census 2000 data also indicates that there are growing proportions of Latinos living in all areas of the United States, especially in non-traditional regions of the country. This paper seeks to address past theoretical and methodological limitations by testing explanations for Latino population growth in both traditional and non-traditional Latino states over the decade.  The results are expected to identify the utility of established theories of international migration for understanding the changing demography of the Latino population.  In sum, the theoretically driven and comprehensive analyses undertaken in this project are expected to contribute to our understanding of this phenomenon and point to new directions for research about the changing demography of Latinos in the United States.	Eileen	Diaz  McConnell
2003	166	Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants	Immigrant Churning through Gateway Cities: Foreign-Born Flows In and Out of Los Angeles and New York 1975-2000	I use 1980 and 1990 PUMS data to examine immigrant churning to and through Los Angeles and New York.  Results indicate that immigrant concentration in these gateway centers has resulted primarily from internal migration of foreign-born residents already in the country and that this “new churning” has contributed to the number of immigrants out-migrating from these gateway centers to elsewhere in the United States.  Results also indicate that younger, less-advantaged immigrants are more likely to out-migrate from these centers than older, more-advantaged immigrants.  These findings illuminate how gateway cities continue to shape the nature and extent of immigrant flows to and from secondary U.S. destinations.	James	R. Elliott
2003	166	Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants	New Immigrants' Location Choices: Magnets without Welfare	The 1996 welfare reform banned legal non-citizens, who arrived in the US after August 1996, from receiving federally financed means-tested benefits in their first five years in the US. However, a number of states restored some benefits using state-level funds. I use this state-level variation in policy to study whether or not new immigrants make their location decisions on the basis of benefit generosity. I use a conditional logit model to obtain estimates of the effect of the policies of interest. To control for time-varying, unmeasured state characteristics, I use a difference-in-differences procedure.      I find that safety-net programs do not affect the locational choices of new low-skilled women immigrants. This result is robust to a variety of specifications including those limited to the target group; difference-in-differences models with each of the control groups, and models that take account of the number of programs available to immigrants and generosity of benefits.	Neeraj	 Kaushal
2003	167	Adult Sexuality, Sexual Behavior, and Sexual Health	Female Control over First Sexual Intercourse in Brazil: Qualitative Evidence from Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais	While public health advocates began exploring the vagaries of sexual consent in the 1990s, public policy regarding sexual health has yet to address the spectrum of gender-based sexual coercion. But there is growing evidence that sexual coercion plays a fundamental role in female sexual behavior. This project presents data from 12 focus groups carried out in June/July 2002 in the municipality of Belo Horizonte, the capital of Minas Gerais, Brazil with low and middle/upper-income women of the ages 18-21 and 30-39 to explore female control over first sex experiences.      The respondents’ sexual debut stories are rife with deception and disappointment.  A prominent theme in the data is that sexual intercourse becomes obligatory at a certain point due to contextual relationship factors.  While the 18-21 year old respondents felt obligated at a different point than the 30-39 year old respondents, this obligation obscures what is deemed unwanted intercourse.	Ann	M. Moore
2003	167	Adult Sexuality, Sexual Behavior, and Sexual Health	Changing Patterns of Sexual Behavior among Undergraduates in Nigerian Universities (a Case Study of Nnamdi Azikwi University Awka)	This study examines salient issues in the sexual behavior of young adult in a typical Nigeria University in this era of Hiv/Aids epidemic. The issues examined centered around gender factors, choice of sexual partner, attitude to sex and sexual behaviors, influence of religions and other socio-cultural sentiments on the sexual behavior of adolescents and sources of sex education/knowledge available to the students. Considering the sensitive nature of such issues, the study employed qualitative tools such as FGDs and in-depth interview of respondents/mailed questionnaires.     Mean percentage and Z-test statistics were used for data analysis. Results were discussed in terms of prevailing information and knowledge about Hiv/Aids.	Nkolika	E Obianyo	Oranye	 Nelson
2003	167	Adult Sexuality, Sexual Behavior, and Sexual Health	Fifty Ways to Leave Your Rubber: How Men in Mombasa Rationalize Unsafe Sex	Background:  In Kenya, 50-70% of female sex workers (SWs) are HIV+, but they are often at the mercy of their male partners when it comes to using condoms.  More research is needed to look at men’s attitudes towards condoms, and to identify ways to increase condom use among men who frequent sex workers.     Methods:  Over 100 men were contacted through participant observations and in-depth interviews in locations where commercial sexual transactions are initiated regarding their attitudes towards male condoms.     Results:  We documented fifty excuses, which can be grouped into five different reasons for non-use: perceived costs, perceived benefits, perceived efficacy of condoms, self-efficacy, and locus of control.     Conclusions:  Some reasons that men dislike condoms are difficult to affect directly, others are due to gaps in knowledge and myths.  This qualitative data will help design targeted interventions that increase the likelihood of initiated and sustained behavior change.	Sarah	C. Thomsen	Michael	 Stalker	Cathy	 Toroitich-Ruto	Ndugga	Baker  Maggwa	Peter	 Mwarogo
2003	168	Child Care and Early Childhood Education	Childcare and Receipt of Public Assistance, 1995–2001	With the focus of 1996 welfare reform on parental employment and a concomitant increase in funding for nonparent childcare, it is likely that the percentage of poor children who participate in nonparent care has increased substantially since 1996, particularly in center-based care arrangements.  Over time this increase may be mitigated by decreased access to childcare resulting from time limits on benefit receipt, sanctions for behavior that does not comply with state welfare laws, or simply being ineligible to receive benefits.     We assess the effects of welfare reforms on the childcare experiences of poor children between 1995 and 2001 using data from the National Household Education Surveys Program. We examine whether the usage and characteristics of nonparent childcare arrangements vary over time, focusing on participation in non-parent care, receipt of financial assistance, cost, child to provider ratio and use of multiple arrangements.  We control for child, family and household characteristics.	Sandra	L. Eyster	Christopher	 Chapman	Daniel	 Princiotta
2003	168	Child Care and Early Childhood Education	Employment Trends and Child Care Trends: Does Rising Demand Mean Rising Supply?	Currently, over 75% of all pre-school aged children of working mothers receive some form of non-parental childcare on a part time or full time basis (Urban Institute Report, 2002).  Proceeding under the economic assumption that rising demand will generate its own supply, ongoing policy intervention through direct and indirect demand subsidization attempts to mitigate the chronic undersupply of quality formal care noted by many authors.  This paper uses a unique longitudinal dataset compiled in part from special tabulations of the 1990 and 2000 Census of Population and Housing to examine actual supply responsiveness in the child care market by modeling county level changes in the supply of center care between 1990 and 2000 as a function of lagged changes in 1) female labor force participation, 2) welfare to work policy, 3) child care tax incentive policy, 4) child care regulatory policy, 5) state child care subsidy spending, and 6) the availability of informal, family day care options.	Carlena	 Cochi Ficano
2003	168	Child Care and Early Childhood Education	The Effect of Government Child Care Subsidy Programs on Child Care Choice among Low Income Families	The paper estimates the effects of state child care policies on low- income parents’ child care choices for their young children under age 6.  Prior research suggests that these differences are largely explained by resource constraints; if the price of market care is reduced, lower income families would be expected to substitute market care for informal babysitting arrangements.   Federal and state child care subsidies are designed to increase the purchasing power of low income families and would be expected to increase their use of market care.  Policies for funding and regulating child care vary substantially across states; we make use of this variation to estimate the effects of alternative funding mechanisms and child care regulations on parents’ choice of  formal (i.e. market-based) or informal (i.e. babysitting) child care arrangements for their youngest child.	Marcia	K. Meyers	Se-Ook	 Jeong
2003	168	Child Care and Early Childhood Education	Does Early Childhood Education and Care Improve the Academic Skills of Children from Low-Income Families?	Government-funded early childhood education and care (ECEC) programs support low-income families’ transitions from welfare to work, and may also promote young children’s school readiness.  Experimental studies have demonstrated that high-quality ECEC programs improve low-income children’s academic skills, but research has not shown that children benefit from more typical ECEC programs.  With correlational evidence, it is difficult to determine whether ECEC experiences improve children’s academic skills or whether the association is spurious, resulting from the omission of family or child characteristics that drive parents to place children in ECEC and also enhance children’s academic skills.  Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Kindergarten Cohort Study, a nationally representative panel study of children who entered kindergarten in 1998, this paper takes advantage of variation in state spending on ECEC to estimate Instrumental Variable (IV) models of the effect of young children’s ECEC experiences on their academic achievement in the early school years.	Katherine	A. Magnuson	Jane	 Waldfogel
2003	169	The Role of Demographic Assumptions in Projecting the Financial Status of
the Social Security Trust Fund:  An Open Meeting with the Technical Panel
on Assumptions and Methods	Brief Overview of Current Assumptions and Methods		John	R. Wilmoth
2003	169	The Role of Demographic Assumptions in Projecting the Financial Status of
the Social Security Trust Fund:  An Open Meeting with the Technical Panel
on Assumptions and Methods	Open Discussion			 Everyone
2004	1	Internal Migration in Developing Countries I	Rural-Urban Migration in West Africa: Toward a Reversal? Migration Trends, Economic Conjuncture, and Rural Development in Burkina Faso and Cote d'Ivoire	While most developed countries experienced at least one phase of reversal in their rural-urban migration flows since the 1970s, the same pattern is usually not expected in developing countries, especially in the less urbanized African countries. This study of migration trends in Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire documents that these two countries have experienced a renewal in their migration patterns in recent years. Empirical evidence from migration surveys shows that urban-to-rural migration is on the increase in both countries, while rural-to-urban migration has been declining. As a result, there is a clear pattern of 'counter-urbanization' in Côte d'Ivoire, while in Burkina Faso there is still a net gain in population in urban areas. The second part of this paper uses multilevel event history data to analyse the impact of contextual factors (economic factors, environmental conditions, level of rural development) on migration between urban and rural areas.	Cris	 Beauchemin	Sabine	 Henry	Bruno	D. Schoumaker
2004	1	Internal Migration in Developing Countries I	In-Migrants and Exclusion in East African Rangelands: Access, Tenure, and Conflict	East African rangelands have a long history of population mobility, competition over key resources, and outright conflict. The paper explores the relationship between internal migration and conflict in areas straddling the Tanzania / Kenya border, characterised by strong ecological, ethnic and socio-economic continuities, across which contrasting political and economic contexts have been superimposed.  Contrasts between Kenyan and Tanzanian lands offer a controlled comparison.  Changing population composition in Kenya and Tanzania Maasailand are explored, with associated patterns of resource access and control.  Qualitative and quantitative method mix, including Participatory Rapid Appraisal, participant observation, semi-structured interviews, oral histories, and a single-round household survey (Tanzania: n=90; Kenya: n=157 households).  Two sets of results are presented: a description of the nature and scale of in-migration; and, resource access is outlined with respect to ethnicity and migration status.  Comparative data presented for both Kenya and Tanzania, and results placed in the context of other work.	Ernestina	E. Coast	Katherine	 Homewood	Mick	 Thompson
2004	1	Internal Migration in Developing Countries I	Why Does Migration Decrease Fertility? A Multicountry Analysis	Jensen and Ahlburg (2003) found little support for post-migration adoption of fertility norms, and strong evidence of the importance of increased opportunity costs of childbearing in accounting for postmigratory fertility declines in the Philippines.  In the present paper, we examine migrants in a broader set of countries, and find that the fertility of migrants to urban areas typically is not significantly lower than the fertility displayed by those who migrate between equally urbanized areas.  Postmigratory employment is associated with lower subsequent fertility in Latin America, regardless of whether the destination is more urban than the migrant's place of origin, although the relationship is statistically significant only in the larger samples.  In our Middle Eastern data, the level of female employment is low and postmigratory employment does not affect subsequent fertility, suggesting the importance of the status of women in the causal mechanism we posit.	Eric	R. Jensen	Dennis	A. Ahlburg	Sarah	M. Gale
2004	1	Internal Migration in Developing Countries I	Chain Migration and Residential Segregation in São Paulo	The powerful process of internal migration has guaranteed the constant transformation of Brazil's urban landscapes. Unfortunately, there is little empirical research examining the sociospatial impacts of internal migrants within cities.  While detailed ethnographies describe the ways in which internal migrants from particular sending areas are funneled to certain city neighborhoods, no broad-scale urban analysis exists.  This paper bridges theoretical and empirical gaps in the literature and provides the first spatial examination of internal migration settlement patterns using detailed sample data released from the 2000 Brazilian Census.  Utilizing GIS and spatial segregation indices, the paper focuses on the geography of internal migration to and settlement within Sao Paolo.  Specifically, the research objectives are to:(1) Describe the patterns of in-migration for various sending communities; (2) Document and map the newcomers' patterns of settlement; and (3) Determine to what extent social networks prompt particular migrants to spatially concentrate in certain neighborhoods within the city.	Emily	 Skop	Ernesto	F. Amaral	Joseph	E. Potter	Paul	A. Peters	Wilson	 Fusco
2004	2	Migration and HIV	Migration and HIV: Use of Commercial Sex Workers among Latino Migrants in Durham, NC	This analysis explores use of commercial sex workers (CSW) among foreign-born Latinos in a rapidly growing immigrant receiving city and discusses implications for the spread of HIV in the U.S. and internationally. Using data from an ethnosexual survey of 442 Latino immigrants in Durham, NC, we describe prevalence and frequency of CSW use.  We then estimate logistic and negative binomial regression models to assess the social and demographic predictors of CSW use, and describe patterns of reported condom.  Over 28 percent of respondents report using the services of a CSW during the previous year, with rates as high as 46 percent among single men and nearly 40 percent among married men living apart from their wives.  While relatively few socio-demographic factors predict the likelihood of CSW use, frequency of use is sensitive to immigrants' family, migration, and socioeconomic characteristics. Reported rates of condom use are high, but fall as familiarity with CSWs increase.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2004	2	Migration and HIV	The Reproductive Health Consequences of Rural-Urban Migration among Adolescents in Nigeria	This paper examines the reproductive health consequences for Nigerian adolescents who have migrated to the city. The paper documents high rates of STDs and abortion, suggesting risk of HIV/AIDS. Sexuality has become an important arena in which young migrants negotiate the urban cultural landscape. Findings indicate that rural-urban migration may pose particular hazards for adolescent reproductive health, as young people struggle with issues of individual identity and economic survival. But urban settings also provide possible health benefits to adolescents and these are examined. Data include a random sample survey of over 400 young migrants in a southeastern Nigerian city, in-depth life history interviews with a smaller sub-sample, and extensive participant observation. Analysis combines statistical and ethnographic approaches, and the paper concludes by trying to explain the incongruity between young migrants' high levels of knowledge about HIV/AIDS and contraception and the low levels of consistent condom use.	Igwe	 Aja-Nwachuku
2004	2	Migration and HIV	Does Migration Improve Women's Health and Knowledge of HIV/AIDS	The present paper explores the effect of patterns of migration and duration of migration upon health and morbidity condition of women and knowledge and awareness of AIDS by analysing the data from India's National Family Health Survey, 1998-99. Women migrating towards rural area are more underweight than migrating towards urban area whereas reverse for obesity. However, women migrating from rural to rural area were more anaemic than rural to urban. Significant differences were found for morbidity conditions like Asthma, Tuberculosis, Jaundice, Malaria and some reproductive health problems according to streams of migration. Knowledge of AIDS also significantly differs according to the stream and duration of migration. Thus study finds out that stream of migration and duration of migration plays a key role in morbidity and health status of women.  Key words: migration, pattern, duration, health, morbidity, underweight, obesity, anaemia, asthma, tuberculosis, jaundice, malaria, reproductive health, HIV/AIDS	Praween	Kumar  Agrawal	Sutapa	 Maiti
2004	2	Migration and HIV	Stimulating Research on HIV/AIDS, Migration and Urbanisation, and Poverty and Inequality: Experiences from Three Small Grant Programmes in the SADC Region	Generous grants from the Andrew W Mellon Foundation enabled three 'Nodes' on Migration and Urbanisation, HIV/AIDS, and Poverty and Inequality to invest in capacity building by funding projects with potential for both good quality research and strengthening capacity. This paper argues that in Southern Africa, insufficient research has been conducted on the inter-section between the three research areas in the spread of epidemics such as HIVAIDS. It reflects on the process of establishing the small grant programmes in three areas, and shares some important experiences on challenges to local and regional research capacity building. Poverty, HIV/AIDS, and Migration and Urbanization are intimately related. Indeed poverty provides the context within which both population movements and the continuing spread of the AIDS epidemic in Africa is driven. The paper illustrates this using data from the Kayelitsha/Mitchell's Plain Survey 2000 (KMPS 2000)and HIV/AIDS surveillance data from the City of Cape Town's Health Department.	David	G. Ndegwa	Stephen	 Tollman	Deborah	 Posel	Eleanor	 Preston-Whyte	Dudley	 Horner
2004	3	Couples and Reproductive Health	Assessing the Factors That Contribute to HIV/STD Transmission in Marriage in Urban Slum Communities in India	Despite the overwhelming evidence of the marital unit as a significant locus for transmission of HIV/STD for women throughout the world, there has been little effort to explore the factors in marital relationships that are associated with transmission or prevention. Data for this paper was collected through a structured survey and STD testing of both wife and husband for 210 couples and in-depth interviews with 62 women and 52 men, conducted in association with a five-year NIMH study of men's sexual health in three slum communities of Mumbai. Preliminary data show that a subset of marital relationships in these communities carry significant risk for women, as men conduct extramarital affairs, limit women's mobility, and practice forcible sex and domestic violence. Demographic, behavioral, attitudinal, and biological data will be presented on husbands, wives, and marital dyadic factors, which are associated with women's gynecological health and STD status.	Sumitra	 Sharma	Stephen	L. Schensul	Sreeparna	 Chattopadhyay	Bonnie	K. Nastasi	Garimella	 Rama Rao
2004	3	Couples and Reproductive Health	Partner Awareness Risk and Perceived HIV Susceptibility among Seronegative Heterosexual Couples	Perceived susceptibility or vulnerability is a central concept of many theoretical models of individual health behavior.  Unlike many other health risks, one's perceived susceptibility for HIV is due not only to one's own behavioral risk levels but also partner risk levels.  Consideration of partner risks, however, is usually done without full and accurate knowledge.  The disparity between actual and perceived partner risks constitutes what we call partner awareness risk (PAR).  Using data from a pretest phase of a randomized trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of an HIV/STD risk reduction intervention for at-risk heterosexual couples (N=520), we investigate how PAR levels are associated with perceived HIV susceptibility.  More specifically, we examine the extent to which PAR moderates the association of sociodemographic, behavioral risk, and relationship context factors with perceived HIV susceptibility, paying particular attention to how these relationships vary by gender.	Trent	W. Moore	David	F. Sly	Dianne	 Harrison
2004	3	Couples and Reproductive Health	Husband-Wife Disagreement in Rural Malawi: A Longitudinal Analysis	Several couple studies have found discordance between partners on objective as well as subjective matters. Explanations of couple disagreement generally consist of ex-post interpretations of quantitative data collected by cross-sectional surveys, such as the Demographic and Health Survey. In this paper, we adopt a different approach and we investigate husband-wife disagreement by using quantitative and qualitative couple data from a longitudinal survey in rural Malawi. We expand on previous analyses of couple data in two main respects. First, we exploit the longitudinal nature of the survey to verify whether couples that disagree in the first round are more likely to disagree in the second round. Second, we draw on qualitative data purposively collected during the second round of the survey to explore the reasons of couple discrepancies. We find that the quantitative and qualitative evidence is consistent with the interpretation that contextual influences on individual reporting are the most important factor in explaining husband-wife inconsistencies.	Simona	 Bignami	Susan	 Watkins
2004	3	Couples and Reproductive Health	Spouse Differential in Fertility and Contraceptive Intentions in Three Culturally Contrasting States of India	Fertility and contraceptive intentions are normally influenced by the bargaining strengths and preferences of those involved in decision-making. In the present paper, we investigate the fertility intentions of wives and husbands and the degree of concordance in demand for children, contraceptive practices and contraceptive intentions in three culturally contrasting states of Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Orissa in India. The data is from the Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) district level households survey in India.  In all the three states we have studied the joint agreement of wives and husbands in additional children desired weakens with increasing parity. The joint agreement is also strong among wives and husbands for couples with children of one sex only.  A large percentage of both wives and husbands are undecided about future intention of contraceptive use invariant of number of children ever born and sex composition of the living children.	Laishram	 Ladusingh	Faujdar	 Ram	Balram	 Paswan	Nizamuddin	 Khan
2004	3	Couples and Reproductive Health	Utilization of Reproductive Health Care Services in Uttar Pradesh, India: Multivariate Decomposition of Covariates	The policy statement on the Reproductive and Child Health programme articulated that couple should be able to have sexual relations free of fear of pregnancy and a safe motherhood. The present paper makes efforts to study the utilization of reproductive health services in economical and demographically backward state, Uttar Pradesh, of India. The decomposition techniques (Martin and Njogu, 1994) is used to study the changes in the odds ratios of reproductive health care (contraception, antenatal care, delivery and postnatal care) utilization during NFHS-I (1992-93) to NFHS-II (1998-99) in terms of compositional changes, changes in propensity of use and inter play of these. The outcome shows that recent increases in these health cares are because of increase in intensity of utilization of these services followed by compositional changes in NFHS-1 & NFHS-2 survey	Ravendra	K. Sharma
2004	4	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Adolescents Through the Lifecourse: Variation in Sexual Risk among Adolescent Men and Women in Rural South Africa	South Africa is experiencing one of the world's most severe HIV epidemics, with more than ten percent of youth aged 15-24 infected.  Important differences exist in sexual risk according to age, gender, rural-urban residence, and other contextual factors.  However, most studies view adolescents as a homogeneous group.  In rural KwaZulu/Natal province, qualitative and quantitative methodologies were used to examine factors associated with sexual risk outcomes, including sexual initiation, partnership characteristics, condom and contraceptive use among younger (ages 14-15) and older (ages 16-18) adolescent women and men.  Although men and women experienced a similar age at first sex, patterns of sexual activity differed.  For women, religious affiliation, schooling, community participation and age were associated with all outcomes.  For men, younger age at first sex was associated with heightened sexual risk; schooling and parental residence were independent predictors of condom use.  Qualitative findings demonstrated the importance of educational achievement and community norms.	Abigail	 Harrison
2004	4	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Teenage Romance and Sex: The Relationship Context of Sexual Activity	The majority of teenagers report having sex during their high school years and the literature in demography and other social sciences emphasizes the timing of first sexual experience and contraceptive use.  Remarkably little attention has been paid to the relationship context of sexual activity.  We initially investigate the norms surrounding dating and sexual activity and determine how these norms influence adolescent sexual behaviors.  We then examine relationship features of both romantic and nonromantic sexual relationships, and identify similarities and differences in these types of relationships.   We draw on data derived from the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study (TARS). These data are unique and include both survey data from 1316 7th, 9th, and 11th graders and in-depth interviews from 100 survey respondents.  This paper builds on prior work by using multi-method approach to examine the nature of adolescent sexual relationships.	Wendy	D. Manning	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2004	4	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Partnership and Sexual Histories of Adolescent Males: Myths and Realities	Adolescents are immersed in the process of developing their own identity and establishing interpersonal bonds beyond the family, including romantic and sexual relationships. This period of emotional and sexual maturation encompasses experimentation and learning, as well as exposure to potential reproductive health risks. Sporadic sexual relationships and frequent partner change are commonly assumed to be natural features of partnership dynamics during adolescence. However, little research has been done to confirm or explain these patterns. Our study analyzes, from a dynamic perspective, the partnership biographies of adolescent males in order to portray the prevailing patterns of dating, intimating and mating, e.g. types of relationships, their frequency, their duration, their exclusivity and their link to sexual behaviour and contraceptive decision-making. The paper uses data from a survey carried out in 2000 among 1,438 adolescent males aged 13-19 in several favelas of Recife, Brazil. The survey collected detailed partnership, sexual and contraceptive biographies.	Fatima	 Juarez	Teresa	 Castro
2004	4	Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Sexual Coercion among Young Women in Thailand: Results from WHO Multi-Country Study on Domestic Violence against Women	This study is part of the WHO Multi-Country study on Women's Health and Life Experiences participated by eight countries in Asia, Africa and South America.  This paper focuses on first sex experience of young women and sexual violence committed by their intimate partners. Methodology: A household survey of single and married women was conducted in the year 2000.  Information was obtained from 2,818 single and married women aged 15-49 years.  The response rate at the household was 95% and at the individual was 89%.  Results: We found that 4.4% of the women had their first sex by force and the prevalence of forced first sex was doubled among women age 15-24 years old.  Only 59% of women younger than 25 years old reported their first sex as wanted. Bivariate and multivariate analysis suggested association of first sex of young women with some of their and their partner's characteristics.	Wassana	 Im-em	Churnrurtai	 Kanchanachitra	Krittaya	 Archavanichakul
2004	5	Immigrant Adjustment and Adaptation: Comparative Experiences for Canada and the United States (Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society)	Suburban Residential Clustering of New Immigrant Groups: A Challenge to Spatial Assimilation?	Residential clustering of new immigrant groups in suburban areas has been drawing considerable attention in recent years.  It may directly challenge the spatial assimilation perspective which expects new immigrants to share their neighborhood with the general population once they move to suburban areas.  Based on 1996 Canadian census data, this study will explore racial and ethnic composition of the suburban and central-city neighborhoods where new immigrant groups are clustered.  In addition, this study will examine demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of other groups who share their neighborhoods with the new immigrant groups in suburban and central areas.  By documenting these backgrounds, we hope to evaluate the applicability of spatial assimilation perspective in this emerging phenomenon of residential clustering of new immigrant groups.	Eric	 Fong
2004	5	Immigrant Adjustment and Adaptation: Comparative Experiences for Canada and the United States (Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society)	The Formation of Immigrant Neighborhoods in the U.S. Metropolis		John	R. Logan
2004	5	Immigrant Adjustment and Adaptation: Comparative Experiences for Canada and the United States (Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society)	The Development of Canadian Immigration Policy	Canada has one of the world's highest pro-active immigration rates; its three largest cities (Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver) have very high proportions of foreign born, similar or higher than found in Los Angeles and Sydney, for example. This paper examines developments in Canadian immigration policy that promote large inflows. Particular attention is given to a comparative explanatory framework and to contrasts with policy developments in the United States and other major immigrant receiving nations. The framework gives particular attention to national immigration responses to global transformations in labor markets, international security, and culture.  Canada is placed comparatively as an intermediate player on the global political-economic stage.  Its immigration policies play an important role in national efforts to maintain and improve its international standing.	Alan	B. Simmons
2004	5	Immigrant Adjustment and Adaptation: Comparative Experiences for Canada and the United States (Sponsored Jointly by the Canadian Population Society)	The Development of U.S. Immigration Policy		Michael	S. Teitelbaum
2004	6	Greater Boston: Demographic Microcosm of the Nation?	Boston's Emerging Ethnic Quilt: A Geographic Perspective		James	P. Allen
2004	6	Greater Boston: Demographic Microcosm of the Nation?	Threads from the Past: An Historical Perspective		Stephan	 Thernstrom
2004	6	Greater Boston: Demographic Microcosm of the Nation?	The Public School Population: Boston's Future Creeps In on Tiny Feet		Valerie	 Edwards
2004	6	Greater Boston: Demographic Microcosm of the Nation?	The Range of Future Implications: A Political Science Perspective		Peter	N. Skerry
2004	7	Statistical Demography	Statistical Models for Complete and Incomplete Network Data	There are two statistical approaches to modeling the structural regularities in networks of relations within a population. One, motivated by the interest in modeling the detailed dependence among ties, is based on exponential random graph models and requires complete network data.  The other approach is motivated by the need to deal with the practical constraints of data collection, and is based on loglinear models that can be used with incomplete (local network) data.  We establish the link between these two modeling frameworks.  Both are based on the exponential family, but use alternate forms of conditioning.  In special cases the two probabilities are related via Bayes' rule and parameter values may be explicitly related.  Understanding these links sheds light on the relationship between local and complete network data, and the role that models can play in bridging the traditional gap between them.	Steven	M. Goodreau	Laura	M. Koehly	Martina	 Morris
2004	7	Statistical Demography	Grade of Membership Analysis: Newest Development with Application to National Long-Term Care Survey Data	Newest development in the theoretical foundation of the Grade of Membership (GoM) analysis performed by authors brings new insights into the value of GoM analysis, providing new ways to interpret estimates as well as new numerical methods to obtain estimates. In this presentation we expose most important results recently obtained by the authors and apply the new methodology to the National Long Term Care Survey (NLTCS) data. We analyse the results obtained by providing interpretation for the estimates and by investigating the errors arising from the limited size of the sample. This analysis shows that GoM model performs well in the case under consideration.	Mikhail	 Kovtun	Igor	 Akushevich	Kenneth	G. Manton	H.	Dennis  Tolley
2004	7	Statistical Demography	A Correlated Frailty Model with Long-Term Survivors for Estimating the Heritability of Breast Cancer	The aim of this study is to investigate the role of genetics and environment in the susceptibility towards breast cancer. In order to do this, we adopt an interdisciplinary approach, combining a correlated frailty model with models developed by quantitative genetics. These ones enable to decompose the estimated variability of frailty into its genetic and environmental components. The methodology is applied to breast cancer data from the Swedish Twin Registry, including information about all the female monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs born in Sweden between 1886 and 1967. Our estimate of heritability in the propensity to develop a breast cancer is obtained taking into account the possibility that a fraction of the population is not susceptible to experience the event. The inferential problem is solved in a Bayesian framework and the numerical work is carried out using MCMC techniques. Possible extensions, advantages and limitations of the proposed method are discussed.	Isabella	 Locatelli	Alessandro	 Rosina	Paul	 Lichtenstein	Anatoli	 Yashin
2004	7	Statistical Demography	Another Variation on the Lee-Carter Model	The Lee-Carter mortality model contains two equations.  One represents the age pattern of death rates using age-specific constants and a period-specific constant.  The other represents the sequence of period-specific constants as a random walk with drift.  Lee and Carter estimated the model using the singular value decomposition along with time-series methods; least-squares and ML estimators have also been proposed.  I reformulate Lee-Carter as a set of equations for year-to-year changes in log-rates, arranging the equations in the familiar seemingly-unrelated regressions setup.  I show that Lee-Carter imposes very strong restrictions: using rates for 19 age groups, the Lee-Carter approach (in first-difference form) requires estimating 21 parameters, although there are 209 empirical means, variances, and covariances with which to identify parameters.  I estimate the restricted and unrestricted versions of the model, along with models of intermediate complexity; test the identifying restrictions; and assess the projected values of life expectancy produced by each.	Douglas	A. Wolf
2004	8	Parental Employment and Child Outcomes	Jobs and Parenting 24-7: Work Schedules and Parenting of the Working Poor	Much of the extensive work-family literature, based on samples of middle-class families, misses the unique work-family issues of poor families.  We attempt to start filling this gap, focusing on the broad issue of work and family dynamics among the working poor, looking at one component of this dynamic--the relationship of a nonstandard work schedule (e.g., night or weekend work) to parenting behavior (specifically, time apart, family routines and parenting style) and to the subjective experience of parenting (parenting challenges, stress, and satisfaction).  Projected job growth in the low-wage sector, with its high incidence of nonstandard work, is expected to result in more nonstandard schedules for working-poor parents.  Based on analysis of one wave of data from the Three-City Study, we find that mothers in working poor families who work a nonstandard schedule give significantly more negative reports on the subjective experience of parenting but show no measurable differences on the objective measures of parenting.	Karen	 Bogen	Andrew	J. Cherlin
2004	8	Parental Employment and Child Outcomes	Nonstandard Work Schedules and Child Cognitive Outcomes	The first major aim of this paper is to examine whether the effects of maternal employment on children's cognitive outcomes differ by mothers' work schedules.  The second major aim of this paper is to examine whether or not the effects of maternal work schedules may differ in different contexts (e.g., low-income families or welfare families).  This paper, thus, builds on and extends prior research on the effects of early maternal employment by utilizing data on a large national sample of children in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child Supplement (NLSY79-CS).  The NLSY79-CS is well suited for this analysis because, in addition to collecting detailed information on family demographic background, it also contains information on various dimensions of maternal work schedules (e.g., working at evenings, nights, or rotating shifts) at every assessment point along with a rich set of information on early child care and home environment.	Wen-Jui	 Han
2004	8	Parental Employment and Child Outcomes	Jobs, Marriage, and Children: How His and Her Jobs Affect Child Well-Being	Although employment of both parents in married-couple families is now common in the U.S., men and women continue to face gender-differentiated work and family expectations.   This study focuses on similarities and differences in how mothers' and fathers' work conditions affect family and child outcomes.  Using the Child-Mother data set of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, I examine a synthetic cohort of 2,865 families with two employed parents and an early school-age child. I focus on work complexity, hourly earnings, and usual work hours, and hypothesize that each parent's greater work complexity and higher earnings will be associated with higher marital quality, better home environments, and better child-well-being, with father effects stronger.  Full-time work schedules are expected to be more positive than both very low hours and extensive overtime.  Consistent with gendered expectations regarding optimal work-family balancing,  however, mothers' extensive overtime, but fathers' less-than-full-time hours, will be especially problematic.	Elizabeth	 Menaghan
2004	8	Parental Employment and Child Outcomes	The Effects of Center-Based Care on the Well-Being of Low-Income Children: An Instrumental Variables Analysis Using Experimental Data from Welfare and Employment Programs	In this paper, we take advantage of a set of experiments testing different welfare and employment policies to address the role of child care as an influence on children's academic achievement and social behavior as their parents move to increased employment.   We address two related questions: a) Does use of center-based care affect children's well-being; and b) Do welfare and employment policies for parents affect children's well-being in part through the type of child care parents use?  By leveraging treatment differences in welfare, employment, and child care policies among low-income single parents with young children, we are able to use instrumental variable techniques to estimate the causal effects of child care on children's development.  We find that use of any center-based care during the child's preschool years has a positive effect on school achievement in the early grades of elementary school.  Effects hold up when controlling for income and employment.	Lisa	A. Gennetian	Danielle	 Crosby	Aletha	 Huston	Chantelle	 Dowsett
2004	9	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality I	Health Dynamics and the Evolution of Health Inequality over the Life Course: The Importance of Neighborhood and Family Background	We analyze health dynamics and the evolution of health inequality over the life course.  We use correlations collected from a nationally representative longitudinal sample of siblings and neighbors to estimate upper bounds on the causal effects of family and neighborhood background on health outcomes in early-to-mid life.  We find that sibling health correlations are large throughout at least the first 30-40 years of life, averaging 0.40 at ages 30-40.  While the childhood neighbor correlations are smaller, they are substantial throughout the first 30-40 years of life for males.  Our estimates suggest that disparities in neighborhood background account for roughly ¼ of the variation in health status among males in mid life, and contribute significantly to current racial health disparities.  We attempt to explain the life-cycle pattern of sibling and neighbor correlations and assess the relative roles of neighborhood and family background on the health trajectory over the life course.	Rucker	C. Johnson	Bob	 Schoeni
2004	9	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality I	Community Subcultural Orientation and Mortality following Life-Threatening Diseases in Older Life	This paper reports the results from a multilevel study on the prospective effects of community subcultural orientation on mortality following onset of thirteen life-threatening diseases in later life. The study also examined the inter-relationship among community economic, physical, social, and subcultural effects on the survival chances of elderly patients. Three data sources were used to construct the working sample in this study: the 1990 Census, the 1994-95 PHDCN-CS, and the COSI data. 51 ZIP code areas and 12,672 elderly patients were studied.  We find that a measure of anomie at the community level significantly predicts higher rates of mortality for older patients with serious diseases over and above personal characteristics (OR=1.26). The data also show that subcultural orientation, in addition to social and structural contexts, is important to health in its own right. Moreover, beliefs and attitudes as measured by anomie can partially explain the link between other community factors and health, and vice versa.	Ming	 Wen	Nicholas	 Christakis
2004	9	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality I	Child Mortality in India: Exploring the Community-Level Effect of Education	When assessing health benefits of increased education in developing countries, many researchers have been concerned about the omission of important determinants of education from the models. This study illustrates that one should also be concerned about the limitations of the individual-level perspective. According to a model based on NFHS II data, the average education among women (but not men) in the census enumeration area has a strong impact on child mortality, net of the mother's own education. The relatively low child mortality associated with women's autonomy explains some of this community education effect. In addition, it operates partly through health knowledge, reproductive behaviour and more proximate determinants of mortality, such as the use of maternity and other preventive health services, the child's nutrition, and the mother's care for a sick child.	Oystein	 Kravdal
2004	9	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality I	The Interaction of Community Factors and Individual Characteristics on Child Height in China	This objective of this paper is to investigate how individual characteristics (education, wealth and occupation) modify the effects of community factors on child height. Using data from China, we specified a list of community variables including community infrastructure, access-type and efficiency-type health services, food market accessibility, and the strictness of the family planning policy. We applied both the sample-stratifying approach (running regression models on the stratified sample by the individual characteristics) and the interaction-term approach (adding interaction terms to regression models on the unstratified sample). The result of the sample-stratifying approach suggests that community infrastructure and access-type health services are substitutes while food market accessibility and efficiency-type health services are complements of the individual characteristics. The family planning policy is negatively associated with child height only for the less educated, poor and farmer households. The interaction-term approach only confirmed education being able to significantly modify the slope of the selected community factors.	Feng	 Zhao
2004	10	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences I	Forging Asian Identities through Marriage: Theory and Reality	Using data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census, this study examines trends in racial and ethnic endogamy for native-born members of three Asian groups in California. This study contributes to the developing literature on Asian racial and ethnic boundaries by examining two aspects of Asian-American marriage that are frequently ignored: first, the impact of foreign-born Asians on marriage choices of native-born co-ethnics, and second, the respective roles of intra-ethnic and inter-ethnic marriage for overall trends in Asian in-marriage. The findings call into question the claim that growth in Asian populations leads to the strengthening of ethnic and pan-ethnic boundaries for Asian Americans. Instead current marriage patterns reveal weakening barriers between Asians and Whites. In addition, regression analysis reveals the dangers of generalizations across and within Asian-American groups, with significant variation in intermarriage by ethnic group, age, gender, and education level.	Deenesh	S. Sohoni
2004	10	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences I	Premarital Pregnancy and Spouse Pairing Patterns in Japan: Assessing How Novel Family Behaviors Fit into the Family Formation Process	We examine trends in age and educational intermarriage in an attempt to interpret how the rapid increase in premarital pregnancy fits in to the family formation process in Japan.  Using data on over 30,000 marriages between 1947 and 1997, we estimate logistic regression models of spouse pairing.  We first estimate the average 'effect' of premarital pregnancy on patterns of age and educational pairing.  We then estimate cohort-interactive models to examine change in the relationship between premarital pregnancy and spouse pairing.  Results show a clear increase in the likelihood of 'less desirable' pairings in marriages preceded by pregnancy.  This change was particularly dramatic in the 1990s and most pronounced among relatively early marriages and women with higher levels of education.  Premarital pregnancy does not appear to be an increasingly conventional path to family formation.  Rather, it appears that the family formation process in Japan is becoming increasingly heterogeneous.	Jim	 Raymo	Miho	 Iwasawa
2004	10	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences I	Integration and Out-Partnering: Attitudes and Behavior of Young Adults in Sweden	The extent of inter-ethnic partnering shapes the distinctiveness of ethnic communities and has been viewed as the quintessential indicator of assimilation, just as intra-ethnic partnering has been considered an important basis of ethnic group continuity.  We use 1999 and 2003 survey data on native-born young adults in Sweden of Swedish, Polish and Turkish origins to investigate their ethnic out-partnering attitudes and behavior.  We consider the impact of education, the structure of their families when they were growing up, a composite attitudinal measure of the intensity of ethnic identity, and the inter-ethnic partnering of their parents.  Our overall hypothesis is: The more personal the contacts between young adults of ethnic communities and those of Swedish origins, the higher the probability of inter-ethnic partnering and the more open and less restrictive inter-partnering attitudes.  We examine patterns for both men and women and whether partnering is through marriage or through cohabitation.	Calvin	 Goldscheider	Eva	 Bernhardt
2004	11	Racial Definitions, Racial Identity, and Racial Reporting	Defining Race and Defining Races: Culture, Biology and Group Difference	A striking feature of American demography today is the prevalence of racial categorization combined with the scarcity of clear definitions of what race is or how racial membership can accurately be ascertained.  Yet demographers should be attentive to assumptions concerning the nature of racial difference and their evolution, as the history of American racial classification practices offers ample evidence of the ways in which changing conceptualizations of race have shaped official and academic attempts to measure racial affiliation.  This paper draws on interview data with over 90 social and biological scientists as well as undergraduate students in these fields to trace contemporary academic and lay definitions of race, and to outline the potential impact of current race thinking on future racial classification practices.	Ann	 Morning
2004	11	Racial Definitions, Racial Identity, and Racial Reporting	Separate and Unequal: Observed and Self-Reported Race in the General Social Survey	Using unique national data from a recent experimental sub-sample of the General Social Survey (GSS) that includes multiple measures of race, I examine observed and self-reported racial classifications for patterns of inconsistency. Much as Telles concludes with similar Brazilian data (Telles 2002; Telles and Lim 1998), this study indicates that the two types of classification can yield different results because they describe demographically different groups of people. In particular, I find differences in educational attainment, age, and parents' country of origin help explain inconsistencies between the two types of racial classification in the GSS sample. These findings have implications for improved methodology in social science research that relies on racial classification.	Aliya	 Saperstein
2004	11	Racial Definitions, Racial Identity, and Racial Reporting	Observing Racial Hierarchies in the Response Variability of Multiracial Persons	In this paper, we analyze data from the 2002 census Quality Survey.  Preliminary results show a high degree of stability in the responses of Black and White persons, and for persons who report only one race.  However, a high level of response variability has been documented for persons who identify themselves with more than one race.  We estimate baseline models of independence and quasi-independence in the association of racial identification over time. We attempt to model variability in the responses of multiracial persons by fitting log-linear models that parameterize identity shifts consistent with known hypotheses about racial hierarchies in the United States.  For example, given the principle of hypodescent for determining membership in the African-American population, we predict the persons who identify themselves as African-American and White at one point in time, would be more likely to identify themselves as Black rather than White at some later point in time.	Victor	 Thompson	Matthew	 Snipp
2004	11	Racial Definitions, Racial Identity, and Racial Reporting	Identifying Race and Ethnicity in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth	Respondents in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth were asked to self-report their race and ethnicity in 1979, and again in 2002.  In addition, each respondent's race and ethnicity is classified on the basis of interviewer observations made at the outset of the survey.  In this study, we assess the degree of inconsistency in these alternative racial/ethnic classifications.  First, we determine how often an individual's racial/ethnic classification changes over time or with the identity of the reporter, and whether these changes are more common among particular racial/ethnic groups.  Second, we ask whether individuals with inconsistent classifications differ from other sample members in terms of family background, geographic location, education, and other characteristics.  Third, we learn whether detailed classification schemes that account for multi-racial or changing racial/ethnic identities outperform simpler schemes in explaining the variation in such outcomes as schooling attainment, weeks worked, labor market earnings, and age at first marriage.	Audrey	 Light	Alita	 Nandi
2004	12	Parental Leave and Child Outcomes: A Comparative Perspective	Parental Leave Policies, Early Maternal Employment, and Child Outcomes in the U.S.	This paper explores links between parental leave policies, the length of time mothers remain at home after giving birth, and cognitive, behavioural, and health related outcomes for children.  We use state leave laws and unionization rates as instruments to estimate the effect of (instrumented) early maternal employment on a series of child outcomes in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Health related outcomes include whether the child received preventive well-baby care and the frequency of that well-baby care in the first year of life, whether the child was breast-fed and the duration of breast-feeding in the first year of life, and whether the child was fully immunized by age 18 months.  We also examine the effects of (instrumented) early maternal employment on child cognitive and behavioural outcomes assessed at age 3 or 4. Preliminary results suggest that the shortfall in parental leave coverage in the U.S. may affect child well-being.	Lawrence	M. Berger	Jennifer	 Hill
2004	12	Parental Leave and Child Outcomes: A Comparative Perspective	The Effects of a Mother's Return to Work Decision on Child Development in the U.K.	This paper uses data from the U.K. ALSPAC cohort to explore the effects of early maternal employment on  child cognitive and behavioural outcomes. We find that it is only full time maternal employment begun in the 18 months after childbirth has any negative effects on later child outcomes. Even here the magnitude of the effect is small. We explore whether the results are biased by unobserved heterogeneity and conduct sub-group analyses to investigate whether certain groups may be more vulnerable to the effects of early full time maternal employment than others. We then explore the mechanisms linking maternal employment to children's development. The mechanisms examined relate to maternal and paternal parenting behaviours, breastfeeding, maternal tiredness and stress, household income and the use of non maternal childcare. We find that a number of these factors operate to minimise the effect of mothers' labour market participation on their children.	Paul	 Gregg	Elizabeth	 Washbrook	Carol	 Propper	Simon	 Burgess
2004	12	Parental Leave and Child Outcomes: A Comparative Perspective	The Effects of Early Maternal Employment on Children's Cognitive Outcomes: The Canadian Experience	Using data from the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth, this paper examined the effects of  maternal employment on the PPVT-R scores of children who were one year or less in 1994-95 and became 4 to 5 year olds in 1998-99. Our results indicate that the scores for children whose mothers returned to work in six months of the child's birth were not significantly different from children whose mothers never worked or returned to work after a year. This happened regardless of mothers' social and economic backgrounds. However, we also found that children of highly educated mothers, particularly in the low-income group, who returned to work in 7 to 12 months after the child's birth, were most adversely affected. Patterns of results were similar for children in the high-income group but the magnitude of the adverse effects was not quite as severe as that in the low-income group.	Bali	 Ram	Teresa	 Abada	Feng	 Hou
2004	12	Parental Leave and Child Outcomes: A Comparative Perspective	Parental Leave and Child Health across OECD Countries	This paper examines the effects of parental leave extensions on child health outcomes in 18 OECD countries in 1969-2000. It builds on a comparative paper by Ruhm (2000) but adds data on the United States and Japan as well as more recent data on the 18 countries. Additionally, the paper separately examines job-protected paid leave and other parental leave, which includes unpaid leave and non job-protected leave. The findings indicate that other leave has little effect on child health outcomes, while job-protected paid leave has strong effects. Like Ruhm (2000), the study decomposes infant mortality into four components and finds that parental leave has the strongest effects on post-neonatal mortality. This study also explores the effects of related social policies, such as family cash benefits, family allowances, and family services, and finds that family services and expenditure on maternity and parental leave have significant effects on reducing post-neonatal mortality.	Sakiko	 Tanaka
2004	13	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling	Explaining Race and Ethnic Disparities in Educational Ambitions	The most widely cited interpretation for differences in educational ambitions across race and ethnic communities  is that children of the majority population are advantaged because of higher levels of parental education, family income, and other socioeconomic resources. An alternative interpretation stresses cultural factors, broadly defined. The lower educational ambitions of some minority students may result from lower expectations (or encouragement) of parents, peers, and teachers. Other related dimensions of the cultural interpretation include family socialization (parenting styles) and the behaviors and outlooks of students, including absenteeism, completion of homework, and self-images. We examine these hypotheses, and their overlap in a comprehensive model of educational ambitions. Educational ambitions are measured along a continuum from fairly abstract educational aspirations to concrete plans for college right after high school. The data, based on a sample of almost 2,350 high school seniors in a metropolitan school district in the Pacific Northwest, reveal patterns of minority over-achievement as well as under-achievement.	Charles	 Hirschman	Jennifer	C. Lee	Amon	 Emeka
2004	13	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling	Race and Class Intersection in the Access to College Destinations: The Influence of Race- and Need-Sensitive Policies	While race and class barriers throughout the educational pipeline are well depicted in the stratification literature, very little attention has been paid to the intersection between them. This paper not only provides evidence on the intersection of class and race in college attendance patterns, it also considers the societal and organizational mechanisms that produce this conditional relationship by shaping the access of rich and poor blacks, Hispanics, Asians, and whites to selective and nonselective institutions. By means of the NELS:88 survey, the college destinations of all high school graduates in 1992 are arrayed by institutional type and selectivity: 2-year open-door; 4-year non-competitive; 4-year competitive and 4-year very competitive institutions, as well as non-enrollment.  The results show that although, Hispanics and blacks on one hand, and poor youth on the other, were less likely to enroll in 4-year very competitive colleges, economically disadvantaged Hispanics, blacks, as well as Asians, were more likely than their white counterparts to enroll in these colleges, whereas the situation is reverse among affluent students. The concluding section considers the role played by affirmative action (race-sensitive) and financial aid (need-sensitive) in shaping the observed race-class intersectionality, creating unique educational opportunities for students hailing from different race-class groups.	Sigal	 Alon
2004	13	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling	College Choice and the Texas Top 10% Law: How Constrained Are the Options?	This paper addresses whether and how the Texas top 10% law influences college choice among a representative sample of Texas public high school seniors in 2002. We hypothesize that race and ethnic differences in students' knowledge of their rank-based eligibility for automatic admission will dampen the effectiveness of the law in attracting blacks and Hispanics to selective institutions. Tabulations of the baseline survey indicate that blacks and Hispanics were as likely as comparable whites to apply to a 4-year college, but the follow-up interviews reveal that both groups were significantly less likely to enroll in either a 2- or 4-year institution one year later. The full manuscript will ascertain whether these race and ethnic differences differ according to class rank and students' knowledge of the law, and will extend the analyses to consider differences in the selectivity of institutions, and whether located in or out of state.	Marta	 Tienda	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu	Kalena	E. Cortes
2004	13	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling	The Transition to College: Racial/Ethnic Differences in Adjustment and Outcomes	The transition to college is recognized by many researchers as crucial to students' eventual success in college.  Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Freshmen, I examine the transition to college for a cohort of black, Hispanic, Asian, and white students from 28 elite colleges and universities in terms of the ties students form to others on campus.  I analyze how these ties are related to early college outcomes (grades, integration, and dropping out) for students from different racial/ethnic groups.  My findings generally support the idea that interactions in the academic and social realms lead to integration in these respective realms.   However, there are differences across racial/ethnic groups in the extent of ties formed and the impact these ties have on outcomes.   In particular, black and Hispanic students who have greater social involvement are much less likely to leave college and tend to get better grades.	Mary	J. Fischer
2004	14	Child Work and Schooling I	Trade-Offs among Siblings: Children's Work and Schooling Outcomes in Indonesia	Evidence from developing countries suggests that families allocate resources across children unequally, concentrating investments in health and education on a few.  This paper examines the effect of sibling composition and household level demographic characteristics on how children's time is allocated across three major activities--schooling, market labor (both paid work performed outside the home and unpaid labor supplied to home production), and non-market labor such as housework and childcare.  Using detailed time allocation data collected from Central Java, a multilevel analysis is employed.  The preliminary results show that the age-sex composition of siblings is the main explanatory variable while parental characteristics and household wealth play a minor role, girls perform more non-market labor and boys spend more time performing market labor, and older siblings bear the burden of increased workload for their younger siblings.	Amy	 Hsin
2004	14	Child Work and Schooling I	The Impact of School Quality and School Incentive Programs on Children's Schooling and Work in Brazil	During the 1990s in Brazil, school enrollment increased dramatically, while the proportion of children working fell.  These trends in children's activities might be explained by increases in household income, changes in school quality such as increases in teachers' education levels, and implementation of programs that pay poor children to attend school.  We use multilevel analysis to examine the impact of school quality and changes in school policy on child enrollment rates, child labor, and children's progress through the school system.  Data from large annual household surveys, the Pesquisa Nacional Amostra por Domicilios covering the 1992 to 2001 period are combined with yearly data from the Ministry of Education on class size, teacher characteristics, and repetition rates, which are aggregated by urban and rural areas within Brazil's 27 states.  Some policies were adopted at different times in different states, allowing us to use a differences-in-differences approach to estimate their impacts.	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning	Ana	L. Kassouf	Ana	 Fava	Alexandre	 Nunes
2004	14	Child Work and Schooling I	Education and Child Labor: Experimental Evidence from a Nicaraguan Conditional Cash Transfer Program	The Red de Protección Social (RPS) is a conditional cash program, modeled after PROGRESA, to reduce both current and future poverty via cash transfers to households living in extreme poverty in rural Nicaragua. This chapter examines the education- and child labor-related effects of the program, presenting results from a randomized community-based trial. The evidence demonstrates that RPS had a significant and substantial effect on schooling matriculation and enrollment during its first year of operation. Moreover, it led to a substantial reduction in child labor for the school age population.	John	A. Maluccio
2004	14	Child Work and Schooling I	Macro Shocks and Schooling Decisions: The Case of Argentina	This paper asks how households deal with severe, unexpected, nationwide shocks. In particular, I look at whether youths drop out of school in order to work. The data come from the Argentine Permanent Household Surveys for 1996 to 2002, and the shock is the economic crisis, which began at the end of 1998. I find that real household income fell by 50% and that the shock also led to a decline in schooling of 4.2 to 11% for 12 to 17 year olds. But this  decline in schooling attendance was not evenly distributed across groups. Children with highly educated heads actually increased their probability of attendance by 4.2 to 17.4%, while youths with less educated heads reduced their probability of attendance by 3.1 to 18.4%. These results may exacerbate income inequality in Argentina in the longer-term, if the youths do not return to school.	Graciana	 Rucci
2004	15	Land Use, Land Cover Change, and Demographic Processes	Village Settlement and Land Cover Change in a Frontier Region: A 50 Year Retrospective	The proposed paper uses aerial photographs and digital image mosaics for 1954, 1967-1968-1969, 1982-1983-1984, and 1994, data collected in a village survey, and spatially referenced data about topography, hydrography, roads, and villages to explore the dynamic relationship between village settlement and land use/land cover change over the past fifty years in Nang Rong, a district in Northeast Thailand.  It considers topography, proximity to water sources, proximity to the main highway (built in the late 1960s), and proximity to other villages as factors affecting the establishment and siting of villages.  It uses aerial photographs  to present a decadal perspective on the consequences of village settlement for land use/land cover change and its spatial structure.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Stephen	J. Walsh	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Pramote	 Prasartkul
2004	15	Land Use, Land Cover Change, and Demographic Processes	Demographic Trajectories, Migration and Environmental Impacts -- Palawan Province, the Philippines as a Micro-Demographic Laboratory	A central interest in both demographic and environmental research is the trajectory of population growth and the impacts of growth on land use and settlement patterns.  The challenge to fully understanding these interrelated processes is our inability to follow this process from initiation to saturation.  This is because demography emerged due to concerns over contemporaneous population growth and, almost by definition; the geographical areas of interest were well advanced towards population saturation and the depletion of environmental resources.  This paper examines the case of Palawan Province in the Philippines.  Palawan provides a unique opportunity to examine these processes as it was virtually uninhabited as of the 1940's.  Since that time the province has seen increases that approximate exponential growth, and extensive alteration of the coastal and inland environment.  This paper presents results from ongoing research into the impacts of population growth on environmental use in Palawan from the 1940's on.	John	 Poggie	Michael	 Rice
2004	15	Land Use, Land Cover Change, and Demographic Processes	Demographic and Landscape Dynamics in Wolong Nature Reserve (China) for Giant Pandas	Wolong Nature Reserve is a flagship protected area in southwestern China designated to conserve the endangered giant pandas. Since its establishment in 1975, there have been dramatic changes in human population size, population structure, birth, death, and spatial distribution. In the same time, land use and land cover have also experienced significant modifications. High-quality habitat for the panda was lost faster after the reserve was created, and the fragmentation of high-quality habitat became far more severe. To reverse this trend, the Chinese government has been implementing three new policies during the past couple of years. In this talk, the authors will describe major demographic and landscape changes, analyze the interrelationships between demographic and landscape dynamics, illustrate demographic responses to government policies, and discuss the complex interactions among people, policies, and panda habitat.	Jianguo	(Jack)  Liu	Li	 An	Scott	 Bearer	Xiaodong	 Chen	Guangming	 He	Clinton	 Jenkins	Marc	 Linderman	Zhiyun	 Ouyang	Hemin	 Zhang
2004	15	Land Use, Land Cover Change, and Demographic Processes	Controlling Development -- the On-and-Off Connection between Demographic Change and Land Use/Cover Change in Israel: 1948-2002	This study analyzes the linkages between demographic change and land use/cover change (LUCC) in Israel, 1948 to 2002.  We quantified rates of development in four 150 km2 regions using 1:50,000 survey maps as a basis for a Geographic Information System analysis.  While there is a strong correlation between population growth and LUCC at the national level, the relationship is mitigated by government development policy, particularly when analyzed at the regional and local scale.  Land use, which has been constrained by government policy, reflects government ideology and development priorities.  Two exceptions to this trend are:  1) An emerging trend since the 1980s of preference for suburban living, which has encouraged low-density development despite government guidelines for development intensification, and; 2) A large pulse of immigration in the 1990s which precipitated an unforeseen pulse of land development.  We conclude with the implications of present trends on potential for preservation of open spaces.	Daniel	E. Orenstein	Steven	P. Hamburg
2004	16	Contraception	The Impact of a Behavior Change Communication Program on Contraceptive Ideation and Use in Burkina Faso: An Application of the Propensity Score Method	Burkina Faso is characterized by high fertility and low contraceptive usage. Against this background, the Johns Hopkins University Center for Communications Programs with funding from the USAID worked with the Burkina Ministry of Health to design and implement a behavior change communication campaign between 1998 and 2001. The campaign includes a quality promotion campaign and methods promotion jingles. Using propensity score matching technique this paper analyzes data from a 2001 survey to assess the effects of the campaign. The results show that more than three-quarters of the respondents reported exposure to at least one campaign material. Moreover, the campaign has significant graduated effects on contraceptive ideation and use. High campaign exposure is associated with an increase of 19.2 percentage points over no exposure while zero exposure is associated with 6.5 percentage point increase. The campaign is also associated with increased knowledge about contraceptives and more favorable attitudes towards family planning.	Stella	 Babalola
2004	16	Contraception	Negotiating Contraception: Case Studies in Rural Mexican Villages	I use experiences in four Mexican villages in rural Michoacán, Mexico (135 in-depth interviews of providers and village women) to examine the roles (dynamic and passive) of village women and medical personnel in contraceptive choice. Though government normative guidelines stress informed choice and quality of care, public medical personnel seem to prefer recommending certain method types to others. They find themselves in a difficult role: caught between the woman's right to choose, institutional goals, and limited resources to dispense. Among women: history of deliveries (public/private) is related to contraceptive knowledge, decisions to use, and choice of specific methods. Contraceptive choice (and continuance) is a negotiation. Factors such as the influence of medical authority, past experience with providers, side effects, contraceptive failure, and spousal separation due to migration, play important parts. Women's relationship with medical authority, and the attitude of key players with authority also play a role.	Sonia	A. Castañeda
2004	16	Contraception	Understanding Minority Fertility: Contraceptive Use among First Generation Mexican Immigrant Couples in Houston, Texas, and San Diego, California	While it is widely known that the Mexican origin population in the United States has higher fertility than the U.S. population on average, few studies explore the proximate determinants behind this higher fertility.  Using Donato and Kanaiaupuni's Health and Migration Study, with detailed information on health and migration experiences of Mexican origin individuals living in Houston and San Diego, I investigate the factors underlying contraceptive use among first generation Mexican immigrants.  In particular, I study how socioeconomic and cultural characteristics of both male and female partners in a union are related to their use of contraception.  From preliminary results, I find some support for the relationship between cultural characteristics and contraceptive use, but little support for the relationship between socioeconomic characteristics and contraceptive use.  The models with the best fit employ both male and female partners' characteristics, suggesting the involvement of both men and women in contraceptive decision making.	Caroline	L. Faulkner
2004	16	Contraception	Emergency Contraception Provision in Hospital Emergency Rooms in the United States	To investigate women's access to hormonal emergency contraception (EC), we surveyed Catholic (n=597) and non-Catholic (n=615) hospital emergency rooms.  Trained female interviewers telephoned hospitals during weekend hours, when most clinics and physicians' offices are closed.  We found that 42% of non-Catholic hospital staff and 55% of staff in Catholic emergency rooms said they do not dispense EC, regardless of circumstance.  Twenty-three percent of Catholic hospital respondents report that they provide EC to victims of sexual assault compared to only 17% of non-Catholic hospital respondents. Among staff not dispensing EC, about half offered callers a valid referral, but most of them were dead ends.  Training emergency room staff about EC, requiring hospitals to provide it, encouraging advance prescriptions of EC and offering EC without a prescription could help increase access to this therapy for women.	Teresa	 Harrison
2004	17	Comparing the ACS with Census 2000:  Do the Results Match?	From City to Farm: The View from California		Linda	 Gage
2004	17	Comparing the ACS with Census 2000:  Do the Results Match?	Evidence from Oregon: ACS and the 2000 Census	Census 2010 could see the American Community Survey (ACS) replace the decennial census long-form (Census LF). This possibility represents a major change in that variables traditionally collected on a snapshot basis once every ten years would be collected on a rolling annual basis. Using Loss Function Analysis and other tools, this paper reports preliminary findings from a comparison of ACS and Census LF in Multnomah County, Oregon, one of several national test sites comparing ACS data collected at the time of Census 2000. Overall, we find ACS data collection quality to be as good or better than in Census LF 2000. We find notable differences for race and disability variables between ACS and Census LF.  Differences also are found within each of four major areas of interest: (1) demographic characteristics; (2) social characteristics; (3) economic characteristics; and (4) and housing characteristics), with housing characteristics showing the least similarity overall.	George	C. Hough	David	A. Swanson
2004	17	Comparing the ACS with Census 2000:  Do the Results Match?	ACS Tests in Wisconsin and Montana		Roger	B. Hammer	Paul	 Van Auken	Paul	R. Voss	Daniel	 Veroff
2004	17	Comparing the ACS with Census 2000:  Do the Results Match?	Replacing the Census Long Form with the American Community Survey: An Evaluation of ACS Estimates for Neighborhoods in the Bronx Test Site		Joseph	 Salvo	Peter	 Lobo	Timothy	 Calabrese
2004	18	Authors Meet Critics: "Creating a Life" and "The Price of Motherhood"	Creating a Life		Sylvia	Ann  Hewlett
2004	18	Authors Meet Critics: "Creating a Life" and "The Price of Motherhood"	The Price of Motherhood		Ann	 Crittenden
2004	19	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries I	Women, Doctors, and Cesareans: The Construction of Normal Birth as Risky and the Medicalization of Birth in Brazil	In this work we investigate the reasons for the high rates of cesareans in Brazil, especially in private hospitals. We interviewed 18 obstetricians and 60 women who had given birth in the year of 1998 (30 in a public hospital and 30 in private hospitals), to understand their perceptions and preferences regarding the process of birth. Our data suggest that as result of the process of medicalization of birth in Brazil there is a growing perception of normal births as always more risky than cesareans, seen as innocuous. This perception seems to make easier for doctors to indicate a cesarean and for women to accept it, especially in the private sector. Also, we discuss as the current Brazilian obstetric assistance model (in which obstetricians are the sole responsible for assisting women during pregnancy, labor and birth), seems to reinforce the establishment of a more interventionist, technology-based kind of obstetric practice.	Alessandra	S. Chacham
2004	19	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries I	Men's Sexual Health and Health Care Utilization in Slum Communities in Mumbai, India	This paper explores the nature and prevalence of men's STDs and culturally defined sexual dysfunctions known as gupt rog (secret illness in Hindi), as well as men's treatment seeking behaviors and the approaches allopaths and traditional healers utilize to address these problems. The research team merged qualitative and quantitative analyses of data collected among 2,716 respondents, including married men, allopaths and traditional healers in three slum communities of Mumbai, India. Preliminary results indicate that: Men avoid public health facilities, and take significantly less treatment-actions for STDs than for gupt rog. Allopaths tend to deny the consequences and cultural importance of gupt rog, and while traditional healers are lacking accurate knowledge of STDs, they nevertheless suggest treatment for sexually transmitted infections. Results suggest that it would be highly inappropriate for any entity seeking to address sexually transmitted diseases in India to ignore the gupt rog problems.	Abdelwahed	 Mekki-Berrada	Sharad	S. Narvekar	Ravi	K. Verma	Niranjan	 Saggurti
2004	19	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries I	Inconsistent Reporting of Female Genital Cutting Status among Adolescent Girls in a Longitudinal Intervention Study in Northern Ghana	The difficulty of measuring behavior with self-reported data is rarely discussed in the literature of female genital cutting (FGC) research.  This paper explores inconsistent reporting of circumcision status in longitudinal survey responses in the context of an intervention study to discourage the practice of FGC among adolescent girls in rural Ghana.  Survey findings are used to explore the relationship between interview and interviewer characteristics and respondent answers to the question, Are you circumcised?  In particular, inconsistent reporting in the form of reversal of a previous positive response, termed denial, is examined for associations with interview characteristics and with the background characteristics of individual respondents.  Bias in the reporting of circumcision status is explored in depth through analysis of a series of focus group discussions.	Reshma	 Naik	Elizabeth	F. Jackson	Patricia	 Akweongo
2004	19	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries I	Why Disparity in HIV/AIDS-Related Knowledge in Sub-Saharan Africa: Selectivity in Reporting or Receiving?	Using DHS data from a number of sub-Saharan African countries and employing multivariate analyses, this paper examines disparity in knowledge of two important HIV/AIDS-related issues--mother-to-child transmission and whether condoms offer protection against HIV infection. Modes of HIV transmission and risk factors associated with HIV infection have been identified two decades ago. Since then HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns have been disseminating these information. However, univariate analyses show remarkable differences in knowledge of these two issues. Given the centrality of these two factors in the fight against the epidemic, one would expect little difference in reported knowledge of both factors.  However, the glaring gap in knowledge of the two factors raises a number of questions: Why have respondents selectively retained/received one kind of knowledge over the other? Do women tend not to report accurately about use of condoms? Understanding the reasons for such disparities will help us in modifying AIDS education strategies.	Zewdu	 Woubalem	Alex	 Ezeh
2004	20	Families and Households in Developing Countries	Are African Families Becoming Overextended? A Historical Analysis of the Effects of Family Extension on Schooling Inequalities in Cameroon	Extended-family systems play an important role in buffering socioeconomic inequality in African societies, notably through fosterage of children across nuclear family units. However, there is concern that this support system may break down under the influence of globalization and recent economic crises. Previous scholarship to address this concern has focused on trends in rates of family extension/fosterage, but a full account of trends in the buffering influence of extended families requires simultaneous attention to trends in fosterage rates, the distribution of fosterage opportunities, and the ameliorative effects of fostering. This study uses retrospective fosterage and schooling histories of 2,257 children in Cameroon to examine trends in these three proximate determinants of the buffering influence of extended families. Findings suggest that while the ameliorative effects of fosterage have not changed over time, both the rates and the distribution of fosterage opportunities have changed in ways that raise concern for children at the bottom quintile of the resource distribution.	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	David	 Shapiro
2004	20	Families and Households in Developing Countries	Births, the Composition of Households, and Their Implications for Household Economy in Market Transition Societies: China and Vietnam Compared	Through comparative, longitudinal analyses of households located in China and Vietnam, as captured in three distinct household surveys, we demonstrate that the recent incidence of a birth and shifting household composition influence household-level economic activity.  We find that household economic activity, that is, whether a household operates a family business, engages in the wage sector, or diversifies across multiple sectors, varies over time and that the birth of a child increases the odds of both household entrepreneurship and diversification.  The gender and age composition of households is also important for shifting household economic activities.  In Chinese and Vietnamese households, greater numbers of adult males, more so than  females, increase the odds of all three market-based activities-entrepreneurship, wage employment and sectoral diversification.  Together, the pooled, comparative analyses suggest there are salient rural-urban differences in the household composition-household economy relationship.  These results inform the logic of fertility limitation policies in market transition settings.	Kim	 Korinek	Soumya	 Alva	Feinian	 Chen
2004	20	Families and Households in Developing Countries	Stages of the Demographic Transition from a Child's Perspective: Family Size, Cohort Size, and Schooling	The demographic transition generates a sequence of changes in family size and cohort size that may have important implications for resources available to children.  This paper provides a new characterization of stages of the demographic transition from a child's perspective.  In the first stage, falling infant and child mortality lead to increasing numbers of surviving children within families and to increases in the size of birth cohorts.  In the second stage, falling fertility overtakes falling mortality to produce declining family size, but cohort size continues to rise due to population momentum.  In the third stage, falling fertility overtakes population momentum to cause declines in the absolute size of birth cohorts along with continuing declines in family size.  These stages, and their interaction with schooling outcomes, are analyzed using Brazilian census data from 1960 to 2000, along with more recent census data from Kenya, Mexico, and Vietnam.	David	 Lam	Leticia	 Marteleto
2004	20	Families and Households in Developing Countries	Individual, Household and Family Responses to Terrorism: Evidence from Longitudinal Household Survey Data	The October 2002 bombing on Bali had a devastating effect on the economic security of the island's population.  Unique longitudinal household survey data that were specially collected for this study are used to measure the impact on the well-being of individuals, households and their families.  We contrast an array of indicators of well-being of respondents who were interviewed in February 2002, prior to the bombing, with indicators measured in early 2003, after the bombing.  In addition to changes in earnings and income, we examine changes in household spending and household structure, as well as changes in physical and psycho-social health.  Earnings collapsed by 20%--but families sought to smooth this effect.  We identify some of the coping mechanisms they adopted including changes in living arrangements and re-arrangements of the household budget.  Special attention is paid to how the family mitigates the effect of this large, unanticipated income shock.	Wayan	 Suriastini	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Bondan	 Sikoki	Duncan	 Thomas
2004	21	Risk and Protective Factors for Children and Youth	The Interaction of Birth Weight, Gestation, and Parental Investment in the Production of Cognitive Development	Low birthweight is correlated with a variety of poor health and cognitive outcomes at both younger and older ages.  In this paper, we estimate models of children's achievement scores as a function of birth weight using data from the NLSY Child sample.  Data on siblings permit us to control for family-level heterogeneity and test how the effect of birth weight on achievement scores varies with age and grade attainment.  We also pay careful attention to how parameters estimates vary across different measures of birthweight and gestational age.  Additionally, we investigate whether parental investment in the form of delayed kindergarten entrance compensates for the negative effect of low birthweight on subsequent achievement scores.	David	 Loughran	Ashlesha	 Datar	Rebecca	 Kilburn
2004	21	Risk and Protective Factors for Children and Youth	Low Birth Weight, Socioeconomic Status, and Childhood Outcomes: A Fixed-Effects Analysis	In this paper, we explore the relationships between birth weight and childhood behavior, health and cognitive abilities using a large (N=3428) nationally representative dataset.   The focus of the paper is the contrast among estimates of the effect of birth weight in bivariate models of childhood outcomes, multivariate models that control for observed socioeconomic differences, and models that control for unobserved family characteristics that may underlie both birth weight and subsequent outcomes.  There is a small, but statistically significant negative relationship between birth weight and various positive childhood outcomes in bivariate and multivariate models, especially among girls.  This effect disappears when unobserved  characteristics of families are controlled.	Laura	 Prichett
2004	21	Risk and Protective Factors for Children and Youth	Understanding the Effects of Neighborhoods on Children: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Measures of the Neighborhood Experience	Studies of the effects of neighborhoods on children are often cross-sectional, rendering them unable to account for the dynamic nature of social life, and obscuring important aspects of neighborhood processes and outcomes.  Studies that do consider residential mobility often examine the patterns of black and white children, leaving the neighborhood experiences of Latinos and Asians unclear.  Using residential histories from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey for black, white, Latino and Asian children, we compare the cross-sectional approach with an approach that considers the fact that children's overall neighborhood experiences, not just their situation at one point in time, determine their life chances.  Specifically, we ask two questions: 1) Do residential mobility and neighborhood change perpetuate inequality in exposure to disadvantage, or do they attenuate such inequality by reducing a child's cumulative exposure to poverty?  2) How do static vs. dynamic conceptions of neighborhood experience matter for children's outcomes?	Margot	 Jackson	Robert	D. Mare
2004	21	Risk and Protective Factors for Children and Youth	Turbulence during Childhood	Researchers have regularly found that turbulence is related to poorer development among children.  For example, repeated changes in child care arrangements, family structure, income, residence and schooling have all been linked to poorer outcomes for children.  This paper will examine measures of turbulence in children's lives through age 12 in schooling, residence, and parental marriage from Round 1 of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 cohort.  In addition, traumatic events, such as seeing a shooting, being bullied repeatedly, or experiencing a break-in, will be examined, along with social and demographic control variables, to assess the importance of turbulence over and above background factors and life stressors.  Implications for behavior problems and delinquency will be examined.  Analyses will assess whether turbulence matters, net of control variables, whether types of turbulence are cumulative or redundant, and whether some types of turbulence are more critical than others.	Kristin	 Moore	Sharon	 Vandivere	Akemi	 Kinukawa
2004	22	Family Investments	Parental Education and Child Learning: Investing in Goods and Time	Children of more educated parents have been shown to outperform their peers on standardized tests, an outcome often attributed to more educated parents investing more in their children's human capital accumulation.  However, neither the form of this investment nor the extent to which it explains the relationship between parental education and child learning is well understood.  Using unique data from China, this paper examines how parental education impacts the household's provision of time and goods used in children's learning and the extent to which these investments may explain the relationship between parental education and child learning.  I find that more educated parents allocate greater levels of both goods and time to their children's human capital accumulation.  In addition, controlling for investments in goods and time reduces the estimated effects of parental education on children's learning.	Phil	 Brown
2004	22	Family Investments	Consequences of Divorce and Remarriage on Intergenerational Transfers	In the second half of the past century, American families experienced several important demographic changes that are likely to redefine rights and obligations between parents and their children. Using four waves of the AHEAD study, I address three research questions in the paper. First, what are the consequences of parents' divorce on the trajectories of adult children's support of their parents over time? Second, does remarriage further decrease aging parents' propensity for receiving support from their children? Last, does having a stepchild from remarriage expand parents' support network in times of need? The results show that children of divorced mothers are just as likely as children of widows to assist their mothers with ADLs or IADLs. Fathers' remarriage is negatively associated with children's provision of support over time. Having a stepchild is unlikely to offset the negative impacts of divorce and remarriage on intergenerational transfers.	I-Fen	 Lin
2004	22	Family Investments	Do School Subsidies Promote Human Capital Investment among the Poor?	We investigate the hypothesis that conditioning transfers to poor families on school attendance leads to a reallocation of resources enhancing the human capital of the next generation, via the effect of the conditionality on the shadow price of human capital. We estimate the price effect of conditional transfers to mothers on intra-household allocations using data from a social program in Mexico, and show that price effects are large and significant. The estimates suggest that household resources beyond those directly subject to conditionality have been reallocated favorably to children's human capital investment.	Cesar	 Martinelli	Susan	 Parker
2004	22	Family Investments	A Single Father's Shopping Bag: Purchasing Decisions in Single Father Families	Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (1980-1998) this paper examines purchasing decisions in single father families.  Children growing up in single-father families, like those in single-mother families, are quite disadvantaged compared to married families, and often have worse outcomes compared to other family types.  This paper examines consumption differences that exist in father-headed families by estimating Engel Curves and expenditure elasticities, as well as comparison multivariate analysis.  Results suggest that single fathers spend more on food consumed away from home and alcohol and tobacco products; and less on publications and toys, as well as children's education.  Single fathers differ from single mothers by spending more on food away from home and alcohol and tobacco, and less on children's education.  Consumption patterns may suggest one way in which child well-being in households are affected, and may explain some of the child development differences for children residing with single fathers.	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2004	23	Determinants and Consequences of Income Inequality	Rising Household Income Inequality: The Importance of Sorting	Household income reflects the distribution of personal income and the composition of households.  Theoretical and empirical research suggests that changes in family structure and work behavior have contributed to rising household income inequality.  Demographic and labor market changes have also changed the relationship between personal and household income.  We develop a non-parametric measure of the impact of changes in household income relationships on the distribution of household income.  Using data from the March CPS (1968-2003), we find that were it not for changes in income sorting, household income inequality would have fallen over the last three decades.	Deborah	S. Reed
2004	23	Determinants and Consequences of Income Inequality	The Effects of Job Displacement on Career Outcomes by Worker Characteristics	Job displacement is affecting the security of long-term steady employment in America breeding an uneasy concern over the ability of workers to sustain a successful career characterized by upward mobility.  Using Wisconsin Longitudinal Study data, I estimate long-term effects of job displacement on a range of career outcomes using conditional difference-in-differences matching estimation separately by sex, educational attainment, broad occupational and industry classification.  Results indicate that in general, displaced workers have a striking level of non-employment, but that there are several interesting trends by occupation, education, and gender.  Matching results suggest that men's economic and benefits losses are worse than women's, but women's job authority losses are worse than men's.  Education reduces losses for women, but not for men, except for advanced degree holders.  Blue collar workers suffer the greatest economic and benefits losses, but upper white collar workers also suffer occupational status declines and job autonomy and authority losses.	Jennie	E. Brand
2004	23	Determinants and Consequences of Income Inequality	Income Distribution and Social Expenditure: Health, Education, and Cash	Data from several sources are used to examine the cross-national effects of inequality on social expenditures in the form of health care, education and cash. We find that the inequality between the middle class  and the poor (as measured by the 50/10 percentile ratio of market income) has a small, positive impact on spending. But we also find that inequality between the top end of the distribution and middle class (measured by the 90/50 percentile ratio) has a large and negative impact on social spending. Measures of demographic composition, immigrants and trust are shown to also have a significant impact on spending. Our results  suggest that as the rich become more distant from the middle class, they opt out of public programs. This implies that rising inequality will erode support for social institutions and social support that provides insurance against income loss, upward mobility and equal opportunity.	Timothy	 Smeeding
2004	23	Determinants and Consequences of Income Inequality	After Death Do Us Part: An Analysis of the Economic Well Being of Widows in Four Countries	Using newly matched longitudinal data from the United States, Germany, Great Britain and Canada, we show that despite dramatically different social welfare systems, the change in the average woman's economic well being in these countries following the death of her husband is remarkably similar. While the United States has the greatest share of women who experience dramatic declines in well being, most were in the upper part of the income distribution prior to their husband's death. The mean household size-adjusted replacement rate for women in the lower tail of the distribution prior to widowhood rises substantially in all four countries.	Richard	V. Burkhauser	Philip	 Giles	Dean	R. Lillard	Johannes	 Schwarze
2004	24	Attitudes and Expectations about Childbearing and Childrearing	Attitudes about Childlessness in the United States: Age, Gender, and Other Correlates	Acceptance of childlessness among Americans has increased in recent decades.  This paper uses data from the National Survey of Families and Households (1987-88 and 1992-94) to examine the correlates of negative, neutral, or positive attitudes about childlessness.  Reported attitudes reflect the extent of agreement with the following questions: it is better to have a child than to remain childless (time 1) and a man/woman can have a fulfilling life without children (time 2).  Bivariate results show more positive attitudes at time 2 and among those who are young, never married or cohabiting, childless, or adoptive parents, and those of higher socio-economic status.  More negative attitudes are related to lower education, unemployment, lower childhood socio-economic status, or being Hispanic.  Multinomial logistic regressions show strong differences and interactions by gender, age, racial-ethnic group, and parental status that remain after controlling for other factors, but partner status and childhood background are not significant.	Tanya	 Koropeckyj-Cox	Gretchen	 Luecking
2004	24	Attitudes and Expectations about Childbearing and Childrearing	Childless or Childfree? A Qualitative Insight into Childlessness in Italy	Childlessness is an important component of fertility decline in many European countries, including Italy where it is becoming an emerging issue. This paper is aimed at getting an insight into voluntary childlessness in Italy, using qualitative information from 9 focus groups, where 59 childless women--currently married and with no physical infertility impediments--have been invited to participate. We concentrate on those issues that have been usually neglected by quantitative analysis, such as identity, values, attitudes and motherhood representation. In particular, we disentangle among different motivations and paths leading to childlessness. The decision-making process concerning reproductive choices have been pointed out. The perception of a stigma associated to the refuse of motherhood and the possible reactions to it have been assessed. Moreover, an exploration of the perceived costs, benefits and fears related to childbearing has been tempted. A final dimension concerns possible unmet need of policies.	Maria	Letizia  Tanturri
2004	24	Attitudes and Expectations about Childbearing and Childrearing	Resources, Family Power, and Gender Preference in Minya, Egypt	Researchers debate whether, in highly patriarchal settings, women's access to and control over resources in the family will alter their family power and gender preferences. We adapt a theory of gender stratification to explore the influence of a woman's customary and non-customary social and economic resources and marital household structure on her family power and gender preferences in Minya, Egypt. Residence with parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, and the husband decrease women's influence in decisions pertaining to children. On average, women in endogamous marriages still prefer sons over daughters and have greater influence in life course decisions than do women in non-endogamous marriages. More educated women report weaker son preference and greater influence in daily and life course decisions, but more educated women still tend to prefer sons. We discuss the institutional and demographic circumstances under which women's empowerment is likely to improve the relative well being of girls.	Kathryn	M. Yount	Constance	A. Nathanson
2004	24	Attitudes and Expectations about Childbearing and Childrearing	The Relationships of Maternal Attitudes in Child-Raising with Their Behaviors regarding Children's Health and Investments in Children's Ability	This study investigates the links of maternal attitudes in child-raising with their behaviors and investments related to children's health and ability.  The study uses data from an interview survey targeted at mothers with children aged four and held in central Taiwan in 2002, and its measures for maternal attitudes in child raising include the major maternal reason for raising children and maternal most wanted characteristic for children.  For this study, maternal behaviors regarding child health are maternal patterns of using prenatal care, breast-feeding children, giving children nutritional supplements, and taking children to exercise.  The investments in children's talents refer to training courses for improving children's intellectual capability, artistic skills and sporting talents.  Results from multivariate analyses for this study show that maternal attitudes in child-raising substantially affect most of these maternal behaviors and investments regarding children's health and ability.	Likwang	 Chen	Wen-Shan	 Yang
2004	25	Violence and Its Effects on Populations	Effects of Civil and Interstate Wars on Human Life Expectancy and Mortality: A Time Series Cross-National Analysis	The purpose of this paper is to examine the effect of military conflict on human life expectancy and age-specific mortality across countries and over time.  The paper includes two main parts.  First, we develop a theoretical model of the relationship between conflict, on the one hand, and life expectancy and mortality, on the other, highlighting the role of material and psychosocial variables.  Next, we test hypotheses from the theoretical model for a sample of about 120 countries from 1960 to 1999.  The empirical analysis assesses both the direct and indirect effects of civil and interstate wars in terms of war expectation, duration and severity.  The design is pooled time series cross sectional design.  We apply a set of statistical techniques, including OLS with panel corrected standard errors, OLS with robust standard errors, fixed effects model, and the GEE models, to ensure that our results are not artifacts of particular modeling choices.	Quan	 Li	Ming	 Wen
2004	25	Violence and Its Effects on Populations	The Welfare Cost of Violence	This paper draws on the value of life literature to estimate the loss of welfare caused by the violence observed in 73 countries of the world during the nineties. In the extreme case of Colombia, violence determines a reduction of 3 years in life expectancy at birth. For the U.S., violence reduces life expectancy at birth by 0.8 year. The social value of eliminating violence is estimated to correspond to 20% of the American GDP in 1995, and 113% of the Colombian GDP in that same year. Generally, a one-unit increase in the years of life lost due to violence is associated with an increase of 26% of the GDP in the social willingness to pay for violence reductions.	Rodrigo	R. Soares
2004	25	Violence and Its Effects on Populations	Could Political Violence Affect Infant Mortality? The Colombian Case	Colombia has experienced for over 60 years a severe internal conflict that has intensified during the last decade. Several demographic behaviors have been affected by such long and intense conflict. In this paper I present some measurements of the very unusual mortality pattern. However, internal conflicts could be affecting other variables, not studied before, such infant mortality. In this paper, I will test whether political violence could be affecting infant mortality rates in Colombia during the last decade. I will use information on violence for the period from 1990 to 2000 with estimates of the IMR, which along with covariates, will allow me to analyze the effect on yearly IMR changes of changes in violence per municipalities using a difference in differences model. In addition, I will explore the micro-level data as this information is available from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) carried out in Colombia.	Piedad	 Urdinola
2004	25	Violence and Its Effects on Populations	Global Firearm Injury: Interpreting International Firearm Mortality Data	The World Health Organization (WHO) declared violence a leading public health problem internationally.  Firearm injury is an important, modifiable component of violent death. Understanding and addressing firearm mortality is hindered by inadequate data availability, quality, and comparability. To determine the global nature of firearm mortality, we examined the availability of national firearm mortality data by population size, region and level of development, using two public data sources (WHO World Report on Violence and Health and the United Nations International Study on Firearm Regulations survey). Non-governmental sources of data, such as mortuary statistics, indicated that some populations without systematic data do have firearm injury problems. Available data, for less than 50% of the world's population, provided a minimum global estimate of 120,000 annual firearm deaths. Interpreting implications of data availability, as well as understanding the magnitude and distribution of firearm deaths should be part of a global public health approach	Rose	 Cheney	Therese	 Richmond	C.	William  Schwab
2004	26	Measurement of Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Mortality in China Today	This paper evaluates the completeness of death reporting above the youngest ages in three censuses of the PRC from 1982 to 2000, and revisits the completeness of death recording in the 1973-75 Cancer Epidemiology Survey.  The paper discusses the theoretical basis of the General Growth Balance Method and explains why this technique is particularly suitable for analyzing the completeness of China's census mortality data and census counts.  Information on child mortality from a variety of sources is reviewed, and best estimates arrived at.  Adjusted life tables are calculated for the intercensal periods 1964-82, 1982-90 and 1990-2000, and for 1999-2000.  The authors analyze adjusted levels of and trends in life expectancy and mortality by sex in childhood, adulthood, and old age, highlighting unexpected findings.  The paper discusses why survival rates continue improving in China, despite meager and deteriorating health insurance coverage, increasing privatization, and reduced government support of health services.	Judith	 Banister
2004	26	Measurement of Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Adult Mortality in Eastern Asia: Trends and Patterns	The purpose of this paper is to identify trends and patterns of adult mortality in Eastern Asia, using data from China, South Korea, and Taiwan.  A total of four (1964-2000), ten (1955-2000), and twelve (1905-2000) censuses from China, South Korea, and Taiwan, respectively, and the inter-censal average annual deaths were obtained.  We used the Synthetic Extinct Generation method adjusted to the census coverage change based on General Growth Balance results.  Changes in 45q15 and age-specific mortality rates were examined.  In addition, age-specific levels were estimated, using the Coale-Demeny West Model life tables.  Remarkable adult mortality reductions were observed and, importantly, each country experienced fairly constant reduction rate over time.  The 'far-eastern mortality pattern' was observed only for earlier periods in South Korea and Taiwan.  Excess male mortality increased over time in all countries and, especially, it has expanded to young adults in South Korea and Taiwan.	Yoonjoung	 Choi	Danzhen	 You
2004	26	Measurement of Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Active Life Expectancy, Gender, and Education among Elderly Indonesians	The expected growth in the size of Indonesia's elderly population heightens the importance of understanding potential changes in this population's burden of disease.  Growing numbers of elderly living with chronic health problems potentially strain family support systems as well as health care institutions' abilities to meet their health care needs.  In this paper, we lay the initial groundwork for anticipating Indonesia's future burden of disease by developing a demographic model of population health.  We develop this model within the analytic framework of a Markov-based multistate life table model to calculate an important indicator of the burden of disease, the expected years of active life of elderly Indonesians.  Active life expectancy refers to the years of expected life free from major functional problems.  We gain additional insights into future changes in disease burden by examining educational differences in active life.  We pay special attention to gender's association with active life.	Mira	M. Hidajat	Yasuhiko	 Saito	Mark	D. Hayward
2004	26	Measurement of Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Famine in North Korea, 1995-1998: A Retrospective Study of North Korean Migrants in China	A severe food crisis in North Korea in 1995 led the government to seek large-scale food aid though it prohibited outside assessments of mortality.  Lacking direct means of measuring recent mortality, alternatives were sought. It was estimated that, since 1995, between 50,000 and 150,000 North Koreans had moved temporarily into China.  In 1999-2000, interviews were conducted with a total of 2,692 North Korean migrants.  Respondents provided information on births, deaths, and migration patterns in their household in North Korea from 1995-1998.  The study found, using a framework of 19 generalizations about the demography of famine (Dyson and O Grada,2002) that a famine had occurred in North Korea during the period 1995-1998.  Evidence supported three key generalizations: crude mortality had increased significantly, this increase was due principally to increased malnutrition and infectious disease and that male mortality rates increased more than for females at most age groups.	Courtland	 Robinson	Myung-Ken	 Lee	Gilbert	 Burnham
2004	27	Racial Identification among Mixed Heritage Americans	Who Chooses to Choose Two? Multiracial Identity of Children with Parents of Different Races	Prior to the 2000 Census, researchers estimated that the size of the multiracial population could range between 3.1 and 6.6 percent.  However, many fewer (2.4 percent) identified as multiracial, and those that did are younger than the population as a whole.  For those who are identified as black/white and Asian/white, median ages are extremely low: 9 and 18, respectively. Thus, for a large number of multiracial Americans, parents assign racial identity.  In this paper, we focus on the children who would be most likely to be identified as multiracial: children with parents of different races.  We use the 1 percent PUMS from the 2000 census, restrict our analysis to children living in two parent families, and ask the following questions. To what extent do parents of different races identify their children as multiracial?  Do patterns of multiracial reporting depend on the specific race of each parent?  Are the socioeconomic characteristics of the family relevant?	Sonya	 Tafoya	Hans	 Johnson	Laura	 Hill
2004	27	Racial Identification among Mixed Heritage Americans	Race of the Minority Parent and Racial Identity of Children of Intermarried Couples	For the first time in the census history, Americans were able to mark one or more racial categories in the 2000 Census to classify their race. How do intermarried couples identify their children's race? Using data from the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) of the 2000 U.S. Census, I examine how Black-White, Latino-White, Asian American-White, and American Indian-White couples identify their children's race. My main focus is to examine the main effect of race of the minority parent on children's racial identities and how race of the minority parent interacts with intermarried couples' characteristics and neighborhood factors.	Zhenchao	 Qian
2004	27	Racial Identification among Mixed Heritage Americans	Got Koko? Hawaiian Racial Identification and Multiracial Diversity	Hawaiians are one of the most multiracial groups in the United States. We examine conditions leading to Native Hawaiian identification among mixed-race Hawaiians using Census 2000. In earlier analyses using the 1990 Census, where multiracial people could choose only one race, findings suggest that strong ties to Hawai'I--the cultural and geographic home of Hawaiian population, history, and culture--are vital to the intergenerational transmission of Hawaiian identification in both continental and island multiracial families.  Further, some similarities in racial identification existed among multiracial Native Hawaiians, American Indians, and Asian Americans.  Presently, we take advantage of the detail afforded by the multiple-race classifications in Census 2000 to examine how racial identification may differ between multi-race and single race Hawaiians, while also examining differences among specific multiracial Hawaiian groups. This research will contribute to our growing understanding about racial identity processes among multiracial individuals.	Shawn	Malia  Kanaiaupuni	Nolan	J. Malone
2004	27	Racial Identification among Mixed Heritage Americans	Pacific Islander American Identity: The Racial Identification of People of Pacific Island Heritage	Prior to the establishment of the new guidelines for measuring race and ethnicity by the Office of Management and Budget, Pacific Islanders (Pis) have typically been aggregated with Asian Americans creating measurement problems due to the high level of heterogeneity within this category.  Despite the rapidly changing demographic and socioeconomic impact of Pis relative to their population size, very little is understood about this group. According to the 2000 US Census a high proportion of the Pacific Islander population reported more than one race.  Also, it was the only race where the number of respondents reporting two or more races was higher than the number reporting a single race. The paper analyzes the Pacific Island population using data from the 2000 US Census to determine how PIs identified themselves based on parental identification, ancestry, residential and language use.  Logistic regression analysis is used to predict the racial identification of PIs of mixed race.	Sela	V. Panapasa	Claudette	E. Bennett
2004	28	Gender Preferences for Children	Gendering the Family Composition: Sex Preferences for Children and Childbearing Behavior in Denmark, Finland, and Sweden	It has been argued that a society's 'gender system' influences parents' sex preferences for children. If this was true, one should expect to find no such preferences in countries with a high level of gender equality. We exploit population register data from Denmark, Finland, and Sweden to examine parental sex preferences during the last three to four decades. First, we cannot observe any effect of the sex of the first-born child on second birth risks. Secondly, we detect a distinct preference for one child of each sex among parents of two children. Next to this combination preference, our analysis reveals, thirdly, that Danish and Swedish parents developed a preference for having a daughter, while Finns exhibit a significant son preference. This shows that modernization and more equal opportunities for women and men do not necessarily lead to parental gender indifference, but that they might even result in 'new' sex preferences.	Karsten	 Hank	Andres	 Vikat
2004	28	Gender Preferences for Children	A Less Valued Life: Population Policy and Sex Selection in India	In this policy analysis, based mainly on secondary data and documentary review, the link between population policies and use of sex selection as part of family building strategies will be examined. Recently, both the national and state governments have formulated population policies to hasten the transition to replacement level fertility. Implementation strategies include the use of incentives and disincentives and an inordinate focus on sterilization. At the same time recent shift to smaller families has not necessarily been accompanied by a concurrent shift in the social and economic pressures that underlie preference for sons over daughters. Therefore the implementation of coercive population policies could well result in the increased acceptance and reliance on the use of sex selection strategies to plan smaller families and ensure the birth of desired number of sons. It can be concluded that these policies often ignore the gender dimensions of reproductive decision-making, and thereby sustain and at times even exacerbate gender-based inequities.	Rupsa	 Mallik
2004	28	Gender Preferences for Children	Agency in the Face of Opposition: Women's Decision-Making and Son Preference in Vietnam	Vietnam is an interesting setting in which to study relationships between gender and fertility decision-making. Strong patrilineal traditions, in which having a son to carry on the family line is extremely important, coexist with egalitarian socialist ideology and state policies discouraging couples from having more than two children. This paper analyzes recent survey data to investigate the effects of women's agency in social and economic spheres of life, and their attitudes regarding gender equality, in predicting their stated propensity to use contraception or have an abortion in face of strong pressure from close relatives to bear an additional child in the hope of having a son.	Tran	 Hung Minh	Nancy	 Luke	Vu	Song  Ha	Vu	Thien  Pham	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler
2004	28	Gender Preferences for Children	Determinants of Son Preference in India: Disentangling Economic Factors and Cultural Attitudes	We study determinants of son preference in India. First, we use more recent and richer data to update Rosenzweig and Schultz's (1982) test of the role of sex-specific labor market conditions in affecting male versus female birth choices, health inputs such as prenatal care and immunizations, and outcomes such as child nutritional status.  Second, we test the role of factors reflecting cultural attitudes, such as women's intrahousehold power and attitudes towards domestic violence. We use data on parents and children from the 1992-93 and 1998-99 Indian NFHS, and labor market indicators from the 1993-94 and 1999-2000 Employment NSS. We also re-evaluate the common finding that high birth order girls are particularly at risk. We find that older siblings currently in the household, rather than the number of older siblings per se,  hinders high birth order girls' outcomes: this is consistent with the importance of economic constraints in affecting discrimination.	Alessandro	 Tarozzi	William	H. Dow
2004	29	Non-Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Centripetal Forces: The Construction of Hometown Loyalty in a West African Migrant-Sending Community	While much energy has been devoted to identifying the forces contributing to migration from rural communities of the Third World, comparatively little has been devoted to exploring the forces drawing migrants back to those communities.  When mentioned at all, these pull-factors emanating from migrant-sending communities are typically glossed as cultural or family-related.  This paper, drawing on ethnographic research and interviews with returned migrants in a Malian sending community, offers a more penetrating analysis.  It identifies a set of significant social practices and beliefs which influence migrants' decisions to return, and which contribute to the construction of an ideology of hometown loyalty.  The discussion of centripetal forces suggests that definitive return is just one out of many different forms of demonstrating loyalty to one's hometown, and not necessarily the most important; it further suggests that a deterritorialized identity is vital to the survival of rural sending communities.	Bruce	 Whitehouse
2004	29	Non-Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Parents' Overseas Migration and Gender Division of Labor among Filipino Children	This study examines the consequences of overseas migration of parents on the gender division of labor among children in Filipino families. Data from selected provinces in the Philippines indicate that the pattern of household task allocation among children differs according to which parent is abroad.  Families where neither parent is abroad demonstrate lower propensity for sex-typing of household tasks. In families where the father is abroad, gender-segregation in task allocation among children is also weak because the mother performs most of the household tasks. Absence of the mother at home due to overseas migration is congenial to gender-based allocation of household tasks. Previous studies show that the employment of the mother away from home sinks the daughters deeper into domestic roles but mother's overseas employment exacerbates the daughters' situation vis-a-vis their male siblings. Such family structure created by overseas migration of the mother perpetuates gender asymmetry in the household division of labor.	Marie	Joy B. Arguillas
2004	29	Non-Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Educational Consequences of Emigration for Children in China	Fujian is considered one of the largest emigrant-sending provinces in China. Socio-demographic profiles of emigrants from Fujian consist mainly of young males with low educational attainment from rural areas.  This study examines the educational consequences of this emigration for children who are left behind.   Specifically we compare school enrollment for children whose households sent international migrants and children from non-emigrant households.  Our preliminary results show that emigration brings positive consequences for the education of children.  First, children from households with emigrants are more likely to be enrolled than children from non-emigrant households.   Second, emigration also brings positive consequences for gender, i.e. unlike the girls from non-emigrant households, girls from emigrant households are more likely to be enrolled in school than boys.  Mechanisms of these outcomes are explored in the final part of the paper.	Hideki	 Morooka
2004	29	Non-Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	To Study or Not to Study: The Influence of Family Migration on School Enrollment among Mexican Adolescents	The main objective of my research is to explore the effects of international migration in the communities of origin.  The specific goal is to analyze to what extent family experiences of migration to the U.S. influence the school enrollment of adolescents in Mexico.  Using nationwide and representative data, I analyze the differences in school enrollment among Mexican adolescents between 12 and 16 years of age taking into account whether someone in the family has lived or lives in the U.S. and the prevalence of migration to the U.S. in the community.   The first results indicate that migration to the U.S. may be deterring adolescents from staying in school, and that the effect is stronger for boys than for girls.  A possible explanation is that adolescents and their families lower their educational expectations as the perceived returns from education are lower compared to the returns from migration to the U.S.	Silvia	Elena  Giorguli Saucedo
2004	30	Changing Characteristics of Immigrants in the 1990's	Changes in the Age Structure and Occupational Distribution of New Immigrant Destinations 1990-2000	This study examines both the age and the occupational structure of a sample of communities whose immigrant populations exceeded 5% for the first time in Census 2000. The examination is twofold: 1) what occupational and age structure characteristics described these areas prior to the influx of migration, and 2) how has the influx influenced affected these characteristics. I test the hypothesis that new destination communities had comparatively older age structures prior to the migration flows, which would suggest that migrants were drawn by a void in the working age population.  My primarily data sources are the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. I expect to find evidence that the age structure of communities influenced the influx of migration.  I also expect to see a concentration of immigrant labor in a few occupations in the newer destinations and a wider diversity of occupations in the more traditional destinations.	Katherine	 Bartley
2004	30	Changing Characteristics of Immigrants in the 1990's	Trends in Immigrant Earnings in the 1990s	This paper uses the newly-released 2000 PUMS to study changes in immigrant labor market performance in the United States.  Immigrants who came to the U.S. in the 1990s experienced greater labor market success than did earlier cohorts upon arrival.  While data from the 1960-1990 PUMS show a continuous decline in the earnings of new immigrants, the trend reversed in the 1990s, with newcomers doing as well today relative to natives as they did 20 years ago.  This improvement in immigrant performance is not explained by changes in educational attainment or origin-country composition.  We explore alternative explanations, including changes in immigration policy affecting the types of immigrants admitted; changes in labor market conditions that differentially affect new arrivals; changes in immigrant selectivity; and the contribution of recent high-skill immigration to California.  We also examine the extent and implications of attenuation bias caused by imputation in the PUMS.	Rachel	M. Friedberg	George	J. Borjas
2004	30	Changing Characteristics of Immigrants in the 1990's	Pioneer and Settler Migration in the New Mexican Migrant States	During the 1990s, the foreign-born Mexican origin population in the United States accelerated its transformation from a largely regionally concentrated ethnic group to one more widely distributed around the country.  In 1990, for example, only 10 percent of foreign-born Mexicans resided outside California, Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, or Illinois, whereas by 2000, almost 1 in 4 did.  This paper uses micro-data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses to understand what states experienced the most growth and why.  Preliminary results suggest that rapid growth in the 1990s occurred in states where migration channels developed in predictable waves over the previous two decades as explained by social causation theories of migration.  This study highlights the importance of secondary migration within the U.S., previously thought to be insignificant among Mexican origin migrants, in blazing the trail for those that followed in the 1990s.  The policy and theoretical implications of the results are discussed.	Mark	 Leach	Frank	D. Bean	Susan	K. Wierzbicki
2004	30	Changing Characteristics of Immigrants in the 1990's	Backlash: Effects of 9/11 on Immigrants, Muslims, and Arabs Living in the U.S.	Since the September 11 terrorists' attacks, a growing number of Arabs and Muslims living in the United States have become victims of hate crimes and ethnic and religious profiling. The objective of this study is to measure the economic repercussions of this backlash on the lives of immigrants, especially Arabs and Muslims. In particular, we study the effect of the September 11 attacks and its ongoing aftermath on the labor market outcomes--employment and wages--and location choices of these groups and try answer the following questions: Has discrimination against immigrants resulting from September 11 affected their employment and wages? How did immigrants, in particular Arabs and Muslims, react to the incidents of hate crime? Have they moved out of cities where they were targets or potential targets of hate crime?	Neeraj	 Kaushal	Cordelia	 Reimers
2004	31	Fertility Transitions in Africa	The Christian-Muslim Gap in Sub-Saharan Fertility Transitions	The paper examines Christian-Muslim differentials in contraception and fertility in sub-Saharan countries with adequate DHS data. It detects that Muslims tend to have significantly lower contraceptive prevalence than Christians in most of West and Central Africa (WCA) even after controlling for other characteristics. In East Africa (EA), the differences are generally less pronounced and in some cases Muslims show higher contraceptive prevalence. In congruence with these patterns, in WCA Muslims have persistently higher TFRs, while the opposite is generally true of EA. Yet, when controlling for other factors, being Muslim is conducive to lower fertility in several countries in both regions. Three main theoretical perspectives--the doctrinal differences, minority-status, and characteristics hypotheses--are engaged to explain these patterns. The paper seeks additional explanations in country and regional historico-cultural peculiarities. It concludes with an assessment of possible implications of the detected differences for the future course of the sub-Saharan fertility transitions.	Victor	 Agadjanian
2004	31	Fertility Transitions in Africa	Poverty and Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa. Evidence from 25 Countries	The relationships between poverty and fertility have important implications for the demographic future of Sub-Saharan Africa. With half of its population living on less than 1$ per day, there will be no sustained fertility decline in Africa unless poverty is dramatically reduced or unless considerable fertility declines occur among the poor. Using the most recent Demographic and Health Surveys, the objective of this paper is to document the relationship between poverty and fertility behaviour in Sub-Saharan Africa. Results indicate strong differentials in fertility and proximate determinants by economic status in all of the 25 countries included in the study, even when controlling for education and place of residence. Analyses of fertility changes within countries also indicate that significant fertility declines have occurred among the poorest women in several countries, a result broadly consistent with an innovation diffusion framework.	Bruno	D. Schoumaker
2004	31	Fertility Transitions in Africa	Social Identity and Community Effects on Emergent Birth Limitation in Southern Ethiopia	This study examines the effects of social identity on birth limitation in Southern Ethiopia, a rural region of 11.1 million persons, with more than 80 distinct ethnic, religious, and ethnic identities. The data are drawn from the 1997 Family and Community Survey, that collected information on community, household, and women's life and reproductive health. The survey took place in 29 communities, yielding a sample of 2550 women. Using ordered logistic regressions models we find that the negative effects of ethnic identity on emergent birth limitation are lessened by residence in a community in which they are in the minority, or with diverse social identities. This is particularly the case among Muslems. Even so, among the poorest Muslem Silte communities, shia law reinforces traditional pronatalist attitudes and behaviors. Crises in food production, water collection, and drought, along with exceptionally poor roads, schools, health care centers hinder emergent birth limitation.	Dennis	 Hogan	Belay	T. Biratu
2004	31	Fertility Transitions in Africa	The Dynamics and Determinants of Fertility Stagnation: Moslems in Israel from 1980-2000	It is generally assumed that once fertility levels fall by 10%, transition is well underway. Moslems in Israel experienced rapid fertility decline from TFR levels near 9 in the 1960s to about 4.5 in the early 1980s but have remained constant since then. This article uses multilevel statistical models and census data to examine fertility stagnation amongst Israeli Moslems. The results indicate that communities are becoming increasingly important predictors of fertility with Israeli Moslems displaying increasing uniformity in reproductive behavior within their communities. These findings have profound implications for fertility transition theories, as it would appear that fertility is stabilizing at levels well above replacement level, after a rapid initial decline. Could this be the final stage of the fertility transition? If so, can we continue to assume that the demographic transition involves moving from one state of homeostasis to another?	Petra	 Nahmias	Guy	 Stecklov
2004	32	Modeling Issues in Statistical Demography	Under-Reporting of Medi-Cal and Welfare in the March Current Population Survey: An Analysis of Matched Survey-Administrative Data	The March Current Population Survey (CPS) is a standard data set for the analysis of issues related to welfare program participation, Medicaid participation, and health insurance coverage.  Unfortunately, CPS estimates of the number of program participants are well below administrative data totals and there is some evidence that the difference is growing.  To improve understanding of these issues, with the cooperation of the Census Bureau and the State of California, we matched administrative data from California's Medicaid system (Medi-Cal, including cash assistance) to March CPS data for 1990-2000, by Social Security Number (SSN).  For those individuals who provided an SSN, we consider the congruence of the survey data and the administrative data, and in particular how reporting error varies across sub-groups and through time.  Finally, we consider the implications of the matched analysis for other analyses using the CPS.	Jacob	A. Klerman	Jeanne	 Ringel
2004	32	Modeling Issues in Statistical Demography	Effects of Exposure Misspecification in Log-Linear Models for Rates	Log-linear models are used in demography and epidemiology to model rates cross-classified by explanatory variables.  A rate is defined as the ratio of the number of events of interest to the exposure. For example, for mortality rates, the exposure is total person-years at risk. The rates are not modelled directly, but a table of counts of events of interest and a table of exposures are required. Often, the true exposure is unknown and an estimate of exposure is used. The problem we study in this paper is the effects of misspecification of the exposures on inferences drawn from a log-linear model for rates. Our literature review suggests that the effects of this type of misspecification have not been investigated. In particular, we investigate how this type of rates model misspecification affects parameter estimates, estimated standard errors, confidence intervals, test statistics, etc.	John	W. McDonald	Peter	W.F. Smith
2004	32	Modeling Issues in Statistical Demography	Age-Period-Cohort Analysis of Repeated Cross-Section Surveys: Fixed or Random Effects?	Yang and Land (2003) developed a mixed (fixed-random) effects model for the age-period-cohort (APC) analysis of micro datasets in the form of a series of repeated cross-section sample surveys that are increasingly available to demographers.  To estimate the mixed effects APC models, Yang and Land applied the statistical methodology of hierarchical regression models by treating cohort and period effects as random.  A key assumption of such models is that cohort and period are uncorrelated with other regressors.  An alternative approach to model estimation could be based on a purely fixed cohort and period effects regression model, which does not require the uncorrelated effects assumption and large numbers of cohorts and/or periods.  We examine these assumptions and compare the fixed vs. random effects model specifications for APC analysis. We continue to use the data on verbal test scores from 15 cross-sections of the General Social Survey, 1974-2000, for substantive illustrations.	Yang	 Yang	Kenneth	C. Land
2004	32	Modeling Issues in Statistical Demography	Estimated Coefficients, Information Sets, and 'Biases' in Nonlinear Models	Demographers often use logit and probit models when analyzing binary events. Many researchers, however, misinterpret how including or excluding additional regressors, heterogeneity corrections, and multi-level factors impact the interpretation of the estimated parameters. Such misinterpretations can result in incorrect inferences about the importance of incorporating additional features into statistical models. In this paper we derive how estimated coefficients in probit and logit models must change when one includes or excludes explanatory variables that are independent of the other explanatory variables in the model. We demonstrate how coefficient estimates change when one controls or fails to control for such independent factors.  Reports of biases in such models can often be attributed to the fact that estimates in nonlinear models depend crucially on the inclusion or exclusion of factors that are independent of those already included in the statistical model. Unlike linear regression, the set of conditioning variables plays an important role.	Thomas	 Mroz	Yaraslau	 Zayats
2004	33	The PRB/Russell Sage Census Reports	Science and Politics in Census Taking		Kenneth	 Prewitt
2004	33	The PRB/Russell Sage Census Reports	Gender Inequality at Work		David	A. Cotter
2004	33	The PRB/Russell Sage Census Reports	Unequal Fortunes: The Maturing of the Baby Boom		Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes
2004	33	The PRB/Russell Sage Census Reports	Latinos and the Changing Face of America	The Latino population has made a significant impact on the demography of the U.S. population.  The analysis uses data from the 1990 and 2000 Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) to highlight and analyze key demographic, marriage/family, language, and socioeconomic patterns related to the Latino population.  The analysis, broken down by nativity status, is based on seven groups--Mexicans, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Dominicans, Central Americans, South Americans, and Other Latinos.  The results of the analysis highlight the different routes toward integration experienced by the 14 groups examined.  In particular, Mexicans, the largest group within the Latino population, lag behind other groups with respect to socioeconomic characteristics.  The paper concludes with an overview of recommendations for improving the socioeconomic conditions of Latinos.  This paper is part of the Population Reference Bureau/Russell Sage Foundation Census 2000 Series.	Rogelio	 Saenz
2004	34	Couples and Family Planning	Contextual Factors, Gender Relations within the Couple, and Family Planning Use in Dakar-Senegal	We use qualitative data gathered in Dakar (Senegal) during year 2001 to analyze the impact of contextual factors and gender relations on the use of modern contraception by married couples. We found that virtually all women needed first to challenge their husband's authority before resorting to contraception. Some did so by encountering a conflict and others in a more consensual way that avoided direct confrontation with the husband. In both cases, challenging men's authority was possible mainly because of the economic plight that results into the deprivation of men's economic power and the relatively new phenomenon of women participating in the household economy. However these changes did not yield a more egalitarian gender relation within the couple in many other respects. Nearly all women still grant their husband the right to exert power and this stems from the ingrained social and cultural norms that dictate men's powerful position.	Mariam	 Ben Aya	Macoumba	 Thiam
2004	34	Couples and Family Planning	Current Use of Contraception among the Pare of Northern Tanzania: Do Wife-Husband Relations Matter or Is It Women's Empowerment?	Current literature on the adoption of contraception in sub-Saharan Africa indicates that the empowerment of women within the marital union has a positive impact on contraceptive practices and that the link of empowerment to contraception is through spousal communication. This paper represents a step beyond these works by broadening the concept of spousal communication and by considering the effects of spousal communication and women's empowerment as separate factors on the adoption of contraception. The study is based on ethnographic and survey data from a case study of matched wives and husbands in two Pare villages in Northern Tanzania. Results indicate that while the empowerment of women (as measured by their level of education and religion) enhances joint decision making and thus has an indirect effect on the adoption of contraception, the empowerment of women (as measured by the woman's occupation outside of farming), in itself is associated with contraceptive use.	Ulla	M. Larsen	Marida	 Hollos
2004	34	Couples and Family Planning	Couple's Reproductive Goals in India and Its Policy Relevance	To what extent couples agree with each other on fertility intentions, sex of the next child, and the intention to use family planning in future has major role not only in determining the family size but also in the process of transition. The present paper investigates this question in Uttar Pradesh, India. Quantitative data from DLHS-2002 has been used in the present analysis. Wives differ significantly from their husbands regarding the sex of their next child. Results show that it is the husband who has the highest influence on the couple's reproductive goals.  The analysis further reveals that male child is the preference of most of the couples, which in turn affects their intention to use contraceptives, when to use a contraceptive, and the time gap between the next child. It can be concluded that understanding husbands' views are very important from the policies and programmes point of view.	Faujdar	 Ram	Abhishek	 Singh
2004	34	Couples and Family Planning	The Influence of Couple and Contextual Characteristics on Current Contraceptive Use in Two States in India	The importance of surveys with couples to understand the links between reproductive intentions and behaviors is highlighted increasingly in the literature.  Data from India are used to explore the influence of couples and contextual characteristics on current contraceptive use.  Given the south Asian context, where husbands have more influence on fertility decisions than their wives, analysis using couple level factors is conducted to better understand contraceptive use dynamics.   Two-by-two tables and logistic regression are used to explore these complex relationships in 986 currently married couples.  The results indicate that a couple's education level mediates the influence of religion on current contraceptive use in this setting. Couples generally agree on their level of discussion on reproductive issues. Fertility desire, discussion between spouses and district of residence are significant predictors of contraceptive use. The findings provide an understanding of how couple characteristics and their level of communication influence contraceptive use in Asia.	Sagri	 Singh	Laurie	 Zabin
2004	35	Cohabitation	Almost Cohabiting -- How Much Is Enough?	In the 1990s, there was a push to measure cohabitation in large-scale surveys and incorporate it into analyses about couples and families.  However cohabitation was operationalized inconsistently across surveys yielding vastly different estimates of cohabitation rates. The inconsistency in measuring cohabitation is due in part to the different goals of and constraints on individual surveys, but also likely reflects the ambiguity regarding the boundaries and meaning of cohabitation. Most quantitative studies simply use an all-or-nothing measure to differentiate between cohabiting and not cohabiting.  But recent qualitative evidence from Manning and Smock suggest that many young couples live together only part of the time, complicating our notion and measurement of cohabitation. This paper uses data from the Fragile Families study to examine how changing the definition of cohabitation (to include or exclude couples living together less than full time, etc.) changes the prevalence, correlates, and outcomes of cohabitors.	Jean	T. Knab
2004	35	Cohabitation	Transitions of Disadvantaged Cohabiting Mothers into Marriage	Marriage is at the center of public policy debates over reauthorization of the 1996 welfare reform bill.   In this paper, we examine patterns of union formation among disadvantaged cohabiting mothers.  Specifically, we focus on transitions to marriage or singlehood among cohabiting women.  Data come from the newly-released cohabitation histories in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979-2002).  For the first time, the partners of the NLSY cohabiting women are matched over successive survey waves.  This provides a new opportunity to evaluate the effects of women's economic circumstances and welfare receipt, as well as their marital and fertility histories (including serial partners and the biological relatedness of co-residential children), on union transitions.  We fit discrete time multinominal event history models of union transitions, while controlling for individual fixed effects.  Our primary goal is to identify barriers to marriage among cohabiting mothers.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Leanna	M. Mellott
2004	35	Cohabitation	A Comparison of Cohabiting Relationships among Older and Younger Adults	This study explores how cohabitation differs for older and younger adults, drawing on data from cohabitors (n=966) in each of the first two waves of the National Survey of Families and Households.  Older cohabitors report significantly higher levels of relationship quality and stability than younger cohabitors, although they are less likely to have plans to marry their partners.  Few differences were found in the reasons to cohabit, although assessing compatibility is a more important reason for younger cohabitors.  Findings suggest that older cohabitors are more likely to view their relationship as an alternative to marriage whereas younger cohabitors are more likely to view their relationship as a prelude to it.	Valarie	 King	Mindy	 Scott
2004	35	Cohabitation	Choosing between the Available Alternatives: Intergenerational and Intragenerational Influences on Attitudes toward Cohabitation	Intergenerational panel data are used to examine inter- and intra-generational influences on adult children's attitudes toward cohabitation. The analyses focus on the influence of parents' marital history and children's experiences with cohabitation, cohabitation dissolution, marriage, and divorce. The mediating influences of parents' attitudes toward cohabitation, parents' and children's religiosity, and children's sexual behavior in adolescence are also considered. Parental divorce during childhood leads young adults to view cohabitation more favorably, and this is true whether or not the divorce is followed by remarriage. Parental divorce influences adult children's attitudes about cohabitation by shaping subsequent levels of religious involvement among parents and children, parents' cohabitation attitudes, and adolescent children's sexual behavior. Dissolution of a first cohabitation and direct entry into marriage among the second generation are associated with decreasingly positive views of cohabitation, while entry into cohabitation and divorce after direct entry into marriage lead to increasingly positive attitudes toward cohabitation.	Mick	 Cunningham	Arland	 Thornton
2004	36	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	When Reality Sinks In: The Shifting Perceptions of Adulthood	Using data from the Philadelphia Educational Longitudinal Study (PELS), this paper seeks to explore both the subjective and objective determinants of self-defined adulthood and the relationship between these indicators overtime.  Preliminary results suggest that substantial change has occurred over the two-years since this group of adolescents has left high school and moved on to other stages of their lives. Over this period, the proportion of respondents who believe having children, getting married, and moving out on one's own are important to becoming an adult have decreased, while the proportion reporting securing full-time work is important has increased.  These findings suggest that with increased life experience the notions of what it means to be an adult shifts from idealized toward more realistic. At the same time, we find a significant increase in the percent of young adults both crossing demographic transitions and taking on individual household and financial responsibilities.	Janel	E. Benson	Frank	 Furstenberg
2004	36	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	Adolescent Relationships in the Transition to Adulthood	To better understand how prior life-course experiences might contribute to race differences in the timing and type of first union, this research investigates race differences in adolescents' relationships with the opposite sex.  Preliminary analyses using data from the first wave of the Add Health show that black adolescents are less likely to report opposite sex friends or romantic partners, but much more likely to report having a sexual relationship.  These experiences in adolescence are associated with the likelihood of marriage and cohabitation by the third wave of the Add Health.  Whereas involvement in social relationships, especially romantic relationships, with the opposite sex has a strong positive association with marriage, involvement in sexual relationships, especially nonromantic sexual relationships, has a weaker effect on the odds of marrying.	Kelly	 Raley	Sarah	R. Crissey	Chandra	 Muller
2004	36	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	Positive Outcomes from Poor Starts: Predictors of Dropping Back In	Youth who take major missteps while teens often have positive outcomes by their mid-twenties.  Using NELS 2000, we provide one of the first longitudinal analyses of well-being for teen mothers and high school dropouts that includes a nationally representative population of Hispanic and Asian youth.  Our study examines a host of positive outcomes for teen mothers and high school dropouts and reveals that determinants of positive outcomes vary dramatically by type.  For example, we find that educational outcomes are closely related to parental characteristics, whereas individual behavioral variables bear a closer relationship to employment and income outcomes.  Delaying age at first intercourse and using birth control are associated with higher chances of achieving positive outcomes, even among those with poor starts.  For teens that have eventual positive educational outcomes, it appears to be important to return to schooling within a year or two of dropping out of high school or giving birth.	Laura	 Hill	Christopher	 Jepsen
2004	36	Transitions from Adolescence to Adulthood	Converging Patterns to Emerging Adulthood? Australia and the U.S. in Comparative Perspective	The transition to adulthood has become of increasing importance to researchers and policy makers alike as the period of transition from child to adult becomes longer. The transition period has been defined in many ways, however demographically it can be seen to encompass leaving school, entering the labor force, leaving the parental home, marriage and childbearing. One of the key arguments in recent times about this transition is the extent to which the changing structure of society has contributed to these transitions as becoming more individualized or more standardized. This paper uses data from the Australian Census of Population Housing between 1971 and 2001 to explore the extent of changes in the pattern of transition to adulthood in Australia. It is hypothesized that the transition to adulthood in Australia has similar characteristics to that found in the US.	Ann	 Evans
2004	37	Race, Health, and Mortality I	Black-White Differences in Health and Mortality among the Older Divorced	Past research has shown that for the overall population, divorce has less deleterious consequences on the health of blacks compared to their white counterparts.  However, the effects on younger respondents will dominate research that contains all age groups.  In contrast, extant research on the older divorced population suggests that in comparison to whites, divorce may be worse for blacks.  Conclusions are difficult to draw because of the use of race as a first-order control variable.  This paper builds on past research by allowing race to have both direct and indirect associations with health and mortality.  The results suggest that divorce is associated with poorer health and higher mortality for both blacks and whites; however, socioeconomic status appears to explain this entire association.  Though the link between divorce and health is not statistically different for the two races, the relationship between socioeconomic status and health does vary for blacks and whites.	Sarah	A. Avellar
2004	37	Race, Health, and Mortality I	Differential Health and Mortality Patterns among Migrant Populations in Belgium	Adult migrants, in spite of a low socio-economic status, tend to have lower mortality than the host population. Belgium is an interesting case to study the migrant paradox. It combines a large migrant community with a well-established national register. Linking individual records of the 1991 census with registered deaths and migrations offers the possibility to evaluate the selective migration and the importance of salmon bias migration. The census variables allow control for a large set of confounding factors. The extension to death certificates with causes of death permits a more in depth analysis to identify factors that contribute to the health outcome of sub-populations. The more favourable mortality pattern of some Mediterranean populations does not imply a morbidity advantage. The general result points to a more complex picture than the classic paradox with a wide combination of factors contributing to the differential health and mortality outcome.	Patrick	 Deboosere	Sylvie	 Gadeyne
2004	37	Race, Health, and Mortality I	Comparing Utahan Mormon and Non-Mormon Hispanics' Health Status: Testing the Cultural Buffering Hypothesis	This study examines Hispanic Health in a new destination state; while taking an in depth look at the influence of health between Utah Mormon and Utah non-Mormon Hispanics. This may possibly test the strength of the cultural buffering hypothesis in the Epidemiology Paradox.  To accomplish these aims, the 2001 Utah Health Status Survey will be utilized as the data sources.  By comparing these two groups in terms of global health status as well as a variety of physical health characteristics we expect to find relationships to significantly better overall health among those that join the dominant Mormon culture than those that do not.	Philip	B. Mason	Youngtae	 Cho	Michael	B. Toney
2004	37	Race, Health, and Mortality I	Gender Roles, Relationship Satisfaction, and Self-Reported Health: A Window into the Personal Lives of Mexicans in the United States and Mexico	Introduction-The incongruencies in Mexican health outcomes in the United States is often explained as the result of cultural protection. One speculation is that Mexicans value certain traditions that have become embedded into their lifestyles and culture. One often noted tradition is the conception of gender roles. Little is known, nonetheless, how these traditions play out as actually influencing health.  Objectives- 1)To determine the level of effect ascription to traditional gender roles  influences self-reported health in Mexicans in the United States.  2) To determine the effects of perceive relationship quality on self-reported health. Methods- This study uses the MAPSS (Mexican American Prevalence and Services Survey) and the Epidemiology of Psychiatric Comorbidity Project (EPM, Mexico City) datasets . Results- Acceptance of traditional gender roles for  Mexicans in the US is not statistically significant, but in Mexico shows marginal significance.  Marital satisfaction is a significant safeguard against poorer health, particularly for women in both countries.	Jennifer	J. Tovar	Jorge	 Caraveo Anduaga	Ronald	 Angel	Maren	Andrea  Jimenez
2004	38	Expectations and Social Relationships	Divided Expectations: The Influences of Biography, Gender, and Class	Demographers have long considered peoples' expectations (e.g., for the number and timing of children) as important predictors of behavior.  But investigation of couples' conjoint expectations has been particularly absent.  And yet life course as well as expectancy theory suggests that decision-making (and hence expectations) are made within embedded social relations, such as the husband/wife dyad.  In this paper we focus on individual- and couple-level expectations using survey data on dual-earner, middle-class couples.  For individuals in our sample, we look at expectations of changing jobs, retiring, and getting married.  For couples, we look at expectations of spouse's job change, as well as expectations of moving and having (or adopting) a child.  We examine: (1) the influences of biography on expectations and subsequent behavior; (2) the influences of occupation and education on individual expectations and subsequent occurrence of change; (3) the congruence and dynamics of expectations and decision-making within couples.	Joyce	 Altobelli	Phyllis	 Moen	Donna	L. Spencer
2004	38	Expectations and Social Relationships	Expectations vs. Actuality in the Levels of Support from Children: Tracing Cohorts in Taiwan from 1965 to 1999	How well do young couples read the social and demographic changes going on about them and to what extent do they modify their expectations as they advance through the life cycle?  This study traces expectations of several cohorts of women for coresiding with children in old age and being supported by them by employing a long time series of questions included in fertility surveys in Taiwan from 1965 to the 1990s; and then contrasting these expectations with actual support patterns revealed in surveys of the older population. The trends in the expectation data are examined by characteristics and estimates of inter- vs. intra-cohort change provided. Expectations appear to evolve with changing life cycle developments and period events, so that the trends in expected support are far from linear.	Albert	 Hermalin	Li-Shou	 Yang
2004	38	Expectations and Social Relationships	Household Context and Subjective Well-Being among the Oldest-Old in China	The linkage between social relations of older adults and health has been well established in the literature. Among types of social ties, the household provides a crucial context, in which household members enjoy different levels of social integration and social support.  As a result, it is often found that people live in some arrangements are healthier than persons in other living arrangements.  Our paper expands upon this idea to investigate the importance of household context to old age well-being in China, where the patrilocal and patrilineal extended family has been traditionally dominant.   Using two waves of data from the Determinants of Healthy Longevity Survey in China (DHLC), we explore how variation in living arrangements is related to emotional health as indicated by measures of subjective well-being among the oldest-old.  We are particularly interested in whether son preference in family building translates into emotional health benefits for the elder.	Feinian	 Chen	Susan	E. Short
2004	38	Expectations and Social Relationships	Social Networks and Family Change in Japan	In numerous Western countries, many changes have occurred in marriage, cohabitation, non-marital fertility and the use of child care, but the traditional Japanese family system strongly discourages all four.  We argue that Japan is ripe for change in some or all of these behaviors. Using a nationally representative 2000 survey, we show that substantial numbers of Japanese know people who have cohabited, used child care, had a non-marital birth, or did not marry, and that such knowledge is patterned by both relationship domain and standard demographic categories.  Further, those who know someone who has engaged in these non-traditional behaviors are also more likely to have a favorable opinion towards them.	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Minja	K. Choe	Larry	 Bumpass	Noriko	 Tsuya
2004	39	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	The Reproductive Health Consequences of Early Marriage in Sudan: Findings from the 1999 Safe Motherhood Survey	Almost all adolescent women in Sudan who bear children do so within marriage, and early marriage is a social norm and married couples are under social pressure to have a child sooner after marriage.  Therefore, it is important to study young married women reproductive health in order to develop policies and programmes to improve the health and well-being of this group.  Using the 1999 Sudan Safe Motherhood Survey the paper will focus on the following:  Pregnancy loss; Childhood mortality; Pregnancy and postpartum complications; and Reproductive tract infections (RTI) such as abnormal vaginal discharge and urinary tract infections.  There were 3097 (19%) ever-married women aged 15-24 years. Almost all of them are currently married (96%).  Education level is low, only 51% attended schools. The mean age at first marriage is 16.4 years. Only about half of young married women know one or more methods and current contraceptive use is below 10%.	Manar	E. Abdel-Rahman	Mohamed	M. Ali
2004	39	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Comparing Maternal Health Indicators between Teenagers and Older Women in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from DHS	This paper uses DHS data from 21 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, collected in the late 1990s and early 2000s. A comparison of maternal health indicators between teenagers and older women, based on logistic regression analyses show that in general, the teenagers are more likely to report unintended fertility (especially mistimed), receive inadequate antenatal care (start late and attend fewer visits), have non-facility delivery,  and have a small baby at birth. However, teenagers are less likely to have had Caesarean section deliveries compared to older women.  An examination of the country level variations shows significant differences in maternal health indicators between countries. However, there is no evidence that the observed pattern by maternal age varies significantly between countries. For teenagers with characteristics associated with higher Caesarean section or unwanted fertility rates, being in countries with overall higher levels of these outcomes greatly amplifies their chances of experiencing these outcomes.	Monica	A. Magadi	Alfred	Otieni  Agwanda	Francis	 Obare	Negussie	 Taffa
2004	39	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Reproductive Morbidity and Health Seeking Behaviour of Adolescent Women in Rural India	Although reproductive health programmes since ICPD Conference in Cairo are increasingly addressing the needs of adolescents, adolescent women still face multiple barriers in accessing reproductive and sexual health services. This study is an attempt to examine the self-reported symptoms of reproductive morbidity including gynecological, obstetric and contraceptive morbidity and health seeking behaviour of adolescent women in rural India. It also includes an exploration of reasons for non-utilization of services. The results of the study show high prevalence of gynecological morbidity. Similarly, a significant number of adolescent women were reported to be suffering from complications during pregnancy, during and after delivery, and after the use of contraception. The study found that adolescent women generally do not discuss about these symptoms and few women seek treatment, especially due to embarrassment, and financial constraint. Moreover, women ignore symptoms as they have accepted them as part of their reproductive life.	Abhilasha	 Sharma
2004	39	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Comparative Qualitative Findings on Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	An important challenge to research on adolescent sexual and reproductive health is accurately measuring sexual behavior.  Conducting comparative research presents a further challenge to making sexual and reproductive health concepts “standard” across  varying contexts.  This paper, based on a multi-country study conducted in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Uganda and Malawi, provides insights into how young people from diverse socio-cultural contexts understand key sexual and reproductive health terms. Fifty-five focus group discussions (FGDs) were conducted from January through April 2003 with adolescents ages 14 to 19 years from diverse circumstances – rural and urban, male and female, in-school and out-of-school.  A number of logistical difficulties in conducting FGDs with the different categories of adolescents are described.  Preliminary findings of adolescents’ understanding of key concepts (e.g. sexual activity, risk, oral sex, prevention and protection) suggest the need to acknowledge the wide range of “measurement error” surrounding sexual and reproductive health outcomes.	Mary	 Amuyunzu-Nyamongo	Christine	 Ouedraogo	Vanessa	 Woog
2004	40	Welfare, Maternal Employment, and Adolescents	Adolescents Assuming Adult Roles: Factors Associated with Teens Providing Child Care for Siblings in Low-Income Families	While research has found that work-promoting policies appear to have little negative effect on preschool or elementary school children, experimental studies find that when parents on welfare are subject to work-promoting policies, adolescents with younger siblings suffer negative outcomes.   One potential explanation for these findings is that when parents must work, adolescents are required to provide child care for younger siblings, occupying time that could be spent on homework or enrichment activities. Little is known about the extent to which adolescents care for younger siblings. Using Survey of Income and Program Participation data, the paper will use descriptive statistics, and logistic and OLS regression models, to create a profile of families that rely on adolescent care-giving.  The multivariate models will be estimated to understand how various characteristics are associated with the likelihood that a family will use teens to provide care and the time that they care for their siblings.	Jeffrey	 Capizzano
2004	40	Welfare, Maternal Employment, and Adolescents	Single Mothers' Employment Dynamics and Adolescent Well-Being	Researchers have been concerned with the largely unaddressed question of the links between single mother job characteristics and child well-being.  In this paper, we use data from a nationally-representative sample of single mothers whose employment experiences we observe over a two-year period during the mid-to-late 1990's.  We link employment patterns to change over time in multiple measures of child well-being.  Controlling for background characteristics and potential selection factors, we find that, relative to being continuously employed in a good job, teens whose mothers lose a job without re-employment show a decline in self-esteem; those whose mothers are continually employed in a bad job are more at risk for grade repetition; and those whose mothers are persistently out of the labor force or lose more than one job show an increased likelihood of school drop-out.  These effects are largely unexplained by changes in family income over the two-year period.	Ariel	 Kalil	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2004	40	Welfare, Maternal Employment, and Adolescents	Maternal Employment and Adolescent Self-Care	The author uses the National Educational Longitudinal Survey of 1988 supplemented by the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth - 1979 to estimate the relationship between maternal employment and the likelihood of adolescent self-care.  Unlike prior research, the author employs a variety of fixed effects models to account for omitted variables that may be related to maternal employment and adolescent self-care.  Findings suggest that the adolescents of mothers who work full-time spend an additional 43 minutes per week in self-care compared to mothers who work part-time.  Further, a standard deviation increase in the number of weeks a mother works during the year increases the probability that her child will be unsupervised by 31 percent.  These effects are not constant across socio-economic groups: affluent families have strong effects, while the relationship is more tenuous among low-income families.  This finding has important implications for pro-work social welfare policies in the U.S.	Leonard	M. Lopoo
2004	40	Welfare, Maternal Employment, and Adolescents	Understanding High School Drop Out: Exploring the Relationship between Policy, Ethnicity, and Dropping Out	Factors such as parental education, parental employment, and family structure all have been shown to influence a child's decision to dropout of school.  Additionally, extreme differences in rates of dropout for children of different racial/ethnic backgrounds suggest that these family factors may have differential effects depending on the child's ethnicity.  Using data from the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies (NEWWS), an experimental longitudinal evaluation of a mandatory employment program, this research attempts to explain these variations in dropout by examining welfare policy, ethnicity, family characteristics and their interactive effect on a child's likelihood to either remain in or leave school.  Results indicate that parental participation in the program does differentially affect children's likelihood to dropout of school depending on ethnicity.  Participation in the education focused program increased dropout rates for White children when compared to Latino children, while increasing dropout rates for Black children when compared to White children.	Amanda	L. Roy	Hirokazu	 Yoshikawa
2004	41	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developing Countries	Why Is Fertility Still So High in Guatemala?	The total fertility rate (TFR) in Guatemala, at 5.0 children per woman, is the highest of any Latin American country.  In particular, Guatemala's urban TFR of 4.1 (Demographic and Health Survey 1998-99) contrasts with urban TFRs in neighbouring El Salvador (2.8), Nicaragua (2.6) and Honduras (3.3).  This study aims to answer the question why the TFR, and especially urban fertility in Guatemala, remains so high. The analysis uses data from three different Demographic and Health Surveys (1987, 1995-96 and 1998-99) to chart the evolution of Guatemalan fertility during the past 25 years.  We then examine local variations in urban fertility using individual-level data from the 2002 census for Guatemala city, representing over one fifth of the country's population. Our hypothesis is that Guatemala's high fertility is related to its cultural heterogeneity, which creates barriers that prevent the diffusion of knowledge and attitudes favouring modern reproductive behaviour and fertility decline.	Sofie	 De Broe	Andrew	 Hinde	Jane	 Falkingham
2004	41	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developing Countries	Closing Gender Gaps in Education in Africa: The Potential Contribution of Pregnancy-Avoidance Programs	Plausible arguments suggest that pregnancy-avoidance programs can help close gender gaps in education in Africa, but studies have not quantified these contributions. We use recent education statistics compiled by DHS on 23 African countries to construct schooling life tables and simulate the reduction in gender gaps that would occur if these countries gradually reduced the incidence of pregnancy-related dropouts. We find the following: For these 23 countries as a whole, the female-to-male ratio among secondary school graduates would increase by 18.3 percentage points, i.e., a 36 percent reduction of the current gender gaps. However, payoffs vary substantially across countries. By themselves, pregnancy-avoidance would not close the current gender gap, but their relative impacts are likely to be substantial in several of the countries studied. Policy and research implications are discussed.	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	Joseph	M. Stycos	Fatou	S. Jah
2004	41	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developing Countries	Does Family Planning Program Reduce Inequality in Fertility, Contraceptive Use, and Other Health Care Utilization? Evidence from Bangladesh	Since the introduction of organized family planning program almost 50 years ago, a large number of studies have examined the contribution of family planning program in reducing fertility in economically disadvantaged countries.  In addition, several studies have examined the concomitant benefits of family planning programs on infant and maternal mortality reduction. However, none of the study has examined whether organized family planning program can reduce inequality in contraceptive use and fertility level. Using nationally representative data from Bangladesh Health and Demographic Survey, 1999-2000, we examine the effect family planning workers on the reduction of inequality in contraceptive use and maternal and child health care (MCH) utilization. Our results suggest that family planning workers significantly reduced inequality in modern temporary contraceptive use (concentration index of 0.105 (95% CI: 0.056-0.124) reduced to 0.005 (95% CI: -0.012 - 0.24). However, the effect of field workers on the reduction of inequality in MCH care utilization is limited.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed
2004	42	Social Environment and Adult Health in Developing Countries	Social Insurance and Widowhood in Costa Rica	Numerous studies have documented adverse mortality effects of widowhood.  Recent work in Costa Rica, however, has found the absence of such an effect.  This paper investigates the role of social insurance in explaining these phenomena, given Costa Rica's extensive social insurance coverage.  Costa Rica increased social health insurance coverage from 40% to over 70% during the 1970s, a period of relative female mortality improvement.  Using both aggregated county-level vital statistics and individual women-level census data, we analyze this insurance expansion as a natural experiment, employing county fixed effects models to estimate the causal insurance effects on the relative mortality outcomes of widows.	William	H. Dow	Kristy	 Gonzalez	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby
2004	42	Social Environment and Adult Health in Developing Countries	Women's Autonomy, Women's Status, and Nutrition in Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Malawi	There are several countries in Southern Africa that have been experiencing both a food crisis and an HIV epidemic, both of which have put 14.4 million people at risk of starvation. In these countries, women have played a central role in food production for their households. Using DHS data from Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi, the relationship between women's status and their own nutritional levels, measured by Chronic Energy Deficiency (CED), is explored. In Zambia and Malawi, women with less decision-making autonomy are more likely to have CED. There is no such association in Zimbabwe, where surveyed women have higher autonomy and a smaller proportion of all women have CED. In the most resource-constrained settings, women with less autonomy are at greater risk of compromised nutritional status which, in turn, may lead to loss of productive capacity, making them at greater risk of food insecurity for themselves and their households.	Michelle	 Hindin
2004	42	Social Environment and Adult Health in Developing Countries	Social Networks, Risk Perception, and Changing Attitudes towards HIV-AIDS: New Evidence from a Longitudinal Study Using Fixed-Effects Estimation	In this paper we compare the effects of social networks on the adoption of strategies to prevent HIV infection in Sub-Saharan Africa. We try to assess the mechanisms through which social interactions shape these behaviors (social influence vs. social learning). Using longitudinal data collected in rural Malawi (MDICP), we implement fixed-effects models to allow for the possibility that important unobserved characteristics of individuals or communities, determine not only the outcomes of interest but also the content and density of social interactions. We distinguish between social influence and social learning by analyzing data on the structure of networks in which conversations about HIV prevention occur. Our analyses emphasize the need to control for the non-random selection of network partners. Standard estimates without such controls are likely to misrepresent the effects of social interactions on the adoption of different strategies to prevent HIV infection.	Stephane	 Helleringer
2004	42	Social Environment and Adult Health in Developing Countries	Social Roles, Environment, and Gender Differences in Disability and Function in Egypt and Tunisia	Research on gender disparities in child survival and health is abundant, yet similar studies in later life are limited. We compare levels of disability among women and men in Egypt and Tunisia and examine whether underlying illnesses, family structure, and living conditions account for observed differences. Adjusted levels of functional limitation are higher for women than men, but adjusted levels of disability are comparable. In Egypt, differences in disability are sensitive to family and environmental controls, and differences in functional limitation are sensitive to family controls. Findings caution against sole use of reported health in studies of gender and aging in patriarchal settings.	Kathryn	M. Yount
2004	43	Race, Assimilation, and Housing	Does Suburban Residence Mean Better Neighborhood Conditions for All Households? Assessing the Influence of Nativity Status and Race/Ethnicity	Suburban residence is considered symbolic of the American dream. Despite growth in suburban minority and immigrant populations, the question of whether access to high quality residential environments is available to all households has gone largely unexplored.  This paper helps fill this gap by evaluating nativity-status and racial/ethnic differences in a range of neighborhood conditions for both suburban and central city residents.  A key question asked is whether disparities in neighborhood conditions among suburban residents are similar to those in the central city, or whether immigrant and minority suburban residents live in neighborhoods similar to those of their native-born and white counterparts, as predicted by spatial assimilation theory.  Among the conditions examined are indicators of physical disorder and undesirable land uses, measures rarely examined in studies of locational attainment.  The study relies on data from the 2001 panel of the American Housing Survey (AHS), the first to include nativity status.	Samantha	 Friedman	Emily	 Rosenbaum
2004	43	Race, Assimilation, and Housing	Spatial Assimilation and Neighborhood Transitions	Spatial Assimilation posits that immigrants tend to live in ethnic enclaves (usually less desirable places with high concentrations of immigrants) due to financial, social and cultural capital constraints but are motivated to move to better neighborhoods as they become assimilated to American life and economically successful. While this model fits closely with the settlement patterns of European immigrants at the turn of the 20th century, scholars have argued that current immigrant experiences differ. This paper uses an event history analysis of the mobility patterns of a sample of adults from Los Angeles County to analyze their transition rates to and from different types of neighborhoods and examine the factors which affect these transitions.  I hope to engage a number of questions which have been raised in the assimilation literature regarding the viability of spatial assimilation and alternative models for explaining the spatial patterns of current first and second generation immigrant families.	Vanesa	 Estrada
2004	43	Race, Assimilation, and Housing	The Effect of Immigration on Residential Patterns in U.S. Metropolitan Areas, 1990-2000	A number of recent studies have shown that residential segregation among various Asian and Hispanic groups has remained the same or increased in recent decades, even while African American segregation has declined. High levels of immigration likely affect patterns of segregation, as new immigrants often settle in ethnic enclaves even as longer-term residents may disperse into outlying areas. The purpose of this analysis is to examine patterns of segregation in 1990 and 2000 for various racial/ethnic groups by nativity, global region, and, among the foreign-born, length of time in the U.S. This will be followed by a multivariate analysis of the effect of immigration on these residential patterns. These analyses will provide insight as to whether the spatial assimilation model is an appropriate one for understanding residential patterns, and the conditions under which it has greater applicability.	John	 Iceland
2004	43	Race, Assimilation, and Housing	Residential Assimilation between the First and Second Decade of U.S. Residence: Interplay of Human Capital and Ethnic Differences with Temporal Dynamics	This paper addresses the residential assimilation of three distinctive immigrant groups in the greater Los Angeles area, focusing on a single arrival cohort that came in 1975-79, and analyzing the pace and determinants of their assimilation between 1990 and 2000.  We pay particular attention to the duration of U.S. residence and its interaction with key determinants: birth cohorts, English proficiency and use, human capital, income, and housing attainments. We expect to find that locational attainment is connected to homeownership and house value, and that such connection varies across immigrant groups. Younger immigrant householders, especially those age 15-24 in 1990 and 25-34 in 2000, i.e., approximating the 1.5 generation, have assimilated faster than middle-aged immigrants. Human capital differences and housing attainments explain much, but not all, of the large difference between Chinese and Mexican immigrants, but less of the difference between Chinese and Korean immigrants. Distinct ethnic differences remain.	Dowell	 Myers	Zhou	 Yu
2004	44	Understanding the Forced Migration of Trafficked Persons and Refugees	A Demographic Case Study of Forced Migration: The 1947 Partition of India	This research seeks to reevaluate relevant census and vital registration data from India, Pakistan and Bangladesh pre- and post-Partition, develop and document methods that can be used to quantify the demographic consequences of forced migration, and compute revised estimates of Partition related migration and mortality using up-to-date methods of demographic analysis.  This paper will focus on pilot analyses of data related to the migration across the border between India and Pakistan in the formerly undivided province of the Punjab in British India.  Primary issues using historical census data from this type of humanitarian crisis where a border was created are:  local boundary changes, differences in data collection - especially regarding important age groups and religion categories, and difficulty disentangling migration from mortality based on the available tabulated data.	Kenneth	H. Hill	William	 Seltzer	Jennifer	 Leaning	Saira	J. Malik	Sharon	 Stanton Russell
2004	44	Understanding the Forced Migration of Trafficked Persons and Refugees	The Forgotten Urban Refugees: A Review of the Demographic and Socio-Economic Dimension of Refugees in Nairobi City	Traditionally refugees fleeing from war or political persecution have been concentrated in camps, which are mainly situated in rural areas. Their migration patterns have, therefore, always been rural to rural or urban to rural. Increasingly, however, a substantial proportion of refugees are moving into urban areas. Could such increasing migration of refugees into urban areas as opposed to settling in designated camps where most of the services and organizations providing assistance to refugees are located be due to the poor services or in search of economic opportunities--economic migrants as they are referred to in the developed world or both? Do such refugees differ from those that remain in the designated camps? We use the UNHCR data base supplemented by primary data collection to explore these issues.	Gloria	 Chepngeno	Charlotte	 Lang’at
2004	44	Understanding the Forced Migration of Trafficked Persons and Refugees	Migration, Sex Work and Trafficking: Learning from Vietnamese Women’s Experiences in Cambodia	Trafficking receives much international attention - as a violation of human rights, a manifestation of organized crime, and increasingly, as a risk to the health of individuals and communities.  The concept of trafficking is also commonly conflated with forced prostitution, despite the fact that not all trafficked people end up in the sex industry, and not all sex workers have been coerced or deceived.  Yet sex workers' own perceptions, motivations, and concerns rarely inform relevant debates or policies. As a result, local anti-trafficking measures often target migrant sex workers but fail to recognize the complex dynamics behind women’s entry into the sex industry or understand their current work conditions and needs. Such measures can actually harm rather than help these communities.  This paper presents the case study of Vietnamese sex workers in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, to demonstrate how attempts to reduce exploitation can result in increased human rights abuse and vulnerability to health risks, including HIV. The data presented draws from in-depth interviews and participatory discussions with over 100 sex workers, addressing their experiences of migration, sex work, and relationship to local gatekeepers including brothel managers, police, and non-governmental agencies (NGO).  Results suggest that responses focused solely on trafficking do not benefit these sex workers; instead, a more flexible approach that takes into consideration sex workers' own realities and priorities is needed.	Joanna	 Busza
2004	44	Understanding the Forced Migration of Trafficked Persons and Refugees	Agrarian Conflict, Internal Displacement, and Trafficking of Mexican Women: The Case of Chiapas State	Some 40,000 indigenous people have been internally displaced due to agrarian conflict of Chiapas during 1994 to 2002. People who leave their lands and homes due to conflict, are currently living in appalling condition, and many displaced families are living together in a subhuman condition. In majority of cases displaced people cannot cultivate their land, either because, the paramilitaries make it impossible, or, no sufficient land. This impossibility, make them suffer from poverty and subjected them towards exploitation. To escape from poverty and conflict, parents sell their daughter in hope of a better life. Every year about 3,000 young girls from Chiapas trafficked to Mexico city and Cancun, where more of them are below the age of consent (Menendez, 2001). So, this paper attempts to show the effect of agrarian conflict on trafficking of women with relation to internal displacement of people in Chiapas, using the primary and secondary information.	Arunkumar	 Acharya
2004	45	New Patterns of Immigration and Settlement in the United States	Residential Choices of the Newly Arrived Foreign Born: Spatial Patterns and the Implications for Assimilation	The preponderance of work on the assimilation of the foreign-born makes only passing reference to their spatial patterns. This study uses data from the 1990 PUMS data, to be extended with the 2000 data, to examine the residential choices of the newly arrived (since 1985) foreign born and to re-examine the evidence for spatial assimilation. While the central city continues to receive lower income immigrants with lower levels of human capital there are also professionals arriving in the central city. Similarly, the suburbs, at least in this case study, receive both households with lower levels of human capital and professionals. The spatial patterns are more complex than in the past and the central city suburban dichotomy may be increasingly questionable as a measure of spatial assimilation. We postulate that this may become increasingly so in our multi-nodal metropolitan areas	William	A.V. Clark	Shila	 Patel
2004	45	New Patterns of Immigration and Settlement in the United States	Ethnicity, Immigration, and Migration to Nontraditional Geographic Areas	This paper investigates immigrants' five-year residential mobility patterns across different types of labor market areas, paying particular attention to three types of nontraditional destinations: nonmetropolitan labor market areas, suburban, and areas of low coethnic population. Informed by social-psychological, economic, and sociological theoretical frameworks of race relations, social capital, and spatial assimilation, I examine how immigrants' decisions to move to classical versus nontraditional geographic areas are affected by local ethnic and immigrant composition, and how these effects vary by immigrant group and by duration of time in the U.S. Thus, this study shows whether classical spatial assimilation models fit the case of contemporary immigrants, as well as the extent to which contemporary immigrants exhibit new patterns of geographic settlement.	Melissa	 Chiu
2004	45	New Patterns of Immigration and Settlement in the United States	Outside City Limits, Inside County Lines: Rural Metro Hispanics	Analyses of new Hispanic destinations often overlook Hispanics whose residence intersects two predominant geographic classification systems: OMB-defined metropolitan and nonmetropolitan counties, and smaller Census-defined urban and rural areas. Geographically large counties with modest urban agglomerations, particularly in the Southwestern States of California and Texas, yield Hispanic populations of mixed urban character and effectively remove some truly rural populations from research and policy debates.  We analyze the 1.2 million rural-metropolitan Hispanics, a group one quarter the size of the entire nonmetro Hispanic population.  We apply GIS techniques to the smallest unit of geographic analysis, block group data, to overcome disjunctures between distinct 1990 and 2000 rural definitions. We analyze changes in spatial concentration, social and economic well being, industrial sector employment, and metro county integration, and we address how inclusion of this population within the nonmetro Hispanic population alters the profile of Hispanics living in rural and small town America.	William	A. Kandel	John	 Cromartie
2004	45	New Patterns of Immigration and Settlement in the United States	California's Newest Immigrants	Immigration and immigrant adaptation are integral parts of California's continuing development, and immigrants are an increasing share of the state's population.  In 1990, 22 percent of the state's population was foreign-born, and by 2000, this share had risen to 26 percent.  Immigrants arriving in the intervening decade were slightly more likely to be from Mexico or Central America than were previous arrivals, and new immigrants from India became an important component of international migration to California.  Using the PUMS, this paper compares the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of new immigrants in 2000 with those of recent immigrants to California at the time of the 1990 census, describing how the experiences of new arrivals have changed over the last decade.  Later in the paper, we examine immigrants' experiences 10 to 20 years after arriving in the United States as compared to their experiences 0 to 10 years after arrival.	Joseph	M. Hayes
2004	46	North American Labor Markets	Structural Impacts: Twenty Years of Labour Flows to Canada	The individual decision to immigrate is made in the context of larger social structures that influence the composition of the economic immigrant population over time.  Over the last 20 years, economic immigrants to Canada have faced changing selection policies, cycles of economic recession and growth, increased demand for information technology skills, women's increased labour force participation and an aging labour force.  Intended occupation of immigrants on gaining permanent resident status is an indicator of the relationship between labour flows and the structural influences on those flows.  This paper examines the flow of economic immigrants to Canada and their occupational composition over the last twenty years. Longitudinal data on immigrants is used to identify patterns of economic integration for occupational groups by key characteristics.  For example, information technology (IT) workers comprise a growing proportion of recent economic immigrants, a group who tend to find work early and remain in Canada.	Heather	B. Dryburgh
2004	46	North American Labor Markets	Why Are Power Couples Increasingly Located in Large MSAs?	Using census data, Costa and Kahn (Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000) document a dramatic increase in the proportion of power couples--couples in which both spouses are college graduates--residing in large MSAs.   Their explanation is that college educated couples are more likely to face a co-location problem and therefore are more likely to migrate to large MSAs than are other couples.  We present three main findings that dispute their hypothesis.  First, we show that the proportion of power couples in large MSAs fell between 1990 and 2000.   Second, we analyze the dynamic forces that underlie the observed location patterns.  We find that marriage and education are more important than couple migration in explaining location trends.  Finally, we investigate factors associated with couple migration.  We find that the effect of education on couples' migration behavior comes not from the joint educational profile but only from the husband's education.	Janice	 Compton	Robert	A. Pollak
2004	46	North American Labor Markets	Weekend Employment in High-Income Countries: A Comparative Analysis	This paper examines the prevalence and correlates of weekend employment in the United States and 17 European countries.  We show that there is considerable variation among these countries.  For example, employment on Saturdays ranges from about 5% to 30% of all those employed. (Generally, much smaller percentages are employed on Sundays). Variations among countries are explained in part by taking into account contextual differences, such as the size of the service sector and work regulations.  The micro-analyses of correlates of weekend employment within countries show that women are generally more likely to work Saturdays than men, and parents and nonparents within a similar age range generally do not differ much in their prevalence of weekend employment.  We argue that even in countries with relatively generous social policies, we need to pay more attention to how weekend employment may impose constraints on parents and children.	Harriet	B. Presser	Janet	 Gornick
2004	46	North American Labor Markets	Latino Immigrant Self-Employment: Changing Opportunity Structures in Four Ethnic Economies, 1990-2000	Despite the fact that self-employment offers many advantages for immigrants, some groups are more likely than others to be self-employed.  This work investigates self-employment probabilities among Latin American immigrants of different place of origin groups within various ethnic economies in the United States dominated by Latino business owners and the changes that have occurred between 1990 and 2000.  In this investigation, I explore whether or not the presence of a dominant immigrant group reduces the self-employment odds of  other Latin American immigrants and whether or not the self-employment context is changing with the marked increase in Latino immigration.  The results indicate that, regardless of human capital and other factors, place of origin continues to significantly reduce self-employment for some immigrant groups relative to the dominant group.  I speculate that dominant groups may have exclusive access to capital or other means of blocking out-groups from entering into self-employment.	Stephanie	A. Bohon
2004	47	Demography of Welfare and Economic Wellbeing	Household Formation and Wellbeing of Young Individuals: A Comparative Analysis Based on the European Community Household Panel	This paper provides a comparative analysis of the impact of family formation on young individuals' wellbeing. The analysis is based on the European Community Household Panel Survey from which we derive several alternative definitions of wellbeing. In particular we consider poverty status, household income (using alternative equivalence scales), and deprivation indices. We then apply Difference-in-Difference estimators combined with Propensity Score Matching techniques (DD-PSM) as a means to provide unbiased parameter estimates of the impact of childbearing on wellbeing. We find that childbearing events tend to reduce material wellbeing, but with significant differences between welfare regimes. There are for instance strong adverse effects in terms of poverty in countries belonging to the Liberal welfare state (UK and Ireland) but much smaller effects among Social Democratic welfare states. The results are more mixed once wellbeing is measured as a multidimensional deprivation index rather than poverty status or household income.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Letizia	 Mencarini
2004	47	Demography of Welfare and Economic Wellbeing	What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments	Standard labor supply theory predicts systematic heterogeneity in the impact of recent welfare reforms on earnings, transfers, and total income. Simulation evidence suggests this heterogeneity could be important. We use experimental data to estimate quantile treatment effects of Connecticut's Jobs First reform. We find considerable evidence of systematic heterogeneity, consistent with theory. Moreover, a focus on mean impacts computed for subgroups would have missed important findings. Earnings fall at the very top of the distribution, as theory predicts should happen. However, Jobs First has essentially no impact on earnings at the bottom of the distribution. Income at the bottom deciles is constant before time limits hit (contrary to large positive mean impacts for a disadvantaged subgroup) and falls afterwards (again contrary to a zero effect using means). These findings suggest cause for concern about the ability of programs like Jobs First to end welfare dependence of significant numbers of women.	Marianne	 Bitler	Jonah	B. Gelbach	Hilary	W. Hoynes
2004	47	Demography of Welfare and Economic Wellbeing	Changes in the Welfare Caseload and the Health of Low-Educated Mothers	Declines in the welfare caseload in the late 1990s brought significant change to the lives of many low-educated, single mothers.  Many single mothers left welfare and entered the labor market and others re-arranged their lives in order to avoid going on public assistance.  These changes may have affected the health and health behaviors of these women.  To date, there has been no study of this issue. In this paper, we obtained estimates of the association between the welfare caseload and welfare policies, and three health behaviors--smoking, drinking, and exercise--and two self-reported measures of health--days in poor mental health, and overall health status.  The results of our study reveal that changes in the caseload had little effect on measures of health status, but were significantly associated with two health behaviors: binge drinking and regular exercise.  Changes in the welfare caseload were positively related to binge drinking and changes in the welfare caseload were negatively related to the probability of engaging in regular and sustained physical activity.	Robert	 Kaestner	Elizabeth	 Tarlov
2004	47	Demography of Welfare and Economic Wellbeing	Does Time on Welfare Affect Women's Wages?	Many scholars have examined the effect of a work interruption on women's wages, but few have analyzed the wage implications of welfare participation.  It is often assumed that time on welfare will have the same negative impact on wages as other work breaks.  We present justifications for why welfare participation is qualitatively different from other generic work interruptions, and discuss how these differences may result in welfare participation having a positive effect, negative effect, or no effect on wages.  Using longitudinal data from the 1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation, our results indicate that time spent on welfare while unemployed results in a larger wage penalty compared to other non-welfare work breaks.  Time spent on welfare while employed has a positive effect on wages, but the effect is much smaller compared to the impact of non-welfare work periods. Results are consistent with theories of human capital deterioration and welfare stigma.	Mary	C. Noonan	Colleen	 Heflin
2004	47	Demography of Welfare and Economic Wellbeing	Female Income Differentials and Social Benefits: A Four Country Comparison	Past literature on the family gap--the difference in outcomes for mothers and women without children--discusses inequality in wages and employment. This study examines family gaps in the economic well-being of households and poverty rates, and analyzes the extent to which they are reduced by the availability of social benefits. Preliminary results, using the Luxembourg Income Study, indicate that the generosity of the social protection system accounts for the size of the family gap, particularly in countries with sizeable income differentials. In countries with the most generous systems, family gaps for the lower half of the income distribution are, to begin with, very small. The inequality analysis finds that earnings have a significant role in determining overall inequality due to their large share in total income.  Benefits have a redistributive effect in all countries, with the magnitude of this effect depending on the generosity of benefits relative to income.	Eva	M. Sierminska
2004	48	Race, Gender, Aging, and Health	Gender and Racial Differences in the Health of Older People (60+) in Brazil	This paper examines racial and gender differences in health among elderly (60+) people in Brazil using 1998 national household survey micro-data (PNAD).  Despite the possibly inherent contradictions in doing so, we find that the health (more literally functional ability) of Black and Brown elders, or of elderly women, is not as good as the health of elderly Whites or men.  Furthermore, it appears that racial differences can be explained by socioeconomic factors but that gender differences cannot.  In the process of this exploration, we delve into issues of comparatively indicating health and imputing marital status.  Although we found no evidence that there is an additional health disadvantage to being Black or Brown AND female, we strongly urge future health research to consider gender and socioeconomic differentials together rather than only separately, as is often the case.	Susan	 De Vos	Luisa	 Schwartzman
2004	48	Race, Gender, Aging, and Health	Gender and Racial Differences among Elderly South African	South Africa, a Multiracial society, has more than 7 percent of his population aged 60 or more. There are huge differences among sexes and races. White population and females live longer and in poor health than other population stratum. Using data from the 1996 micro-data, this paper will demonstrate in detail this hypothesis.	Amadou	 Noumbissi
2004	48	Race, Gender, Aging, and Health	Sociodemographic Effects on Onset and Recovery of ADL Disability among Chinese Oldest Old	By pooling the first three waves (1998, 2000, 2002) of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey, this study examines the association of sociodemographic factors with onset and recovery of ADL disability under a comprehensive context. The results show that sociodemographic factors seem to play some roles on disability dynamics at very high ages even after controlling for many confounders. It is worth noting that the relationships between sociodemographic factors and disability dynamics at oldest-old ages are more complex and far from conclusive. One unique feature of this study is development of measurement and model to include change of functional status before dying incorporating basic sociodemographic factors under a multivariate framework. Our results indicate that the conventional method, which excludes the information of ADL changes before dying due to unavailability of data, overestimates the effects of age, gender, ethnicity, and living alone on disability transitions whereas underestimates the effects of SES.	Danan	 Gu	Yi	 Zeng
2004	48	Race, Gender, Aging, and Health	The Effects of Neighborhood Disadvantage and Instability on Donated and Received Social Support: Examining Gender- and Race-Contingent Patterns among Older Adults	Does neighborhood disadvantage and instability influence donated and received social support? If so, are there gender- and race-contingent patterns? The social disorganization hypothesis predicts that disadvantage and instability diminish social support; the stress mobilization hypothesis predicts that they are associated with higher levels of social support. I also expect the mobilization predictions to be most apparent among black women. Results about the effects of disadvantage concur with the mobilization thesis for black women and the disorganization thesis for whites--although the effects on donated support are stronger among white men and the effects on received support are stronger among white women. In contrast, neighborhood instability is associated negatively with received and donated support among blacks only. I discuss the implications of these findings for theories about community-level effects on social relationships.	Scott	 Schieman
2004	49	Prospects for Higher Education Post-Grutter/Gratz	Research Perspective	This paper presents a conceptual framework for understanding the consequences of the widespread adoption of race-neutral alternatives'' to conventional racial affirmative action policies in college admissions. A simple model of applicant competition with endogenous effort is utilized to show that, in comparison to color-conscious affirmative action, these color-blind alternatives can significantly lower the efficiency of the student selection process in equilibrium. We examine data on matriculates at several selective colleges and universities to estimate the magnitudes involved. It is shown that the short-run efficiency losses of implementing color-blind affirmative action (in our sample) are four to five times as high as with color-conscious affirmative action.	Glenn	 Loury
2004	49	Prospects for Higher Education Post-Grutter/Gratz	Legal Perspective	University administrators celebrated a win for affirmative action in the Michigan Law School case, Grutter v. Bollinger.  But opponents of affirmative action continue to threaten lawsuits and administrative complaints.  They allege that race-neutral alternatives have already succeeded in Texas and California, and they may be expected to allege that many plans are too mechanical, or insufficiently individualized and holistic, to satisfy the rules announced in the Michigan cases.  This paper clarifies the current state of the law in non-technical terms, highlights pitfalls for unwary faculties and administrators, and advises on design of a defensible affirmative action plan.  The race-neutral alternatives on which opponents of affirmative rely are highly race-conscious, but indirect and inefficient, generally producing less diversity than a well-designed affirmative action plan and doing more harm to academic standards, conventionally measured.  These consequences matter legally; universities need not use methods that significantly undermine academic standards.	Douglas	 Laycock
2004	49	Prospects for Higher Education Post-Grutter/Gratz	Institutional Perspective	Many large state universities are facing a demographic bulge at the same time that they are experiencing sharply lower appropriations.  The demographic bulge sharply poses many choices in creating a freshman class that is diverse, adequately prepared, and then adequately mentored.  Large institutions face particular logistical issues in applying Justice O'Connor's Grutter desiderata to a large number of freshman applications.  Besides logistical issues, a race-sensitive admissions policy raises additional issues with alumni, faculty, legislators, high school counselors, and the general public.  This paper traces these issues in the context of the post-Hopwood experience in Texas.	Teresa	A. Sullivan
2004	50	HIV and Reproductive Health Behavior	The Role of AIDS Awareness on Partnership Formation in Rural Southwest Uganda	We analyze qualitative and quantitative data collected from a rural population cohort in southwestern Uganda to investigate the role of HIV/AIDS awareness on changes in partnership formation. Courtship norms and perceived changes due to AIDS are explored through qualitative focus group data collected from unmarried youth, married youth, and adults between 40 and 50 of both sexes.  Using survey data from the 2002-2003 serosurvey of the cohort, we test the hypothesis that rising age at first marriage over the last 20 years is consistent with greater commitment and caution in partnership formation through longer duration and higher likelihood that relationships end in marriage.  Multivariate hazard models are employed to test hypotheses on survey data, and findings are triangulated with the qualitative insights from focus groups to make a case for changing age at sex as a response to HIV/AIDS.	Brent	 Wolff	Dorothy	 Akurut	Sam	 Biraro	Heiner	 Grosskurth
2004	50	HIV and Reproductive Health Behavior	Factors Affecting Condom Use in Primary Sexual Relationships in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper uses data collected in Kenya, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe about 1999, as part of a WHO initiative to investigate how couples perceive and manage the dual risks of unwanted pregnancy and STD/HIV prevention.  In permanent relationships, factors that hypothetically should favor condom use include the desire to stop childbearing, a sense of subjective risk of HIV infection, positive attitudes toward family planning in general and condoms in particular, and several kinds of discussion with the partner.  We find that condoms are not highly favored as a family planning method and their family planning function is often an important reason for NOT using them for HIV protection.  Condom use is also not strongly associated with the perceived risk of HIV infection. Ironically, the greatest obstacles to condom use in permanent relationships are negative attitudes derived from the association with HIV, as well as suspicions of infidelity.	Thomas	W. Pullum	John	G. Cleland	Iqbal	H. Shah
2004	50	HIV and Reproductive Health Behavior	Sterilization in HIV Infected Women in Thailand	Objectives: To assess the prevalence of sterilization in HIV infected post-partum women in Thailand and explore its determinants.  Methods: Data collected within a clinical trial of perinatal HIV prevention (PHPT-2) included: Mother's and partner's socio-demographic characteristics, reproductive history, whether the current pregnancy was planned, previous knowledge of HIV status, baseline clinical and biological status (CD4 count and viral load), and contraceptive use 6 weeks after delivery. To explore the factors independently associated with sterilization, a logistic regression model was performed.  Results: The prevalence of sterilization was 56.3%. Variables independently associated with sterilization were: region (p=0.000), having at least one living child (p=0.000), previous child death (p=0.018) and knowledge of HIV status prior to pregnancy (p=0.000).  Conclusions: Because of their vulnerability, specific attention should be given to HIV infected women to ensure their understanding of the implications of sterilization, access to other contraceptive methods, and to antiretroviral treatments.	Camille	 Lallemant	Sophie	 Le Coeur	Marc	 Lallemant
2004	50	HIV and Reproductive Health Behavior	Culture and HIV/AIDS in Africa: Promoting Reproductive Health in the Light of Spouse-Sharing Practice among the Okun People, Nigeria	The Okun tribe numbering about a million persons accepts sexual relation between men and wives of their male kin. Features of spouse-sharing inimical to reproductive health were identified and used to develop an interactive community-based intervention. The intervention promoted discussion of spouse-sharing as risk factor in HIV/AIDS transmission, knowledge of AIDS/STDs, perception of risk and alternative behaviors to avoid contracting HIV/AIDS. The intervention effects were evaluated using data collected in baseline and follow-up surveys in May 1999 and June 2000 among 1018 sexually active respondents in two sets of Okun communities - one with and the other without intervention. The intervention was successful in raising awareness about HIV/AIDS, perception of risk of contracting the disease and intention to discontinue spouse-sharing significantly in the intervention communities. Lessons learned during the intervention are described as means of informing future community based interventions to address traditional practices that could transmit HIV/AIDS.	Makanjuola	O. Osagbemi	Bunmi	O. Joseph	Adebowale	A. Adepetu	Anthony	O. Nyong	Ayodele	S. Jegede
2004	51	Very Low Fertility I	Patterns of Low and Lowest-Low Fertility in Europe	In this paper we revisit the relation between low and lowest-low period fertility on the one, and cohort fertility and key fertility-related behaviors on the other side.  First, we identify a systematic pattern of lowest-low fertility that is characterized by a rapid delay of childbearing, a low progression probability after the first child, and a falling behind'' at relatively late ages. Second, our analyses show that the cross-country correlations in Europe between the total fertility level on the one side, and the total first marriage rate, the proportion of extramarital births and the female labor force participation rate on the other side have reversed during 1975-1999. Based on these analyses we conclude that the emergence of lowest-low fertility during the 1990s has been accompanied by a disruption or even a reversal of many well-known patterns that have been used to explain cross-country differences infertility patterns.	Francesco	C. Billari	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2004	51	Very Low Fertility I	Women's Economic Opportunities and Childbearing within Marriage in Italy, Spain, and Japan	This study examines the relationship between women's economic opportunities and childbearing in three industrialized countries where gender relations remain less egalitarian: Italy, Spain, and Japan.  Using data from the 1995-96 Fertility and Family Surveys and the 1998 National Family Research, I examine cohort differences in the pace of childbearing within marriage among women who were born between 1945 and 1964.  I ask three questions: 1) in each country, did women in younger cohorts make slower transitions to first births and second births within marriage compared with those in earlier cohorts?; 2) is the delay in childbearing within marriage in younger cohorts associated with increases in women's levels of education and labor force participation, after controlling for increases in age at marriage?; 3) do three countries show similar patterns in the relationship between the delay in childbearing within marriage and increases in women's levels of education and employment?	Kei	 Nomaguchi
2004	51	Very Low Fertility I	Very Low Fertility in South Korea: Patterns and Prospects	This paper examines patterns of very low fertility in South Korea since 1990 and discusses future prospects. Using census data of 1990, 1995, and 2000, and National Fertility Surveys conducted in 1991, 1994, 1997, and 2000, the paper examines patterns and covariates of first marriage and parity progressions to first, second, and third births. Fertility intentions are also analyzed and compared with actual fertility. The main focus of the analysis is how women's education affects marriage and parity progression after marriage, and how the number and gender preferences have changed during the period of very low fertility.	Minja	K. Choe	Seoung-Kwon	 Kim	Robert	D. Retherford
2004	51	Very Low Fertility I	China's Low Fertility in the 1990s: An Illusion from Birth Underreporting?	Estimates of China's fertility in the 1990s were greatly affected by the concerns of serious underreporting of births. However, in addition to much agreement among various large-scale data over time, neither extensive literature reviews, nor analyses utilizing a number of independent sources, can support the argument of substantial birth underreporting, which mainly resulted from neglect in data difference and regional disparities. A series of data comparisons suggest the possibility of overestimate in birth underreporting and hence upward fertility adjustments. Using data gathered at different points in time by different organizations, this research suggests that China's fertility declined from around 2.0 to 1.68 in the first half of the 1990s, and dropped further to 1.5 at the turn of the century. This decline was characterized by changes in both fertility preference and reproductive behaviours. Besides the strengthening of the official family planning program, structural changes had been a more fundamental cause.	Guangyu	 Zhang
2004	52	Gender and Family Roles	Changes in the Family Economic Contributions of Husbands and Wives	Wives and mothers have increased their labor force participation and earnings, raising questions about the relative importance of husbands' and wives' contributions to family income.  We use decennial census data for 1970 to 2000 to estimate the proportion of couples with wife-primary, husband-primary or equal (each contributing 40 to 60 percent) earnings or hours/weeks worked.  We show that, contrary to media accounts that have emphasized the recent growth of couples in which the wife is the dominant earner, the greatest increases in wife-primary and equal working and earning couples occurred in the 1970s and 1980s.  We document differences by education, race/ethnicity, and the age and presence of children.  Equal work is far more common than equal earnings.  Wives of high-earning husbands continue to be somewhat less likely to work, however there is little evidence of a parallel reduction in work for husbands with high earning wives.	Maria	M. Cancian	Deborah	S. Reed
2004	52	Gender and Family Roles	Father as Breadwinner: Gendered Wage Penalties for Job Interruptions	The wage penalty associated with motherhood and women's greater job discontinuity is well-established. Wage outcomes associated with men's family status and job discontinuity is less well-understood. Using a partial-adjustment model on fixed effects estimates, data from the NLSY(1979-1998) are used to estimate both immediate wage outcomes and longer-term wage trajectories as a function of family status and job interruptions for men and women.  The possibility that men incur a parenthood penalty through penalties associated with family-related job absence is considered by disaggregating absences into reasons for them. Results indicate that women receive immediate wage penalties for family-related absences that do not persist over time, although a negative effect of children does. Men get a pass for family absences, but incur wage penalties for non-family job interruptions that do persist over time. Results implicate the reinforcement of traditional gender roles as a primary obstacle to gender equity in the labor market.	Penelope	M. Huang
2004	52	Gender and Family Roles	Maternity and Paternity Leave: Contemporaneous Evidence the June Current Population Survey	This paper combines contemporaneous data on labor market status from the basic monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) and information on the age of a child in months from the Fertility Supplement to the June Current Population Survey to generate new estimates of maternity and paternity leave behavior and how it has changed over the last two decades.  We find sharply contrasting patterns across the two parents.  The nearly continuous and dramatic decrease in time away from work around the birth of a child appears to have ended in the early-1990s and perhaps reversed.  In contrast, until approximately the mid-1990s, there was no evidence that fathers changed their work patterns around the birth of a child, but that pattern also appears to have changed with emerging evidence of measurable paternity leave--lower levels of work among fathers in the months immediately before and after the birth of a child.	Jacob	A. Klerman
2004	52	Gender and Family Roles	Wives Who Outearn Their Husbands: A Transitory or Permanent Phenomenon for Couples?	In nearly one-fourth of dual-earner couples, wives earn more than their husbands. What this point-in-time statistic does not tell us is how earnings and employment are distributed between spouses dynamically over time.  Are the couples cited above persistently in this status, year after year, or do their relative earnings fluctuate? As Blumberg and Coleman (1989) observed, the (in)stability of these patterns likely affects a range of outcomes, including marital stability and risk of domestic abuse. To our knowledge, this study is the first to examine the persistence of relative spousal patterns and offer explanations. We analyze point-in-time data from the 2000 CPS and longitudinal data from the 1996-2000 SIPP. Using the SIPP, we construct a three-year measure of persistence. Among the findings, 22 percent of married couples are nontraditional at a point-in-time and 60 percent of such couples are persistently nontraditional over a three-year period.	Anne	 Winkler	Timothy	D. McBride
2004	53	Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Early Life Events and Health Outcomes in Late Life in Developing Countries -- Evidence from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS)	In this paper, we focus on the interplay between early life events, socioeconomic conditions throughout the life course, and health outcomes at old ages in Mexico. We investigate how the effect of education on health changes as individuals age. We analyze whether the process of accumulation of enduring disease states over the life span differs between old Mexicans with diverse educational backgrounds, and how the patterns of chronic diseases differ by socioeconomic groups. In addition, we evaluate childhood socioeconomic and health antecedents of educational differentiation over the life cycle and the total effect of education on health outcomes in later life. In particular, we estimate whether parental background determines the pattern of disease accumulation over the life span of individuals. The analyses are based on the newly released Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) that represents a unique source to address the health dynamics in a developing country.	Iliana	V. Kohler	Beth	 Soldo
2004	53	Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Health among Elderly Puerto Ricans: Analysis of a New Data Set	We test conjectures suggesting that health status among elderly in Latin America and the Caribbean is and will be relatively precarious. We use data from a recent survey of a nationally representative sample of elderly Puerto Ricans and their surviving spouses (PREHCO), information about Hispanics from HRS, and from cross sectional surveys in seven capital cities in Latin America. We investigate self reported health status, ADL and IADL and compare them to analogous measures obtained from Hispanics in the US, their Anglo and African American counterparts, and elderly populations in Latin America. We also use information on self reported diabetes and anthropometric measures (BMI, hip-to-waist ratios) to establish associations between adult chronic disease and early childhood conditions. These comparisons reveal that Puerto Ricans living in Puerto Rico are disadvantaged relative to their counterparts in the US, but similar to elderly people living in other Latin American and Caribbean.	Alberto	 Palloni	Ana	Luisa  Davila	Alberto	 Garcia	Hernando	 Mattei	Melba	 Sanchez
2004	53	Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Relating Self-Reported and Objective Health Indicators to Adult Mortality in Bangladesh	This paper tests the relative importance of self-reported and objective health indicators in predicting mortality among older respondents to the Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Study (MHSS).  The survey, conducted in rural Bangladeshi region in 1996, is matched to subsequent mortality events through a unique Demographic Surveillance System (DSS).  In addition to socioeconomic data, MHSS includes self-reported data on general health, health trajectory, mobility, and morbidity as well as objective measures of physical functioning.  We relate each health measure to subsequent mortality risk, addressing several crucial questions: 1) Do self-reported health measures predict mortality as well as objective ones?  2) Do self-reported measurements explain mortality even in the presence of controls for objective health status? 3) To what extent are well-documented age and sex differences in self-reported health status in Bangladesh reflected in subsequent mortality differentials? 4) How would longitudinal mortality models be affected by depending exclusively on self-reported health data?	Omar	 Rahman
2004	53	Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Educational Status and Changes in Functional Health: The Case of Older Adults in Beijing, China	This paper first examines the association between education and changes in functional health among older adults (55+) in Beijing between 1992 and 1997 and tests if the association varies by age. It then examines the role of psychosocial factors in mediating the relationship between education and functional health transitions. Our findings show that education results in more favorable functional transitions among those who initially had no functional limitations. Unlike in the United States, there is no indication that the effect of education declines with age. This likely reflects the underdeveloped nature of welfare programs for the elderly in China. Psychosocial factors do account for a substantial proportion of the total effect of education on functional changes. Our results highlight the importance of self-efficacy and social relationships in mediating the effect of education on health transitions. Health behaviors and stressful life events, however, play little role in mediating the effect.	Toshiko	 Kaneda	Zachary	 Zimmer	Zhe	 Tang
2004	54	Population Forecasting	Evaluation of the Variants of the Lee-Carter Method of Forecasting Mortality: A Multi-Country Comparison	The Lee-Carter (LC) method of mortality forecasting is now widely used. Enhancements proposed by Lee and Miller (LM) and Booth, Maindonald and Smith (BMS) address the choice of fitting period, the method for the adjustment of the time parameter and the choice of jump-off rates. In this study, the three variants of the method are comprehensively evaluated based on single year data by sex for several countries including Australia, England and Wales, France, Japan and Sweden. Errors in point forecasts by age and time for 1986-2000 are compared across variants and countries. Findings indicate that LM and BMS are superior to LC. Whereas LC and BMS tend to overestimate mortality, LM often underestimates mortality. Uncertainty is similarly compared across variants and countries. Error is decomposed into jump-off bias versus other error, and uncertainty into fitting period versus adjustment method.	Heather	 Booth	Leonie	 Tickle	Len	 Smith
2004	54	Population Forecasting	Forecasting Best-Practice Life Expectancy to Forecast National Life Expectancy	We develop methods for putting life expectancy forecasting in international context, so that correlations among countries (and between males and females) can be analyzed and taken into account. Life expectancy for females and males in various developed countries equals or lags behind the best-practice (i.e., record) level: the gaps grow and shrink over time. Hence, our strategy for studying life expectancy change is to analyze the pattern of changing gaps. It is complicated to study the correlations among many countries (and the two sexes) in life expectancy over time. Having a standard--in this case, the best-practice (female) level--facilitates analysis.	James	W. Vaupel	Sabine	 Schnabel
2004	54	Population Forecasting	Forecasting Long Run Economic Growth in India: An Application of Probabilistic Demographic Projections	During recent years there has been an increasing awareness of the explanatory power of demographic variables in economic growth regressions. We use results from this literature and demonstrate that demographic changes have not only shaped the past but accounting for uncertainty in the future evolution can guide projections of economic variables. We apply recent probabilistic demographic projections based on expert opinion for India to derive the uncertainty of predicted economic growth caused by the uncertainty in demographic developments.	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Tomas	 Kögel	Sergei	 Scherbov	Warren	C. Sanderson
2004	54	Population Forecasting	Population Scenarios Based on Probabilistic Projections: An Application for the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment	Probabilistic population forecasts offer a number of advantages to users.  However, in some cases population is one component of a larger analysis that may take a different approach to uncertainty.  For example, integrated assessments of environmental issues such as climate change or ecosystem degradation have typically used alternative scenarios to explore uncertainty in future environmental outcomes.  In such cases, population projections that are provided only as probability distributions are difficult to use.  I present a method of deriving individual, deterministic population projections that are consistent with scenarios for integrated assessments, but that are associated with quantitative uncertainty distributions, derived from fully probabilistic projections.  I also describe an application of the method to the development of population projections for use in integrated scenarios for the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, an international scientific effort to assess the current conditions of and future outlook for global ecosystem goods and services.	Brian	C. O'Neill
2004	55	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Parental Education and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan	This study exploits a natural experiment to estimate the causal impact of parental education on child health in Taiwan.  In 1968, the Taiwan government extended compulsory education from six to nine years.  To accommodate the expected increase in enrollment in junior high schools, the government opened 140 new junior high schools, a seventy-percent increase, in 1968. Our natural experiment exploits variations across cohorts in exposure to compulsory education reform and across regions in newly established school density.  We estimate the impact of mother's education on child health by using cohort and newly established school density interactions as instruments for parents' education. Our main data are annual birth and death certificates from 1978 to 1999. Our two-stage least squares estimates suggest that mother's schooling has larger effects on child health outcomes than father's schooling. Parental schooling improves birthweight and related outcomes but has no significant impacts on infant mortality.	Michael	 Grossman	Shin-Yi	 Chou	Jin-Tan	 Liu	Theodore	 Joyce
2004	55	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	A Longitudinal Analysis of ECD Program Effects on the Health, Nutrition, and Psychosocial Development of Filipino Children	Early childhood development (ECD) is thought to shape schooling and lifetime productivities.  But there has been little analysis of impacts of ECD programs in developing countries, particularly with longitudinal data on individual children, and to what extent policy effects are mediated by family and community background.  This paper analyzes unique longitudinal pre- and post-program survey data on children, their families, and service-providers in a Filipino ECD program. It investigates short-run impacts on children not only of contact with ECD programs, but of specific program characteristics, such as  knowledge, aptitude and behaviors of service providers.  The program evaluation measured children's health and nutritional status and also developed and applied instruments to measure children's cognitive and psychosocial development.  The paper also explores effects of programs on parental care and how program impacts are mediated by family and community background, all with control for unobserved fixed individual, family and community factors.	Elizabeth	 King	Socorro	 Gultiano
2004	55	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	The Impact of Experimental Nutritional Interventions on Education into Adulthood in Rural Guatemala: Preliminary Longitudinal Analysis	Early childhood nutrition is thought to have important effects on education. We investigate the impact of a community-level experimental nutritional intervention in rural Guatemala on various measures of education, using the well-known INCAP longitudinal data from the initial intervention in 1969-77 (when the subjects were 0-15 years old) with the most recent information collected on the same individuals in 2002-3. We estimate the effects of exposure to the intervention (that offered a nutritious supplement called Atole) during the critical period when individuals were six months through 24 months of age. Our preliminary results indicate significantly positive, and fairly substantial, effects of exposure on all the education related outcomes we consider: the probability of attending school and passing first grade, the grade attained by age 13, completed schooling attainment, adult Raven's test scores, and adult cognitive achievement scores. Thus there are important education-related effects, some of which persist well into adulthood.	Jere	 Behrman	John	 Hoddinott	John	A. Maluccio	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Reynaldo	 Martorell	Aryeh	D. Stein
2004	55	Child Health and Education in Developing Countries	Children's Use of Preventive Health Care: Can Community Programs Make a Difference?	In 1998, after thirty years of strong economic growth, Indonesia's GDP declined by 15%--a large and unexpected downturn.  In response, the government funded social safety net programs that communities were charged with implementing.  We use data from the 1997, 1998, and 2000 rounds of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, a longitudinal survey of individuals, households, communities, and facilities, to examine how investments in children responded to the economic crisis, and whether children were protected by community efforts to establish a social safety net.  We focus on use of care for children under five, an age at which a number of preventive health care activities can affect child well-being.  Preliminary results suggest that community efforts to strengthen neighborhood health posts and provide subsidized care at government clinics protected children's use of care.  These results are robust to fixed effects specifications that control for unobserved community-level characteristics.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Jenna	 Nobles
2004	56	Public Policy and the Family	Union Formation after Welfare Reform	In order to better understand union formation in the aftermath of welfare reform, information is needed on which welfare recipients are most likely to marry and cohabit.  We examine this question using longitudinal data from the 1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the Women's Employment Survey (WES).  The SIPP contains monthly information on a nationally representative sample.  The WES is a longitudinal survey of welfare recipients in one urban Michigan county. In addition to examining who marries and cohabits after welfare reform, we also examine women and children's well-being post union.  Economic well-being post-union entrance is examined in both SIPP and WES.  Additionally, the unique information contained in WES is used to examine whether, as some advocates fear, domestic violence has increased after union entrance and whether any changes in mental health are apparent.	Rukmalie	 Jayakody	Sheldon	H. Danziger	Kristin	 Seefeldt	Sarah	A. Avellar
2004	56	Public Policy and the Family	The Effect of Economic Stability on Family Stability among Welfare Recipients	The main rationale for defining two-parent families eligible for welfare in the United States was to keep families intact by eliminating an incentive for marital dissolution. Making aid available to two-parent families does not eliminate other reasons for family instability, most notably the reduced gain from marriage associated with having a chronically unemployed husband. This paper explores the hypothesis that husband's unemployment increases union dissolution among welfare recipients. Data for the analysis were compiled for evaluating the Link-Up demonstration project, which took place in seven counties in California's Central Valley in 1992-1994. A discrete-time event-history methodology was employed to examine family instability. The findings show that husband's unemployment and the family's long-term welfare dependency lead to breakup, net of race, age, and number of children.	Alisa	C Lewin
2004	56	Public Policy and the Family	Understanding the Relationship between Formal and Informal Child Support: Evidence from Fragile Families Three-Year Data	In this paper, using 3-year data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Survey, we examine the relationship between fathers' formal and informal child support payments.   Although there is a large body of research looking at the predictors of child support receipt and the effects of enforcement on fathers' payments, there has been scant empirical research focusing specifically on informal support, or, more importantly, on the interaction of formal and informal support.  We examine the prevalence and the individual-level predictors of the two kinds of support.  Finally, we compare the effects of child support enforcement on the probability of receiving each kind of support, controlling for a variety of parent, child, city and state characteristics.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy
2004	56	Public Policy and the Family	Unwed Fathers' Ability to Pay Child Support: Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study	Unwed fathers are the most rapidly growing group of non-resident fathers and the group about which the least is known. This paper uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS) to present new estimates of non-resident unwed fathers' capacity to pay child support.  Prior research has relied heavily on assumptions about assortative mating and takes no account of previously unmeasured characteristics of unwed fathers which depress earnings capacity and increase alternative obligations. This paper deals more effectively with the perennial problems of limited and missing father data because FFCWS achieves exceptionally high response rates, includes previously unavailable data on life history events and obtains mothers' reports of fathers on crucial indicators. To estimate fathers' earnings capacity and fathers' prior and current obligations, we use a rich set of formerly unobserved variables, including incarceration, mental health, substance abuse and multiple partner fertility.	Marilyn	 Sinkewicz
2004	57	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences II	Intermarriage and Social Distance in Multiracial America: Results from the 2000 Census	Will America become a multiracial melting pot in which racial distinctions disappear, or will some groups remain separate while others mix? In this paper, we use intermarriage patterns to explore the social position of single and multiracial groups. We look at the marriage patterns of couples in the 2000 census, using log-multiplicative models to assign distance scores to multiracial and single race groups based on their choice of marriage partners. We find that most mixed race groups receive scores in-between their single race constituents. Those with any Black identity, however, have marriage patterns that are indistinguishable from single-race Blacks. These results suggest that the divide between Blacks and non-Blacks will continue to be the major barrier in American society, even as intermarriage increases.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Barbara	S. Okun
2004	57	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences II	The Interracial Context of Educational Assortative Marriage		Aaron	 Gullickson
2004	57	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences II	Crossing Racial Boundaries: Changes of Interracial Marriage in America, 1990-2000	Trends in interracial marriage provide an indirect indicator of changes in race relations and intergroup social distance in America. Using data from the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) of the 1990 and 2000 U.S. censuses, we employ log-linear models to examine changes and variations in interracial marriage and union among whites, blacks, Latinos, Asians, and American Indians with different levels of educational attainment. We also explore how immigration affects patterns of interracial relationships. In addition, we address the role of the new racial classification in the 2000 Census in changing levels of interracial marriage and union among various racial groups.	Zhenchao	 Qian	Daniel	T. Lichter
2004	57	Intermarriage: Trends and Consequences II	How Do Marriage, Divorce, and Educational Upgrading Affect Trends in Educational Assortative Mating?	Trends in the resemblance between husbands and wives on their educational attainments result from underlying trends in entry into marriage, marital dissolution, and educational upgrading by married persons.  We use data from the June Current Population Survey to examine how within-cohort variation in educational assortative mating accounts for historical trends in the resemblance between spouses. We describe age patterns of educational assortative mating across three birth cohorts (1955-60, 1961-66, and 1967-72). For each cohort, we describe age patterns of educational assortative mating in prevailing marriages. Next, we decompose the within-cohort changes in prevailing marriages into two components: (1) changes due to first marriages and (2) changes due to marital dissolutions, remarriages, and educational upgrades after marriage. We then estimate the relative contribution of trends in assortative mating into first marriage and trends in marital dissolution, remarriage, and educational upgrading to historical changes in resemblance between spouses in prevailing marriages.	Christine	R. Schwartz	Robert	D. Mare
2004	58	Population, Environment, and Health	Public Health Investments and the Infant Mortality Gap: Evidence from Federal Sanitation Interventions on U.S. Indian Reservations	To what extent do differential levels of investment in public health inputs explain observed differences in health outcomes across socioeconomic and racial groups?  This study investigates the impact of 3700 projects that were part of a widespread Federal initiative to improve sanitation infrastructure on U.S. Indian reservations starting in 1960.  Sanitation investment substantially reduced the cost of clean water for households, leading to sharp reductions in both waterborne gastrointestinal disease and infectious respiratory disease among Native American infants.  The sanitation program was quite cost-effective, in part because improvements in the overall disease environment also reduced infectious respiratory disease among nearby white infants. Despite the health externalities, sanitation interventions explain about a third of the remarkable convergence in Native American and white infant mortality rates in reservation counties between 1960 and 1998.	Tara	 Watson
2004	58	Population, Environment, and Health	Access to Safe Drinking Water: Effects on Health and Time Management in Andhra Pradesh, India	The paper focuses on the significant role played by access to safe drinking water on human health as well as on time management. The study is based on a comparison of salient characteristics of villages covered by the Sri Sathya Sai Water Supply Project (in Anantapur district) with those of adjacent, similar villages not covered by the scheme. It was found that access to safe drinking water had resulted in a significant reduction in the incidence rates of waterborne diseases as well as ailments related to fluoride ingestion. Moreover, the women in the household who traditionally play the major role in collection and storage of water needed for household requirements had to spend less time and effort for it. As a consequence, they had more time to devote to household work and teaching their children. There was a significant improvement in their health and reduction in quarrels over water.	Garimella	Rama  Rao	Garimella	Rohini  Devi	M.N.V.	 Prasad
2004	58	Population, Environment, and Health	The Effects of 'Improvements' in the Water Supply on the Mortality of Cities at the Turn of the Twentieth Century	At the turn of the Twentieth Century, changes in the water supplied to cities were undertaken to lower urban mortality.  Previous studies have linked sanitation interventions to mortality decline, however, the measures relating to water supplies have often been quite general and the link to mortality more speculative than empirically established.  In this paper we examine the changes in water supplies in New York, New Orleans, Philadelphia and Chicago in detail and  relate the changing water supplies to changes in mortality from specific causes of death, including: typhoid fever, the cause of death most consistently linked to the condition of the water supply; other diseases considered to have been water-borne; and the seasonal pattern of mortality among both children and adults.  Our analysis focuses on comparisons both across cities and across areal units within cities that had different strategies and timing of interventions.	Gretchen	A. Condran	Rose	 Cheney	Harold	 Lentzner
2004	58	Population, Environment, and Health	The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The 20th Century United States	Mortality rates in the US fell more rapidly during the late 19th and early 20th Centuries than any other documented period in American history.  This decline coincided with an epidemiological transition and the disappearance of a mortality penalty associated with living in urban areas.  Little empirical evidence on what caused these improvements exists, however.  This paper investigates the causal influence of clean water technologies--filtration and chlorination--on mortality in major cities during the early 20th Century.  Plausibly exogenous variation in the timing and location of technology adoption is used to identify these effects, and the validity of this identifying assumption is examined in detail.  Strikingly, we find that clean water was responsible for 44%, 74%, and 62% of the reductions in total, infant, and child mortality in major cities, respectively.  Rough calculations suggest that the rate of return to these technologies was about 21:1 and that the cost per life year saved by clean water in 2003 dollars was about $500.	David	 Cutler	Grant	 Miller
2004	59	Latinos and Race	Choosing Race: Evidence from the Latino National Political Survey (LNPS, 1989-90)	Self identification of race can be viewed as a matter of constrained personal choice; a critical constraint might be the actual physical appearance of the individual which would affect how others see them. The LNPS provides ideal data for examining choice of race as the outcome of a constrained decision in a population of persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican and Cuban origin residing in the United States (1) because of the high variation in answers to the race question and (2)  because each respondent was graded by the interviewer on their skin shade. Utilizing multinomial logistical regressions, we treat skin shade as one of several factors affecting respondents' answers to the race question, where race is treated as the endogenous or dependent variable in our analysis. This may be the first empirical study to treat race as an endogenous variable.	William	 Darity, Jr.	Tanya	G. Boza
2004	59	Latinos and Race	Are There Alternatives to Racial/Skin Color Classification in Brazil? A Comparison of Two Large Urban Areas	The objective of this paper is to explore alternatives to racial/skin color classification in Brazil.  Data come from SRSR, a survey designed to collect information from women aged 15-59 on race, reproductive health, and sexuality, representative at the city level.  Fieldwork took place in Belo Horizonte and Recife in 2002.  The race questions include not only the traditional question from censuses and other Brazilian Census Bureau's (IBGE) surveys, but also interviewer's classification of the respondent (as the 1996 DHS), respondent's self-classification according to different categories, respondent's open-ended self-classification, and racial classification of famous individuals.  The motivation comes from the fact that, differently from the US, racial classification in Brazil is not necessarily related to ancestry or origin but rather to appearance or phenotype.  In addition, there is a rejection of the pardo (brown) and preto (black) categories used by IBGE.  However, to date, researchers have not found a better alternative.	Paula	 Miranda-Ribeiro	Andre	J. Caetano
2004	59	Latinos and Race	Latinos and Racial Identification	Large-scale immigration over the past three decades has led to a strong interest in the processes associated with immigrant economic incorporation.  While traditional models of assimilation assume an upward trajectory resulting in full incorporation for the descendents of immigrants, the segmented assimilation model adds an alternative trajectory of downward mobility.  In this view, children of immigrants exposed to declining inner-city environments and who are regarded as non-white risk incorporation into an urban non-white underclass.  Fundamental to the segmented assimilation idea, is the supposition that immigrants can be divided into white and non-white groups.  In this context Latinos constitute a unique group in that nationwide roughly half identify as racially white and 47 percent identify as some other race.  Rather than comparing the trajectories of European immigrants with non-European immigrants, this paper compares Latinos who identify as white with those who identify as some other race.	Sonya	 Tafoya
2004	59	Latinos and Race	The Intersection of Race and Ethnicity among Hispanic Adolescents: Self-Identification and Friendship Choices	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), a nationally representative sample of youth in 7-12th grades, we examine how race and ethnicity overlap among Hispanic adolescents.  We examine both self-identification and the choices of  friends to evaluate the relative proximity between race and ethnic groups.  Similar to previous work, we find a large contingent of Hispanics who choose Other Race.  However, we also find that one-third of Hispanic youth chose no racial identifier, which supports the notion that Hispanic is a meaningful panethnic label.  Empirical analyses suggest that the racial identification of other students at school has significant impact on the odds of choosing particular racial identifiers.  We also find evidence that both ethnicity and race are distinct stratifiers among Hispanics as evidenced by friendship choices.  Our findings support a panethnic label, but also find that race and ethnicity are important  dividers among Hispanic youth.	Grace	 Kao	Elizabeth	 Vaquera
2004	60	Comparative Analyses of International Migration	Determinants and Consequences of Irregular Migration in a Society under Transition. The Case of Georgia, Caucasus	Actual economic and political situation in the countries of former Soviet Union became a push factor for great masses of labor migrants that are basically considered as irregular in the countries of destination. The majority of them does not want to stay abroad permanently and stays there to improve the financial situation of their families. These migrants are characterized as mobile, entering and leaving flows and represent the potential flows of irregular labor emigration from Georgia to Russia, Western European countries and USA. Presented paper is based on the results of a special research of 1000 returned migrants, Georgian citizens, who had left for abroad during the period 1991-2002 with intention to work and have returned now back to Georgia. Respondents were interviewed about their living and labor activity in foreign country, remittances to own families and their personal plans for future migration	Irina	 Badurashvili
2004	60	Comparative Analyses of International Migration	Labor Migration to Lebanon from the States of Punjab and Tamil Nadu, India: Similarities and Contrasts in Factors Affecting Migration and Remittance Decisions	The present paper gives a comparative analysis of the process of migration of laborers to Lebanon from the states of Punjab and Tamil Nadu in India including the roles of networks facilitating migration in the two states. It also highlights some similarities and interesting contrasts on the use patterns of remittances at the origin, their quantum and modes of transfer as well as migration networks and living and working conditions of migrants in the host country. The results are based on the quantitative and qualitative data collected during 1998 from a sample of 402 Indian migrant laborers in Lebanon -- 201 each from the States of Punjab and Tamil Nadu, which are located in the extreme northern and southern parts of India with contrasting socio-economic and cultural backgrounds. The study employs multivariate statistical methods to identify the factors affecting migration and remittance decisions of the laborers from the two states.	Seema	 Gaur	Prem	C. Saxena
2004	60	Comparative Analyses of International Migration	Generations and Motivations: Russian and Other Ex-Soviet Immigrants in Costa Rica	This paper investigates the social networks of immigrants from former Soviet Republics to Costa Rica. The data come from fieldwork conducted during the summer of 2003 under a supplemental grant from the National Science Foundation (BCS#9875539). The research objective was to test the importance of social networks in migration decision-making, as well as in the settlement process. A survey was conducted and additional data was obtained from the 2000 Costa Rica Census, and from records of the Costa Rican Migration Office. Findings suggest that social networks of ex-Soviets now living in Costa Rica are influenced by the time of arrival (pre or post 1991) and motivations for migration. Those migrants who arrived before 1991 were motivated by their marriage to (mainly) Costa Rican men. Recent migrants leave their countries of origin mainly for economic reasons. Thus, a shared national background is less important than the motivations for migrating and time of arrival.	Leila	 Rodriguez	Jeffrey	H. Cohen
2004	60	Comparative Analyses of International Migration	Out of Africa: What Drives the Pressure to Emigrate?	This paper evaluates the strength of social and economic forces that affect the pressure to emigrate 'out of Africa' for four distinctly different African countries (Morocco, Egypt, Senegal and Ghana). In general, great expectations about attaining a higher living standard and expected low job search costs abroad are strong forces that drive emigration intentions out of Africa. Signs of positive selection with respect to the level of education of potential migrants are only present in Ghana and Egypt. Negative selection effects within the group of return migrants are present in Ghana and Egypt. The network effects of migrants turn out to be less important than one might expect from actual migration behaviour. Both ties within the household with household members who have international migration experience and ties with current migrants affect intentions only in Ghana and Egypt and it affects the intentions of women far stronger than that of men.	Hendrik	P. van Dalen	George	 Groenewold	Jeannette	 Schoorl
2004	61	Internal Migration in Developing Countries II	The Persistence of Nonpermanent Migration in Argentina's Rural Livelihoods	Despite the profound transformations underwent by the rural areas and populations of Argentina, circulation or nonpermanent migration is still a typical feature of rural livelihoods. The objective of this paper is to illustrate the persistence of this type of population mobility and its current role in the growing diversification of those livelihoods in an irrigated area of the west of Argentina. The data come from interviews with small farm households of Jáchal (province of San Juan) fielded in 2001. The analysis of the interviews shows a diverse picture. Nonpermanent migration has remained as a regular strategy is some of the households while being absent in others, and family migration histories indicated that the situation was similar in the past. At the same time, new destinations and activities have been added to the traditional ones. These  additions reflect the changes in the country's national economy.	Susana	B. Adamo
2004	61	Internal Migration in Developing Countries II	The Intra-Urban Dynamic Based on Spatial Statistics: A Case Study of a Brazilian Municipality in 1990s	This paper has two main goals. The first one is to show the main possibilities and limitations of the Brazilian Demographic Census of 2000 for those who work with intra-urban analysis, dealing specially with information access at local, or intra-municipality level, and to promote a method of data analysis that minimizes these limitations. For this, a study case with the Municipality of Santos, located on the coast of São Paulo, was realized, using a procedure of data interpolation, known as kriging. Then, the second goal arises: to analyze the intra-urban dynamic of Santos in the 1990s, a possible application for these procedures.	Alberto	A.E. Jakob
2004	61	Internal Migration in Developing Countries II	Migration Contexts, Social Support, and Return Migration -- Evidence from the Nang Rong, Thailand, Migrant Follow-up Survey	There have been few analyses of the migration process that delineate the impact of social capital on migrants' decisions to return to origin communities or settle in places of destination.  We address the question of settlement versus return among a population of urban Thai migrants who originate from Nang Rong, a mostly agrarian, poorly developed district in northeastern Thailand.  Descriptive data demonstrate that urban Thai migrants differ markedly in their access to and sources of social support in the destination.  Using longitudinal, multinomial logistic regression analyses to determine the return and settlement patterns of migrants between 1994 and 2000, we find that the decision to return or stay in the destination rests, in part, upon the strength of migrants' ties to persons who can provide support in times of hardship.	Kim	 Korinek	Barbara	 Entwisle	Aree	 Jampaklay
2004	61	Internal Migration in Developing Countries II	Answering the Research Challenge on Family Migration in the Developing Country: The Case of Indonesia	While research on migration has been extensive, there have been little studies focused on family migration in developing countries. In fact, family has been mainly considered both the causes and effects of migration. The paucity of data is often mentioned as one of the challenges in this research. Using Indonesia as a case study, this paper attempts to demonstrate that the family migration research can be done by using both common available data (e.g. census) and special collected data (e.g. IFLS, Indonesia Family Life Survey). Once the two data sets are available, therefore, the limitation findings from one data set can be supported by the findings from another data set. In the case of Indonesia, the study shows that family migration has changed over time in relation with the changes in the family (including its size and structures) as a result of the modernization process and enhancement in economic opportunities.	Salahudin	S. Muhidin
2004	62	Intergenerational Exchanges	The Development of Public Transfers in the United States: Historical Generational Accounts for Education, Social Security, and Medicare	We develop generational accounts for the major public sector transfers for cohorts born since 1850. Generational accounts give the difference between what an average member of a birth cohort receives over its life cycle from the government, and what it pays in taxes, suitably discounted and weighted by survival. We estimate such accounts for public education, Social Security, and Medicare. The purpose is partly descriptive, to trace the evolution of public transfers in the US, and describe how this evolution affected different cohorts.  But going beyond simple description, these estimates gain interest from a vigorous theoretical debate in the economics literature on the link between education, social security, and economic growth, a debate that we review in the first section of this paper. This section also states some new theorems pertaining to the theories.	Antoine	 Bommier	Ronald	 Lee	Tim	 Miller
2004	62	Intergenerational Exchanges	Long-Term Care, Formal Home Health Care, and Informal Care	We use the 1993 wave of the AHEAD data set to estimate a game-theoretic model of families' decisions concerning time spent caring for elderly individuals and financial transfers for home health care.  The outcome is a Nash equilibrium where each family jointly determines his or her consumption, transfers for formal care, and time allocation--informal care, market work, and leisure.  The estimates allow us to decompose the effects of parent and child characteristics into wage effects, quality of care effects, and burden effects.  They also allow us to simulate the effects of a broad range of policies of current interest.	David	 Byrne	Michelle	 Goeree	Bridget	 Hiedemann	Steven	 Stern
2004	62	Intergenerational Exchanges	The Division of Bequests	We document the pattern of bequests based on the exit interviews in AHEAD waves 2-4. We find how bequest inequality varies with the number of children, the age of the decedent, the size of the bequest and so forth.  We study the determinants of the propensity to bequeath unequally, and, given that the bequest is unequal, the determinants of the division of the estate.  Altruistic theory suggests that when children have very unequal economic resources estates will tend to be unequally divided.  Reciprocity suggests that when there were prior unequal upward transfers of time or money estates will be unequally divided.  By combining the core HRS data with the exit interview data we are able to conduct a direct test of these theories. We find how bequests affect wealth inequality by finding their affect on the wealth of the recipients.	Michael	 Hurd	James	P. Smith
2004	62	Intergenerational Exchanges	How Do Families Allocate Elder Care Responsibilities between Siblings?	Adult children are important providers of care to their frail parents.  Despite the attention focused on the high cost of nursing home care, most elder care is provided informally at home by family members.  Yet little is known about how families decide which child will provide help.  Do they delegate most responsibilities to children who are not employed, or do children drop out of the labor force when their parents become frail?  Does the low-wage child bear a disproportionate share of the caregiving duties?  Or does gender play a deciding role?  This paper uses longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Study to address these questions and examine the factors affecting the allocation of caregiving responsibilities between siblings.  The analysis highlights the role played by each adult child's wages, income, employment, and competing family responsibilities in the caregiving decision.	Richard	W. Johnson	Anthony	T. Lo Sasso
2004	63	Methodological Issues in Fertility Measurement	Estimating Total Fertility Rates for Small Areas in Brazil	Indirect methods of fertility estimation are well known to demographers in developing countries. Recently, however, with the increased interest in estimates for small local areas, imprecision has become a major issue since all the errors and biases introduced in the calculation of indirect estimates have been enlarged by the variability due to the small size of the population exposed to risk. Additionally, most methods proposed to correct data and to estimate the TFR indirectly depend on handpicking the best estimates, a cumbersome task for a large number of areas. In this paper we propose to estimate of the level of fertility for municipalities utilizing several already developed methods to correct for non-sampling errors such as non-response and miscalculation of the reference period, as well as by taking advantage of smoothing techniques from spatial statistics to correct for sampling variation.	Suzana	M. Cavenaghi	Joseph	E. Potter	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Renato	M. Assuncao
2004	63	Methodological Issues in Fertility Measurement	Reconstructing Past Fertility Schedules for Hard-to-Estimate Groups from CPS Data	We develop methods that use combined June CPS samples to estimate time series of age-specific fertility rate (ASFR) schedules for subpopulations not identified in US vital statistics reports. We use a new model for the shape of the ASFR schedule, and new statistical methods for extracting fertility information from CPS data. These innovations allow estimation of plausible and useful time series of ASFRs over 1965-2000, even for relatively small groups. Our main goal is to produce age- and time-specific estimates of the fertility of Mexican-born and other immigrant women while they reside in the US. These rates are important for understanding the expected and potential contribution of immigrant fertility to future US population change.  The methods that we develop are also applicable to many other subpopulations of interest.	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Gray	 Swicegood	Frank	D. Bean
2004	63	Methodological Issues in Fertility Measurement	Timing Effects and the Interpretation of Period Fertility	Low fertility levels and later childbearing in many developed countries have reinvigorated the period/cohort debate on the meaningfulness of the period TFR.  Here, timing effects are defined as level changes in period fertility that do not reflect changes in completed cohort fertility, and the Average Cohort Fertility (ACF) is used as a measure of period fertility adjusted for timing effects.  Bongaarts and Feeney (1998) presented an alternative approach and a different measure, TFR*, to adjust for timing effects.  Here the two measures are compared.  Conceptually, the TFR* is based on questionable assumptions.  In model populations, the ACF performs as expected, while the Bongaarts-Feeney TFR* is unreliable and often erratic.  When applied to 20th century U.S. experience, the ACF moves gradually, quantifying the substantial timing effects present during the 1970s Birth Dearth.  In contrast, the TFR* behaves like a period measure, and its adjustments are often wide of the mark.	Robert	 Schoen
2004	63	Methodological Issues in Fertility Measurement	The Survival-Probability Indices of Period Total Fertility Rate	This article shows that the tempo effect on period total fertility rate (PTFR) measured by the conventional index includes two elements, which we call genuine tempo bias and spurious tempo bias.   Genuine tempo bias exists between complete cohort fertility rate (CFR) and any measure of PTFR when the tempo of fertility changes over time, while spurious tempo bias exists in the conventional index as bias that greatly inflates genuine tempo bias.  We identify the cause of spurious tempo bias, formally assess the relative weight of spurious tempo bias in the tempo effect, and propose two survival probability indices of PTFR that eliminate spurious tempo bias without making any strong assumption.  As a side product, we also introduce a new index which improves the adjusted TFR index introduced by Bongaarts and Feeney.  An application of the new and old indices to Japanese fertility data for the past 20 years is presented.	Kazuo	 Yamaguchi	Motomi	 Beppu
2004	64	Population Projections in the 21st Century	Confidence Intervals for Population Forecasts: A Case Study of Time Series Models for States	A substantial amount of research has dealt with the use of time series models to develop confidence intervals for population forecasts.  Most studies have focused solely on national-level models and few have considered the accuracy of the resulting forecasts.  In this study, we take this research in a new direction by constructing time series models for several states in the United States and evaluating the resulting population forecasts.  Using annual population estimates from 1900 to 2002, we develop a variety of forecasts and investigate the impact of differences in model specification, launch year, length of base period, and length of forecast horizon on the accuracy of point forecasts and the width of confidence intervals.  We also evaluate the extent to which predicted confidence intervals encompass future population estimates.  We conclude with several observations regarding the potential usefulness of time series models for producing state population forecasts.	Stanley	K. Smith	Jeff	 Tayman
2004	64	Population Projections in the 21st Century	Shining the Soles of Your Shoes: Highly Detailed Small Area Projections	The prospect of projecting 95 large and small Tennessee counties to 2020 annually by race, Hispanic origin, and single years of age demanded both well-established and seat-of-the-pants methods.  The resolution of key issues on a tight schedule will be described as a guide, and precautions to, those engaging in similar work.  Migration assumptions, paramount for projections, are problematic to develop and adjust throughout the projection period.  Pioneer populations of immigrants in small counties presented the greatest challenge.  At the state level, the qualitative assignment of total migration apparently determined Tennessee's future with a single stroke.  Multiple race groups had to be developed according to client specifications.  To derive all the necessary detail, very pragmatic applications of interpolation and rounding techniques across time and within age groups were needed.  Small number volatility threatened to crowd out attention to major trends.  In the end, pricing strategies were developed to preclude repetition.	Stephen	J. Tordella	Balkrishna	 Kale	Tom	E. Godfrey
2004	64	Population Projections in the 21st Century	The Introduction of Bias in Birth Projections in Small Areas near Colleges and Universities: Impacts and Adjustments	A central concern in the preparation of birth projections for small geographical areas near college level educational institutions is the potential bias introduced by the presence of a sizable population of females in the prime reproductive years who are actively deferring fertility behavior.  This concern is increased when birth projections are created for the purposes of guided policy development among city planner and hospitals as these groups are typically interested in projections for very small geographic areas, often as small as a zip code or a set of census tracts.  This paper reviews work performed by the authors to develop realistic birth projections for a city with six local colleges and universities within its projection geography.  The paper reviews the methodological challenges faced in the development of birth projections in geographies with high proportions of fecund females but low rates of reported fertility and ways to adjust for this bias.	David	 Gagnon	Janet	 Muri
2004	64	Population Projections in the 21st Century	Sub-District School Enrollment Projections Using Student Level Records: An Application to Santa Barbara City Schools	School districts throughout California are struggling with uncertainty in primary school enrollment levels.  Some areas of the state are witnessing soaring enrollment levels due to immigration while other areas with expensive housing stock and aging populations are expected to decline.  State level budget problems, the increasing popularity home/private schooling, and school choice laws at the local level have resulted in extreme uncertainty about the expected enrollment levels at individual schools in some district.  Santa Barbara city schools provide an excellent example of enrollment instability and the costs associated with poor enrollment forecasts.  This research uses student level records from the Santa Barbara city schools to evaluate the nature of the instability in past enrollment forecasts.  We also evaluate several alternative projection models which account for inter- and intra-district transfers.  The work is relatively unique in attempting school level, rather than district level, forecasts.	Stuart	H. Sweeney	Erin	 Middleton
2004	65	The New Race and Ethnic Origin Questions: How Have They Worked?	Identification of Hispanic Ethnicity in Census 2000:  Analysis of Data Quality for the Question on Hispanic Origin		Arthur	R. Cresce, Jr.	Audrey	Dianne  Schmidley	Roberto	 Ramirez
2004	65	The New Race and Ethnic Origin Questions: How Have They Worked?	Assessing if Mode of Data Collection Impacts the Reporting of Race and Hispanic Origin	It is critical that questions designed to collect data on race and Hispanic origin result in the collection of consistent data. If a respondent is asked to report their race at two different points in time, their response should be the same. This paper examines the issue of consistency in the reporting of race and Hispanic origin by mode of data collection to determine if mode effects consistency of response. This study is based on data from two U. S. Census Bureau surveys--the 2000 Decennial Census and the 2000 American Community Survey. Race and Hispanic origin responses for a sample of persons interviewed in both of these surveys were compared, taking into account the mode of data collection. Reliability measures produced from these data provide evidence that in this application, mode had an effect on consistency in the reporting of race and Hispanic origin.	David	 Raglin	Deborah	H. Griffin
2004	65	The New Race and Ethnic Origin Questions: How Have They Worked?	Results of Recent Methodological Research on the Hispanic Origin and Race Questions		Elizabeth	A. Martin
2004	66	Union Dissolution	How Fertility and Union Stability Interact in Defining New Family Patterns in Italy and Spain	Italy and Spain represent the Mediterranean Model for their peculiars demographic trends. We focus on fertility, that in these two countries has achieved lowest-low levels, and union instability, that is still at very low levels. These two processes are of particular interest in Italy and Spain, very similar in terms of welfare state and institutions. We consider the processes of fertility and union dissolution as two interrelated life trajectories. The analysis is based on the 1996 Fertility and Family Survey data for Italy and Spain. Results show how union dissolution strongly and significantly affects the risk of childbearing in both countries. Fertility affects the union stability, in fact each further childbearing decreases the risk of union dissolution. Results show the existence of a strong reverse causation between union dissolution and fertility, because the outcome of each process has a significant effect on the risk of experiencing the other.	Lucia	 Coppola	Mariachiara	 Di Cesare
2004	66	Union Dissolution	Job Stability, Earnings, and Marital Stability: How Are They Related?	This study examines the interactions between job stability, earnings, and marital instability.  We analyze the sequence of jobs, marriages, divorces, and remarriages among young men and ask: 1) Do job stability, high wages, and the career advancement of young men promote marriage and marital stability?  2) What are the consequences of marriage and marital stability for achieving high levels of job stability and occupational success?  We use a Dynamic Selection Control model to estimate how young men make sequential choices about work and family.  The maximum likelihood (ML) approach takes account of self-selection, simultaneity and heterogeneity.  The data come from the 1979-1994 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79).   The initial results show causal impacts in both directions: job stability promotes higher earnings and marital stability, while marital stability increases job stability and earnings.  Simulation results showing impacts of economic shocks on pathways will appear in the revised paper.	Avner	 Ahituv	Robert	 Lerman
2004	66	Union Dissolution	Equality and Union Dissolution: The Role of Income Allocation Methods among Married and Cohabiting Puerto Ricans	The rise of cohabitation and childbearing within cohabiting unions has raised questions about the meaning of marriage and cohabitation, as well as the long-term consequences of changing union patterns for children.  We assess the implications of how financial resources are managed in cohabitating and marital unions for union dissolution.  Focusing on mainland Puerto Ricans, a disadvantaged minority group with high rates of cohabitation and childbearing within cohabiting unions, we show that union dissolution is associated with both union type and income allocation method.  The relatively high rate of union dissolution among cohabitors can be explained partially by the fact that cohabiting couples are less likely than married couples to organize access to their income under an equality principle--that is, to put their income into a common pot that both partners can use. Further, departures from equality are more strongly related to union dissolution among cohabiting couples than among married couples.	Sal	 Oropesa	Nancy	S. Landale
2004	66	Union Dissolution	Healthy Baby, Healthy Marriage?  The Effect of Children's Health on Divorce	This paper investigates whether the health of children affects the likelihood that their parents divorce. This topic is relevant to the debate over whether the economic status of families affects children's health: if the poor health of children promotes greater family dissolution, then children's health problems could be the cause rather than the result of children's economic status.  Using the 1988 National Health Interview Survey, the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, and the 1970 British Birth Cohort Study, I find that low birth weight children are at a higher risk of experiencing parental divorce than children of normal birth weight in the US, but not in the UK.  While the difference across countries suggests that divorce is not a universal avenue through which health and economic status are related, part of the gradient observed in children's health in the US may run from health to income.	Angela	R. Fertig
2004	67	Migration, Urbanization, and Health: Contemporary and Historical Perspectives	Historical Perspectives on Migration, Urbanization, and Infectious Disease		Charles	E. Rosenberg
2004	67	Migration, Urbanization, and Health: Contemporary and Historical Perspectives	Environmental Hazards and Migration		Lori	M. Hunter
2004	67	Migration, Urbanization, and Health: Contemporary and Historical Perspectives	The Epidemiology of Migration and HIV/AIDS in South Africa	Southern Africa has both a rapidly growing HIV epidemic and high levels of population mobility.  The common assumption about the role of migration in the spread of HIV is that migrant men become infected while away and return home to infect their rural partners.  We measured the prevalence of HIV among migrant and non-migrant men, and their rural partners, in South Africa, and constructed a mathematical model to estimate the relative risk of becoming infected from within, versus from outside, of primary relationships. At this late stage of South Africa's epidemic, the role of migration is more complex than simply returning migrant men infecting their rural partners.  Rather, there is evidence for the bi-directionality of HIV transmission within couples.	Mark	 Lurie
2004	67	Migration, Urbanization, and Health: Contemporary and Historical Perspectives	Gonorrhea, Infertility, and Population Decline in Yap during the Japanese Occupation	An understudied component of Japan's colonial empire is their occupation of Micronesia from 1919 to 1945.  This paper focuses on the small island of Yap where the Japanese impact on the native population and environment was devastating; the population diminished by more than 25% during the occupation, the crude birth rate was very low, and gonorrhea was rampant.  The main objective of this paper is to determine how much gonorrhea affected population growth.  Our microsimulation model, based on the prevalence of gonorrhea on Yap in 1930, estimates that gonorrhea reduced population growth by 20%, which potentially was enough to reverse the sign of population growth.  Secondly, this paper explores the underlying causes and modes of transmission of the gonorrhea epidemic in Micronesia during the Japanese occupation.  Historical evidence points toward colonial labor exploitation, environmental change and disruption of familiar societal institutions as the proximate causes.	Susan	L. Cassels
2004	68	Determinants and Consequences of Educational Attainment	Gender-Specific Trends in the Value of Education and the Emerging Gender Gap in College Completion	Analysis of March CPS data for 1964 through 2002 shows that white women overtook men in their rates of college completion, and that changes in the value of higher education are a plausible cause for this phenomenon.  White female returns to higher education in the form of personal income remained higher than male returns for the entire period, but the trends in these returns do not provide a plausible interpretation for the shape of the male and female trajectories.  Rather, the combination of (1) a stable personal income premium to higher education after 1980, (2) increasingly favorable marriage rates for the more educated, (3) educational homogamy, and (4) increasing income returns to education for men caused the impact of higher education on the standard of living of young adult families to grow more rapidly for females than males during the period when female-favorable trends in higher education began to emerge.	Thomas	 DiPrete	Claudia	 Buchmann
2004	68	Determinants and Consequences of Educational Attainment	Why Are Some Academic Fields Tipping towards Female?	Using data on the number of men and women receiving doctorates in all fields from 1971 to 1998, we examine changes in the sex composition of  fields and segregation (using D, size-standardized D, and Grusky's A). Women's proportion of those receiving doctorate degrees increased from 14% to 42%.   All fields, including the most male-intensive fields, experienced an increase in their percent female, but the rank-order of fields in percent female changed little. We consider whether men avoid entering fields after they reach a certain percent female.  We use a negative binomial regression model with fixed effects.  The higher the percent female of those getting degrees in a field, the smaller the number of men that enter the field 4-7 years later.  The pattern resembles Schelling's (1971, 1978) model of neighborhood tipping.  Men's avoidance of women impedes reaching an integrated equilibrium, despite the movement of women toward slightly more non-traditional choices.	Paula	S. England	Paul	 Allison	Su	 Li	Michelle	 Budig
2004	68	Determinants and Consequences of Educational Attainment	First Marriage and First Birth Patterns by Educational Attainment in the Transiting Societies, the Netherlands, Japan and Southern India	The objective of this paper is to assess the importance of educational attainment in determining first marriage and first birth patterns across different societies, the Netherlands, Japan and Southern India represented by Karnataka. We study the changes in this kind of demographic behaviour across cohorts within these countries, and also the similarities and differences across societies. The paper tries to assess whether demographic behaviour in such different societies is likely to converge in the future. Our discussion will be placed in the broader context of Demographic Transition theory and debate on whether indeed a Second Demographic Transition  will take place in the same manner in non-western societies as in western ones. This paper uses micro-data from the Netherlands Family Fertility Survey 1998, the Japanese National Fertility Survey 1992, and the National Family Health Survey 1998 for Karnataka. To these data single state life table techniques are applied.	Hideko	 Matsuo	Sarbani	 Banerjee	Inge	 Hutter
2004	68	Determinants and Consequences of Educational Attainment	The Dynamics of School and Work in Rural Bangladesh	This paper investigates the effect of work on the school progress of rural Bangladeshi children. We specify a dynamic switching model for the sequence of school and work outcomes up to the end of secondary school. This approach allows us to evaluate the dynamic effects of work on school progress. We find that work has a negative and sizable effect on school progress and are able to measure this effect for different groups of children. Our results highlight the relevance of policies aimed at increasing school progress through reductions in child work and the importance of accompanying these policies by efforts to improve the adverse environment that working children face. We evaluate the dynamic effects of three policies: compulsory primary schooling, compulsory school entry at age six and universal access to secondary school. We find that these policies have a sizable effect on school progress and child labor.	Jose	J. Canals-Cerda	Cristobal	 Ridao-Cano
2004	69	Maternal Health and Mortality I	Setting Priorities for Safe Motherhood Interventions in Resource Scarce Settings	The Safe Motherhood Initiative, launched jointly by various international organizations brought maternal and child health to the forefront of public concerns. The goal of reducing maternal mortality by 75% between 1990 and 2015 is unlikely to be met.  This study aims to guide policy-decision makers in prioritizing the different components of safe motherhood programs. We compile existing data on effectiveness of safe motherhood interventions and cost theses interventions using the WHO's Mother Baby Package (MBP) Costing Spreadsheet. We compare the cost effectiveness of the 18 interventions included in the MBP as well as safe abortion and antenatal vitamin A supplementation in a low, medium, and high infrastructure settings. We perform a budgetary simulation of the three model settings assuming per capita expenditures of $0.50, $0.75, and $1.00 respectively. Finally, we conduct a multivariate sensitivity analysis to assess the contribution to variance of different interventions.	Ndola	 Prata	Fiona	 Greig	Malcolm	 Potts
2004	69	Maternal Health and Mortality I	Estimating the Impact of Maternal Health Services on Maternal Mortality in Uganda	Each year, over 500,000 women die of causes relating to pregnancy and childbirth. Many of these deaths could be prevented through appropriately targeted interventions. The Safe Motherhood (SM) model combines information from the Maternal-Neonatal Program Index and WHO's Mother-Baby Package to estimate the impact of increased expenditures on the maternal mortality rate. These models have been applied in Uganda, through collaboration with the Population Secretariat, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Futures Group/USAID. Since Uganda operates a decentralized system of service delivery, data collection had to take place at the district and lower level units. Data on district-level service delivery costs were supplemented by national level data for certain variables. Preliminary results from the Safe Motherhood model indicate that, if an 'Ideal' budget were fully funded, the MMR in Uganda would decline from its current level of 505 to a more acceptable 71 per 100,000 women.	Lori	 Bollinger	Robert	 Basaza	Chris	 Mugarura	John	 Ross	Koki	 Agarwal
2004	69	Maternal Health and Mortality I	An Institutional Analysis of Safe Motherhood in Guatemala	This paper analyzes safe motherhood initiatives in Guatemala over the past decade, with a view to showing the complex relationship between national context and safe motherhood outcomes. The paper is based on research conducted in 2003 in-country, involving in-depth interviews with officials involved in Guatemalan safe motherhood policy, and analysis of multiple reports and documents.  Data confirm the persistence of high levels of maternal mortality in the country and ongoing neglect of safe motherhood issues at the national level.  We posit that three contextual factors stand behind these adverse outcomes: the existence in Guatemala of a large indigenous population suspicious of modern medical practices and alienated from the state; political instability--a legacy of long-standing civil war--that has made it impossible to sustain policy continuity for safe motherhood; and the influence of ultra-orthodox elements of the Catholic Church that have obstructed safe motherhood initiatives.	Jeremy	 Shiffman	Ana	 Garces
2004	69	Maternal Health and Mortality I	Effects of Social and Demographic Factors on Trends in Use of Maternal Health Care: A Comparison of Guatemala and Honduras	Honduras and Guatemala are among very few developing countries with recent, well documented declines in the maternal mortality ratio.  Explanations for these declines and recommendations for future programming rest squarely within the realm of supply-side, medical interventions regarding health service use.  Negligible consideration is given to underlying social and demographic factors known to affect antenatal and delivery care use in the developing world.  This paper presents the effects of social and demographic factors on the trends in antenatal and delivery care use in each country during the period of time in which maternal mortality has declined.   Community level variables reflecting access to maternal health care services and ethnic composition are also explored. To identify unmeasured differences between Guatemala and Honduras, the independent effect of country residence, controlling for significant social, demographic and community level variables are presented.  Multivariate logistic regression and Multilevel logistic regression methods are used.	Cynthia	 Stanton
2004	70	Macroeconomic Impact of Aging	Who Gains from the Demographic Dividend? Forecasting Income by Age	Changes in age structure, known as the demographic dividend, have led to growth in per capita income substantially greater than growth in output per worker. In the future, however, the phenomenon will work in reverse as growth in the total population is dominated by growth in older age groups. This paper addresses how intergenerational transfers respond to the changes in age structure that underlie the demographic dividend and the coming demographic burden. We use a new methodology, the overlapping families (OLF) model, which allows the analysis of intergenerational familial effects using age-specific aggregate data. The model is estimated for Taiwan using synthetic panel data constructed from repeated cross-sectional household surveys. Our results suggest that changes in population age structure have important effects on the generational distribution of income. Child generations have gained the most from the demographic dividend, while pensioner generations will be least affected by population aging.	Sang-Hyop	 Lee	Andrew	 Mason
2004	70	Macroeconomic Impact of Aging	Aging in OECD Countries and Capital Flows into Developing Countries: A Policy Analysis Using an Overlapping Generations Model	The pattern of demographic transitions in OCED and developing countries suggest that foreign capital flows from OECD countries to less developed countries can help ease the aging problems of OECD countries. In reality, however, very little capital flows to developing countries. In this paper, I investigate the reasons for this observed pattern of capital flows theoretically, and empirically using cross-country regressions. I use the parameter estimates of the regression models to calibrate an extended production function that incorporates the differences in infrastructure, human capital level and governance in the two regions. Using an overlapping generations model, I then numerically simulate the effects of various policies on capital flows into developing countries and on aging problems of the OECD countries.	Lakshmi	 Raut
2004	70	Macroeconomic Impact of Aging	Life, Death, and the Economy: Mortality Change in Overlapping-Generations Model	Demographers have shown that there are regularities in mortality change over time, and have used these to forecast changes due to population aging in the models lack of potential economic feedbacks. Previous analytical and simple numerical work by economists has focused on comparative statics and used simplistic representations of mortality, such as the assumption of a constant age-independent death rate, or some parametric approximation to a survival curve. We show that it is straightforward to analyze equilibria in such models if we work with the probability distribution of the age at death. US and other data show that this distribution can be plausibly described by a normal distribution--for this case we obtain analytical results. For the general case we have numerical results.  We show that a proper accounting for the uncertainty of when one dies has significant qualitative and quantitative effects on the equilibria of such economic models.	Qi	 Li	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar
2004	70	Macroeconomic Impact of Aging	The Macroeconomic Consequences of Population Ageing and the Population Policy Choice in China: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis	The issue of population ageing is receiving much attention from scholars and policy-makers in China since that country is expected to experience a very rapid rate of population ageing in this century. China's strict family planning policy has resulted in a dramatic fertility decline since the 1970's. This decline has contributed significantly to the rapid ageing of the population with adverse implications for economic growth prospects. An appropriate set of policy responses may help to decelerate the rate of population ageing and mitigate its adverse implications for economic growth. This paper explores three alternative population control policies. Using a dynamic Computable General Equilibrium modelling, the paper analyzes the macroeconomic influences of three population-aging scenarios under the alternative population policy settings in China, covering the period from 2001 to 2100. An implication is that changing the current one-child policy may induce higher GDP growth, while per capita real income may not be higher.	Xiujian	 Peng
2004	71	Asian and Asian-American Families in Historical Perspective	Divorce and Stem Family Household Organization in Early Modern Japan	This study examines the patterns and factors of divorce in eighteenth and nineteenth century Japan drawing data from the local population registers in two northeastern agricultural villages, 1716-1870. Almost half of the first marriages of these peasants dissolved in divorce before they reached age 50, surpassing the proportion becoming widows and widowers. Event history analysis reveals that having a child, or having obtained household headship, significantly reduced the risk of divorce. Different mechanisms were at work for patrilocal vs. matrilocal marriages. Economic hardship and non-intact stem family, for example, significantly increased the risk of divorce but only for patrilocal marriage, while conjugal relationship was the dominant factor for matrilocal marriage. The findings suggest the importance of the practice of divorce in individual life course as well as in achieving the collective goals of peasant families.	Satomi	 Kurosu
2004	71	Asian and Asian-American Families in Historical Perspective	Historical Shifts in the Influences of Children and Education on Divorce Risks in Japan and the U.S.	The linkage between lower socioeconomic status and divorce is thought to increase with industrialization.  According to Goode, with industrialization, the influence of individuals' achieved status on family patterns strengthens and the influence of kin status on family patterns weakens.  However, the socioeconomic and cultural background of a society may alter the shifting linkages among lower socioeconomic status, kin, and divorce.  For example, the Japanese may not experience the rise in divorce rates as a result of the increasingly disruptive influence of lower socioeconomic status.  The increase in Japanese divorce rates may instead be the product of the increasingly disruptive influence of some types of kinship ties, namely children.	Hiromi	 Ono
2004	71	Asian and Asian-American Families in Historical Perspective	Chinese on the American Frontier, 1880-1900: Explorations Using Census Microdata, with Surprising Results	This study uses the Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS) to recreate the structure and dynamics of the Chinese American population on the late 19th century western frontier.  This watershed era marked the beginning of the Chinese Exclusion Acts, which (with only a few exceptions) embargoed immigration from China.  Extracts of person records from 1880 (N=1,221) and 1900 (N=153) are used to portray trends in the distribution of Chinese Americans by age, sex, nativity, industry/occupation, household composition, and geographical area.  A series of population simulations (based on cohort component projection) are used to investigate population dynamics.  Our results imply a picture sharply at odds with conventional assessments on the demographic effects of Chinese Exclusion.  Ramifications for Chinese community life are explored.	Ken	 Chew	John	 Liu	Shila	 Patel
2004	71	Asian and Asian-American Families in Historical Perspective	Rashomon and Chinese Historical Demography: Inconsistencies in the Recording of Family and Kinship across Sources	To assess the consistency of recording of kinship in historical Chinese data, we carry out the first comparison ever of the demography of the same families in two different sources: household registers and lineage genealogies.  We find that these sources offer contradictory accounts.  Reflecting differences between official and private constructions of kinship, individuals recorded in one are sometimes missing from others. The recording of relationship, including paternity, is often inconsistent.  We apply multivariate techniques to identify the factors that affect the chances of being recorded in one source but not another, and the chances of a relationship being recorded differently in two sources.  We assess the implications for estimates of mortality and fertility from these sources.  We conclude by discussing the implications for interpretation of published findings from sources such as lineage genealogies and household registers that have been the mainstay of historical studies of Chinese kinship and demography.	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	 Lee
2004	72	Transitions to Adulthood in International Context	Becoming an Adult in Uncertain Times: A 14-Country Comparison of the Losers of Globalization	Increasing uncertainty about economic and social developments is a definitive feature of globalization in advanced economies. However, the degree to which youth are impacted by rising uncertainty is filtered by historically grown and country-specific institutional settings. This paper summarizes the main empirical results of the impact of increased uncertainty on the transition to adulthood (entry into labor market, partnership, parenthood) in a 14 country comparative study. Results show that generally all youth are exposed to more uncertainty at labor market entry, yet that it is unequal, with risk accumulating in certain groups. Job uncertainty translates into a higher likelihood to postpone or forgo partnership and parenthood. Youth also develop rational responses, which we identified in the form of diverse behavioral strategies: postponement, multiple roles, flexible partnerships and gender-specific strategies, particularly in the male-breadwinner societies. We illustrate how nation-specific institutions serve to shield or funnel uncertainty in unique ways and to particular groups of youth.	Melinda	 Mills	Hans-Peter	 Blossfeld
2004	72	Transitions to Adulthood in International Context	No Time for Youth: The Transition to Adulthood in Mexico, 1970-2000	This research uses a new method of analyzing the demographic statuses (as students, workers, parents, husbands and wives, and their position in the household) of a synthetic cohort of young Mexicans to examine how the youthful life course has changed in Mexico during the past thirty years. Although young people spend slightly more time in school in 2000, the transition from school to work still occurs in the mid-teens. Marriage and childbearing continue to occur in the late-teens to early twenties. Only among urban men and women is there a prolongation of schooling and co-residence with parents. Overall, the lives of young people in 2000 do not look too different from those of their parent's generation who came of age thirty years before in 1970 in spite of the dramatic economic and demographic changes that have occurred during this period.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2004	72	Transitions to Adulthood in International Context	The Impact of War and Wartime on Transition to Adulthood: Vietnam, 1940-1990	During the latter half of the 20th century, Vietnam experienced nearly continuous wars, including the Vietnam War (1965-1975). Wars afflicted young Vietnamese adults most and left profound imprints on the life course of those who survived. Based on the 1995 Vietnam Longitudinal Survey, my study uses the life course approach to document how war affects the timing and sequencing of early life course transitions for the Vietnamese growing up between the 1940s and the 1990s. The life course transitions examined include leaving school and entering labor force and first marriage and first birth. I study the impact of war by comparing the differences between veterans and non-veterans. I also examine the impact of war on wartime generation compared with the cohorts growing up during non-wartime periods. I will describe the overall patterns of transition to adulthood and present a multivariate analysis of the determinants of timing of first marriage.	Bussarawan	Puk  Teerawichitchainan
2004	72	Transitions to Adulthood in International Context	Transition to Adulthood in Urban Burkina Faso: Changing Context, Changing Dynamics	Based on a unique retrospective survey data collected in Burkina Faso in 2000, the study explores how transition to adulthood among urban youth has evolved over the last twenty years. More specifically, it examines changes in both the timing and the sequence of important social steps such as first paid employment, residential independence, first marriage and first birth across cohorts of women and men. Throughout the analysis special attention is devoted to gender and educational differentials. Results from descriptive statistics and Kaplan-Meier estimates show  increasing unemployment and informalization of youth employment in urban Burkina Faso, especially among educated youth. Besides a more difficult access to economic autonomy, residential independence and first marriage are also clearly delayed among both young men and young women.	Anne	E. Calvès	Jean-François	 Kobiane	Edith	 Martel
2004	73	Obesity and Inactivity: Trends and Consequences	The Content, Activities, and Settings of Leisure as Sources of Physical Inactivity: Changes in North America since 1970	What explains declining physical activity in recent decades?  Hypothesis: the content, activities and settings of leisure have changed and diversified, producing economic, social and spatial barriers, effectively lowering barriers to sedentary forms of leisure while increasing the cost of more active ones.  Longitudinal time-use and industry data support three conclusions.  1)the activities people do most often make fewer demands on physical exertion than 30 years ago, reflecting a shifting emphasis from collective experiences in pubic settings to individualized experiences in private settings.  2)the growth and diversification of content delivered through television/computers has far outstripped leisure choices outside the home. 3)price gradients across the range of routine activities and their settings have changed, with government incentives contributing to lower barriers to sedentary activities and heightening barriers for more active ones.  Overall, these changing incentives and content of leisure activity have likely harmed population health by contributing to inequalities in physical activity.	Brent	M. Berry
2004	73	Obesity and Inactivity: Trends and Consequences	The American Obesity Epidemic: Are We Really That Fat? And, How Could It Have Happened?	Over the past several decades, the proportion of Americans who are considered overweight or obese has skyrocketed.  According to a survey conducted by the Center for Disease Control in the year 2000, less than half (42.9%) of the American population is now considered to be a healthy weight.  This increase has sparked tremendous public concern because excess body weight has been linked to a host of mortality, morbidity, and disability outcomes.  Some have even referred to this trend as the Obesity Epidemic. Others have called obesity the #1 public health concern in America.  Using data from the NHANES, this project documents the trends in American body weight over the past four decades (1960-2000) and offers potential explanations for when and how this epidemic actually occurred.  The explanations offered here rely primarily on the types of lifestyles, including exercise and dietary behaviors, that modern-day Americans have adopted.	Rebecca	 Utz
2004	73	Obesity and Inactivity: Trends and Consequences	Changing Bodies: Weight Management Behaviors among American Adolescents	In the United States, over 40% of adolescent girls report trying to lose weight, while over 30% of adolescent boys report trying to gain weight.  This paper examines the national prevalence of weight management behaviors (such as dieting, exercising, and lifting weights) among adolescent girls and boys in the United States.  Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), I explore gender, race / ethnic and class differences in adolescent weight management behaviors.  I then examine the individual-level psychological, developmental, and familial correlates of weight management behaviors.  I find that a range of factors contribute to differential rates and types of weight management behaviors across social groups.  Additionally, I find that body image misperception predisposes adolescents towards more (and more health threatening) weight management behaviors.  Implications for adolescent health behavior campaigns are suggested.	Jenny	 Godley
2004	73	Obesity and Inactivity: Trends and Consequences	Body Mass Index and Old Age Survival: A Comparative Study between the Union Army Records and the NHANES-I Epidemiological Follow-up Sample	In this paper, I made a historical investigation of the BMI-mortality association among white male Americans through a comparative survival analysis between the Union Army Records and the NHANES-I Epidemiological Follow-up sample. The results indicate that the association between BMI and old age survival is historically dynamic, rather than stable. With the whole American population having moved into a higher BMI regime, the optimal BMI has also experienced a substantial upward shift, from (20.4-22.0) in the late 19th century to (24.9-26.9) in early 1970s. In both samples, those who were seriously underweight are associated with a higher risk of mortality. The mortality penalty associated with the highest BMI quintile has declined substantially since the late 19th century. The implications of these findings to the future trend in old age mortality among white male Americans are discussed.	Dejun	 Su
2004	74	Suicide and Gender-Based Violence	Women's Status, Marital Power Relations, and Wife Beating in Egypt	This paper explores the individual and household characteristics associated with wife beating in Egypt, using data from the 1995 Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS-95). The analysis focuses on women's status and patterns of household decision-making as measures of spousal power dynamics. The results provide partial support for the argument that women's empowerment can reduce the risk of intimate violence. Increased education of both men and women lowers the incidence of wife beating. Women's paid employment and their domination of household decision-making are unrelated to violence, and women's unpaid employment and husband or other family member's domination of household decisions are associated with higher risks of violence. Lower levels of household socioeconomic status, households' residence in urban and more-developed areas, and non-traditional marriage pattern are strongly associated with higher risks of violence. Policy implications for interventions in intimate violence in developing countries are discussed.	Zhihong	 Sa
2004	74	Suicide and Gender-Based Violence	Intimate Partner Violence in China: Risk Factors and Health Consequences in a National Population-Based Survey	This study estimated the national prevalence of, identified risk factors for, and explored the health sequelae of intimate partner hitting in China, including both directionality and severity of hitting.  The study included 1,665 women and 1,658 men who had a steady partner from a nationally representative sample of the adult population of China between ages 20 and 64.  Irrespective of severity, 34.0% of women and 18.2% of men were hit during the lifetime of their current relationship.  Severe hitting was 12.4% for women and 4.9% for men.  Significant risk factors for partner hitting included sexual jealousy, alcohol consumption, low male socioeconomic status, and regions other than the coastal provinces.  Severe hitting was a significant risk factor for adverse health outcomes for both men and women.  Much as in other societies, intimate partner hitting is common in China, and it is correlated with adverse health outcomes for both male and female victims.	William	L. Parish	Tianfu	 Wang	Edward	O. Laumann	Suiming	 Pan
2004	74	Suicide and Gender-Based Violence	Are Women Who Experience Gender-Based Violence at a Higher Risk of HIV/AIDS Infections? A Comparative Analysis	Gender-based violence (GBV) is being increasingly acknowledged as both a risk factor for HIV/AIDS and a possible consequence of actions and behaviors related to HIV/AIDS. Despite the increasing evidence, however, it is unclear how generalizable the findings are or how exactly GBV increases women's risks of acquiring the infection. Accordingly, this paper uses Demographic and Health Surveys data to examine how and whether women's experience of spousal violence measured at the household level compromises their ability to avoid HIV infection in four developing countries, namely Cambodia, Haiti, the Dominican Republic (DR), and Zambia. The HIV/AIDS risk factors specifically examined in relation to women's experience of violence include knowledge of HIV/AIDS and ways of avoiding infection, condom access and use, number of sexual partners, spousal communication, and having an STI and getting it treated. Analysis is done using multivariate statistical techniques.	Sunita	 Kishor
2004	74	Suicide and Gender-Based Violence	Adult Suicide Mortality in the United States: Individual and Contextual Covariates	We examine individual and contextual risk factors for adult suicide mortality, a major social problem and a central cause of preventable death in the United States.  We link nine consecutive years of the National Health Interview Survey (1986-1994) to the Multiple Cause of Death file through the National Death Index (1986-1997), and use Cox proportional hazard models to examine how demographic, social, and health factors are related to the risk of suicide mortality in the United States.  We find that individual level characteristics--age, sex, marital status, family size, education, employment status, existing medical conditions, and veteran status--as well as contextual factors--as measures of social disorganization--are related to suicide mortality risks. These results reveal important mechanisms that contribute to suicide mortality risk, a central preventable cause of death in the United States.	Richard	G. Rogers	Justin	T. Denney	Patrick	M. Krueger
2004	75	Balancing Work and Family	Transition Dynamics for Stay-at-Home Parenthood	Strategies to balance work and family are at the forefront of concerns facing many American parents.  Recently, the media has focused attention on stay-at-home parents--defined as married couples with children where one of the parents choose to be out of the labor force while the other parent works.  This analysis uses prospective data from the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to examine the dynamic nature of the stay-at-home parent family.  Profiles of stay-at-home parents from the Current Population Survey (CPS) are presented as a comparison for the number and characteristics of these families using a similar definition, but a longer time frame.  Using the SIPP, we look at characteristics of stay-at-home parents and their entries and exits over time from this family state.  These transitions are placed in the context of the household and family characteristics prior to the change.	Kristin	 Smith	Jason	 Fields
2004	75	Balancing Work and Family	Do Nonstandard Work Hours Harm Relationship Quality?	This research examines the relationship between nonstandard work schedules and relationship quality for a sample of 1,022 dual-earner couples with children in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 Cohort.  My research findings suggest a reason to be concerned for these couples.  Nonstandard work hours not determined by the worker have harmful effects on relationship conflict and positive interaction, compared to couples who both work days.  Yet more convincing, split-shift couples engage in more conflict, despite prior levels of this variable, suggesting that working alternating schedules is associated with changes in conflict over time.  The one exception to the patterns just described above is the situation when one spouse works irregular hours that she or he himself controls --in this case relationship quality is the same for these couples as it is for couples that both work day shifts.	Susan	 Jekielek
2004	75	Balancing Work and Family	Use of Workplace Work-Life Benefits by Dual-Earner Couples	U.S. employers are giving increasing attention to the obstacles their employees face in managing work-family demands.  Formal family friendly policies have been implemented, providing workers with, for example, child care assistance and improved time control and flexibility.  Despite the growing popularity of such benefits, and research supporting their positive effects, extant literature documents a gap between employer adoption of such policies and the perceived availability and actual use of them by individual employees. Empirical studies that have explored the use of such benefits have focused on individual employee or organizational factors. Little research has investigated couple patterns of work-life benefit use. We employ a life-course theoretical approach (focusing on linked lives and family adaptive strategies) and analzye data from the Ecology of Careers Panel Study to examine the use strategies related to four work-life benefits among approximately 800 dual-earner, middle-class couples in Upstate New York.	Donna	L. Spencer	Phyllis	 Moen	Joyce	 Altobelli
2004	75	Balancing Work and Family	Balancing Childbearing and Work under Different Labor Market Arrangements: An Analysis of European Union Countries	The ability of markets to accommodate women's labor force transitions in connection to childbirth and to ease the trade-offs between work and childcare varies significantly within Europe. I use the 1994-2000 waves of the European Community Household panel to estimate a probit model of the transitions in/out of the labor force, into part time as well as into unemployment of women after births of different order across 15 countries. Models are estimated at 6, 12, 24 and 36 months after birth. At the individual level, I control for women's and spouse's personal (education) and employment characteristics (type/length of contract, sector) as well as household information (income, family allowances). At a second level, institutional and economic differences across countries and regions (maternity benefits, size of government sector, typology of contracts, unemployment) are used. Results should shed light on what factors contribute to balance childbearing with labor market activity.	Alicia	 Adsera
2004	76	Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Out-Migration and Transitions in Labor Allocation and Labor Regimes in Rural Mexico	Changes in the allocation of labor and labor regimes in households of agrarian societies are critically influenced by local labor out-migration.  The understanding of the specific changes experienced by rural Mexican households is the objective of this paper.  Using data from 522 rural households in 18 communities of central-south Mexico we analyze the impact of labor out-migration on labor allocation and regime membership.  A discriminating analysis of families with migrants and/or migration experience is followed by two econometric analyses of changes in labor participation, job-holding and labor regimen membership:  First, semi-parametric logit models estimate changes in on-farm and off-farm labor allocation for males and females; and second, an asset-endowment-sensitive ordered probit model with variable thresholds estimates transitions in labor regimes.  Results suggest that increases in off-farm and single job-holding are, in part, due to out-migration.  They also imply that labor regime transitions--from net-demander to self-sufficient and from there to net-sellers--are likely caused by out-migration.	Ismael	R. Ortega-Sanchez	Jill	L. Findeis
2004	76	Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	The Impact of Labor Migration on Local Socioeconomic Development: An Econometric Analysis of Income Growth and Education in Rural Counties in China in the 1990s	The impact of labor migration on the sending community is important but understudied area. Researchers in the field are debating on whether migration undermines or boosts rural development. In this paper, we study the effect of labor migration/remittances on rural income growth and education in a multivariate framework, using data on temporary labor migration from China's 2000 census and time-series statistics of the rural counties. Results show that labor migration strongly facilitated income growth in rural China, relieving millions of peasants' families from poverty in the 1990s. It also enhanced the propensity of children having middle-school education. By contrast, the lost-of-labor effect of migration on grain production growth is barely significant and negligible, while meat and some other agricultural production grew rapidly in the sending counties. These findings suggest that labor migration have become a new growth point in rural China, contributing to the reduction of regional disparities.	Zhongdong	 Ma	Weimin	 Zhang	Hongyan	 Cui
2004	76	Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Workers' Remittances and Business Ownership in the Dominican Republic	Substantial controversy exists regarding whether remittances benefit or hurt recipient nations.  We contribute to the scorecard on international remittances by exploring one under-researched area-the impacts of these flows on business ownership and their ability to loosen financial constraints.  Our data come from the Dominican surveys of the Latin American Migration Project.  We model the household's likelihood of owning a business as a function of remittance receipt and various household head,  household, and location characteristics.  We take into account the possibility of reverse causality between households' business ownership and remittance receipt since migrants' remitting patterns may vary with their intentions of laying claim to family assets, including family businesses.  Accordingly, using a system of simultaneous probits of the likelihood of household business ownership and remittance receipt, we test the hypothesis that workers' remittances contribute to economic development by facilitating entrepreneurial activity on account of greater availability of financial support.	Susan	 Pozo	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes
2004	76	Economic Consequences of Migration for Origin Communities	Remittance Behavior of Migrants from Nang Rong Thailand: The Role of Social Pressure at Village of Origin	The literature on migrant remittance is dominated by microeconomic explanations, which overstate a utility maximization scheme while understating the importance of social context at origin villages as a determinant in remittance behavior. This paper contributes to existing literature by using multilevel statistical modeling and social survey data from Nang Rong, Thailand to examine how remittances between migrants and households in rural origin villages are related to intergenerational transfers, social networks and social capital, and community effects. Findings show that households that are isolates in the rice harvest are sent less monetary and goods-in-kind remittance. Furthermore, goods-in-kind remittance is more subject to network size and density than monetary remittance. Also, the presence of parents in the household is a strong determinant of remittance. These findings support the idea that social capital considerations and social pressure at origin villages impel migrants to repatriate money and goods in order to fulfill parental obligations.	Martin	 Piotrowski
2004	77	Networks and Social Capital	Social Contagion in Drug Use and Sex among College Students	Past research suggests that congregating delinquent youth increases their likelihood of problem behavior. We test for analogous social contagion effects in the drug use and sexual behavior of college students, using data on the characteristics of first-year roommates to whom they were randomly assigned. We find that boys who reported binge drinking in high school drink much more in college if assigned a roommate who also binge drank in high school than if assigned a non-binge-drinking roommate. No such multiplier effect is observed for females, nor are multiplier effects observed for marijuana use or sexual behavior for either males or females. Students who did not engage in these behaviors in high school do not appear to be affected by their roommates' high school behavior.	Greg	J. Duncan	Johanne	 Boisjoly	Dan	 Levy	Michael	 Kremer	Jacquelynne	 Eccles
2004	77	Networks and Social Capital	The Timing of First Sexual Intercourse, Heritability, and Social/Demographic/Contextual Influences	Our proposed project has two objectives. First, using the twin adolescent samples collected by the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we will examine whether or not genetic factors play an important role in influencing the timing of the first sexual intercourse among adolescents in the United States. Second, if we do find important genetic factors, we will proceed to examine how much the social, demographic, and contextual influences moderate the influences of genetic factors on the outcome. Previous work has found the effects of a number of social economic factors on first sexual intercourse such as gender, ethnicity, family structure, and neighborhood characteristics. These social and contextual influences will be examined carefully for their potential moderating influences on the expression of genetic factors. The analytical approach we will use is the random effects proportional hazards model with the gamma frailty.	Guang	 Guo	Lin	 Wang
2004	77	Networks and Social Capital	Measures of Spatial Segregation	The measurement of residential segregation patterns and trends has been limited by a reliance on segregation measurements that do not appropriately take into account the spatial patterning of population distributions.  We define a general approach to measuring spatial segregation among multiple population groups.  This general approach allows researchers to specify any theoretically-based definition of spatial or social proximity desired in computing segregation measures.  Based on this general approach, we develop a general spatial exposure/isolation index and a set of general multigroup spatial evenness/clustering indices.  We review these and previously proposed spatial segregation indices against a set of eight desirable properties of spatial segregation indices.  We conclude that the spatial exposure/isolation index--a measure of the average composition of individuals' local spatial environments--and the spatial information theory index--a measure of the variation in the diversity of the local spatial environments of each individual--are the most conceptually and mathematically satisfactory spatial indices.	Sean	F. Reardon	David	 O'Sullivan
2004	77	Networks and Social Capital	The Scarcity of Organizational Resources in High Poverty Neighborhoods	Sociologists have suggested that poor urban neighborhoods are deprived of the important organizational resources the middle class takes for granted, such  as childcare centers, churches, hardware stores, and grocery stores.  However, no major studies have tested this proposition.  We test it among 331 PMSA/MSAs, employing a unique dataset containing Department of Commerce data on all businesses and organizations by zip code matched to the 2000 Census.  We examine competing sets of hypotheses about three issues: whether the prevalence of one type of resource co-varies with that of others, whether the prevalence of resources declines as poverty increases, and whether it increases with foreign-born population.  We find surprising co-variance in the presence of diverse types of resources.  We also uncover that neighborhood poverty is significantly associated with increased resource prevalence, as is foreign-born population.  We conclude by discussing limitations of the analysis and implications for the theoretical conception of poor neighborhoods.	Mario	L. Small	Monica	 McDermott
2004	78	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Family Resources, Family Structure, Public Policies, and Child Maltreatment Risk: A Longitudinal Analysis	There is limited research on the mechanisms through which poverty and child maltreatment are connected. This paper uses data from the NLSY to estimate the effects of family resources, family structures, and public policies on child maltreatment risk. These relationships are also explored over time using child fixed-effects models. Maltreatment risk is operationalized in terms of the adequacy of the child's physical environment, emotional and cognitive support, parental spanking behaviors, and medical care. Preliminary results suggest that income and poverty impact routine medical and dental care, the quality of the caregiving environment, and spanking behaviors. In addition, single-parent families and families with a biological mother and non-biological father figure tend have lower quality caregiving environments than mother-father families, and changes in family structure tend to put children at greater risk of maltreatment. Finally, this analysis provides some evidence that more generous welfare policies may serve as protective factors for children.	Lawrence	M. Berger
2004	78	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Family Structure and Child Well-Being: Examining the Role of Parental Social Networks	Using longitudinal data from the NLSY79, this paper examines whether parental social support helps to reduce the negative impact of single-parenthood on children.  Two measures of social support are used: how often a family spends time with friends or relatives, and whether a child's grandparent is living in the household.  Our analyses focus on two important sub-groups of children: African-Americans and families receiving public assistance.  African-Americans are an important sub-group because of the higher prevalence of single-parenthood in African-American families, and because our previous work found significant race differences in the influence of single-parenthood on children.  Families receiving public assistance are examined because they are the target of public policies aimed at increasing marriage.  Results suggest that the presence of grandparents in the home helps buffer the negative associations between single-parenthood and child delinquency.	Rachel	 Dunifon	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2004	78	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Family Structure and Partner Choice	Parental divorce has become a common event in the lives of American children today. Every year, more than one million children experience parents' divorce and nearly one half of the children born in recent cohorts will spend part of their childhood living in a single-parent family. The consequences of parental divorce on children's development and their transition to adulthood have been well documented. Yet our understanding of the long-term consequences remains limited. In this paper, I will examine whether respondents' family of origin predicts the parenting behavior of their partners, and whether partner's parenting style buffers the association between family structure and respondents' own parenting behaviors. The analysis consists of 1,720 respondents who are biological, adoptive, or step parents of the children in the special supplement to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID-CDS). Three aspects of respondents' early family experiences and seven domains of parenting practices will be examined.	I-Fen	 Lin
2004	78	Family Structure and Child Outcomes	Parental Divorce and Socio-Economic Wellbeing: A Cross Cohort Comparison	A substantial body of research demonstrates that children whose parents divorce are more likely to be disadvantaged on a range of outcomes.  Few studies, however, have systematically examined whether or not these associations have remained stable over time.  This is an important issue to explore because some theories suggest that the negative associations should have declined as divorce has become more commonplace.  Using data from two British cohorts, born twelve years apart, we seek to assess whether or not the negative associations of family disruption have, in fact, changed. For each cohort, and for men and women separately, we estimate the effects of parental divorce on several measures of disadvantage.  Taking advantage of the prospective nature of these data, we limit our sample to children  whose families were intact at the first follow-up and control for some family and child characteristics that predated a disruption.	Wendy	 Sigle-Rushton	John	 Hobcraft	Kathleen	E. Kiernan
2004	79	Fertility Transitions in Ghana	Rural Commercialization and Contraceptive Use in Ghana	The paper will examine the role of rural commercialization in fertility transition by looking at the relationships between household and community level participation in market production and contraceptive use in rural Ghana.  It will also examine some of reasons why commercialization is linked to fertility and some socio-economic factors that condition the relationship. The paper focuses on commercialization because traditional demographic transition theory sees it as a key precondition for fertility decline while research in family sociology has indicated that commercialization is one of the most powerful forces shaping families, kinship and gender relations in rural societies. The paper will use data from the Ghana Living Standards Measurement Survey conducted in the late 1980s and early 1990s and the 1984 Ghana Population census.	Kofi	D. Benefo
2004	79	Fertility Transitions in Ghana	The Role of Childhood Mortality in Fertility Transition in a Rural Sahelian District of Northern Ghana	A widely accepted hypothesis holds that mortality decline induces reproductive change.  In Asia, however, childhood mortality covaries with fertility in ways that suggest volitional replacement of children is a consequence rather than a cause of demographic transition. Whether this relationship occurs in African settings where fertility regulation is dominated by child spacing rather than limitation remains unknown.  This paper assesses the child replacement hypothesis with longitudinal birth and deaths data occurring to children of 43,000 women observed in the Navrongo Demographic Surveillance System over the July 1993 to June 2003 period. Cox regression is employed to assess the effect of child mortality on odds of parity progression, controlling for maternal characteristics. Results show that the death of a child has no effect on  the odds of subsequent parity progression.  The Navrongo experiment has no effect on replacement.  Results are contrasted with an analysis from Bangladesh evincing a pronounced replacement effect.	Fred	 Binka	Ayaga	A. Bawah	Mian	B. Hossain
2004	79	Fertility Transitions in Ghana	Marriage, Lineage, Relative Spousal Power, and Fertility Decline in Ghana	Women's relative influence in reproductive decision-making has not increased with rapid fertility decline in Ghana. As men select into monogamy on the basis of lower (but not low) fertility desires, the pressure on their wives to fulfill those desires seems greater. In contrast, junior wives of polygynously married men may be under pressure to cease childbearing; even relatively high fertility goals have dropped enough that they seldom require expending the full reproductive potential of more than one wife. Differences by lineage type are modest, but the influence of matrilineal women seems to have decreased during early fertility transition.	Laurie	 DeRose
2004	79	Fertility Transitions in Ghana	Migration and Fertility in Coastal Ghana: An Event History Analysis	In this paper we undertake an event history analysis of fertility in Ghana.  We exploit detailed life history calendar data to conduct a more refined analysis of the relationship between personal traits, urban residence and fertility.  Although urbanization is associated with lower fertility in developing country settings, most studies have been hampered by lack of information about the timing of residence in relationship to childbearing.  The effect of urbanization itself is strong, evident, and complex, even after controlling for the effects of age, cohort and education. Continuously urban residents exhibit fertility rates that are about 15% lower than rural women at every parity. Rural-urban movers, by contrast, exhibit a very parity-specific pattern, with faster progression to first birth and slower progression to second birth. Our results suggest that the urbanization effect on reducing fertility occurs more in later generations than within the rural-urban migrant generation itself.	Michael	J. White	Salahudin	S. Muhidin	Catherine	N. Stiff	Rodney	J. Knight
2004	80	Spatial Models	Methodologies to Improve Global Population Estimates in Urban and Rural Areas	The growth of cities is an intrinsically spatial issue. By 2007, over half of the world's population will reside in urban areas. Despite increasing knowledge about the characteristics of urbanization, little is known about its spatial dimensions, especially at a continental or global scale. This study is the first systematic effort to delineate human population distribution taking into account urban areas and rural human settlements. It employs simple geographic and demographic principles to generate an integrated database (at 1 km resolution) of populated urban extents from census and satellite data for use in studies of urbanization, population, and the environment. This paper describes the data sources and the methodologies used to produce the urban extents and urban-rural population surface. It will also present estimates--including novel spatial ones, such as the proportion of urban dwellers in coastal zones--from the newly created database and compare such estimates to those from the UN.	Deborah	 Balk	Francesca	 Pozzi	Gregory	 Yetman	Andy	 Nelson	Uwe	 Deichmann
2004	80	Spatial Models	Spatial Variation of Juvenile Sex Ratios and Sex Selective Underreporting in Two Chinese Censuses	The sex ratio of children in China, as measured by official censuses and surveys, has been on the rise since the late 1970s.  National level trends in the missing girls phenomenon and sex-selective underreporting have been well described, but regional and local variations are less well known. This paper uses data from the 1990 and 2000 censuses of China in conjunction with Geographic Information System (GIS) technology and spatial statistics to describe sub-national variation in the juvenile sex ratio and in sex-selective underreporting. We first visualize the spatial patterns in juvenile sex ratio and sex-selective underreporting, then use spatial statistics to detect clustering of these same phenomena. Spatial autocorrelations, global and local, are used to describe spatial patterns and to detect clustering.  We present preliminary models of spatial variation, and conclude with a discussion of social and political explanations for the observed patterns.	William	 Lavely	Yong	 Cai
2004	80	Spatial Models	Hidden Diversity in an Urban/Rural Dichotomy: A Case Study for Dar es Salaam, Tanzania	The diversity not captured by a dichotomous urban/rural classification plays an important role in the outcome of human events. For example, urbanization is crucial for studying malaria transmission in Africa, since incidence rates are low in highly urbanized areas, intense in rural settings, and transitory from in peri-urban zones. This paper aims to highlight differences in the level of urbanization in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Semivariograms will be applied to aerial photographs of the city. Evaluation of the semivariogram components and functional form should facilitate the characterization of different patterns of urban development across the city. Moreover, those patterns should reveal a wide diversity in malaria transmission across Dar es Salaam. Those results should shed light on critical areas to be targeted for malaria control in Dar es Salaam, and facilitate the selection of the best combination of interventions that should be put into place in each area.	Marcia	C.  De Castro
2004	80	Spatial Models	Measuring Urban Health Differentials: Conceptual and Analytical Challenges Illustrated from a Study of Accra, Ghana	Assessments of population health draw on data from diverse sources.  Most demographic and health data can be located in space, even in low-income countries.  We have already shown how an understanding of the interaction of individual and community-level factors at different levels can provide new insights into the fertility transitions.  From this new study of the health of women in Accra, we report on measuring and accounting for intra-urban health differentials.  The structure of the survey instruments required re-thinking of the domains of health that can be reliably assessed from self-report studies.  To standardize for social class variations in health status reporting was tested using anchoring vignettes.  The study included home interviews and objective evaluations of the health of 3200 women aged 18 and over by physicians.  This analysis revealed the need for a clear specification of the models needed to explain both differentials and changes in population health.	Samuel	 Agyei-Mensah	Allan	G. Hill	John	K. Anarfi	Rosemary	 Duda
2004	82	Fertility Policies	Family Formation during the Hungarian Societal Transition: Trends in Postponement and the Impact of Policy Changes	In this paper we focus on two questions concerning family formation during the Hungarian societal transition. First, to what extent has the dynamics of economic activity and wellbeing changed the timing of first union formation and first birth? Second, what has the impact of policy changes been? We use a unique and recent micro-level dataset: the Hungarian Social and Demographic Panel Survey, released in 2002. We estimate survivor functions to illustrate the dramatic changes that have taken place among Hungarian birth cohorts. We then use semi-parametric hazard regression models for the timing of first union and first birth to disentangle the interplay between cohort, period effects and individual-level characteristics. Our results indicate that the decline in economic activity had a severe impact on family formation. Nevertheless, certain policies have exacerbated this effect, and policy changes during the 1990s had an asymmetric impact --- depending on the social status of individuals.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Francesco	C. Billari	Zsolt	 Speder
2004	82	Fertility Policies	China's Missing Children: The 2000 Census Underreporting Surprise	We compare the age and sex structure of China's 2000 population census to an estimate of that structure based on a projection from the 1990 census.  Based on China's own official estimates of demographic change, we find that about 37 million children were underreported in the 2000 census, over a quarter of all children under age five and an eighth of those between ages five and nine.  Counts of adults were otherwise excellent.  Sex differences in child underreporting were minor.  Child underreporting in China's censuses also occurred in 1982 and 1990, due in part because parental truth telling can lead to fines or punishments under birth restrictions in place since the 1970s.  Yet child underreporting rates in 2000 nearly tripled compared to previous censuses.  We attribute that increase primarily to policy enhancements beginning in the early 1990s holding officials at all jurisdictional levels personally responsible for enforcing birth quotas.	Daniel	M. Goodkind
2004	82	Fertility Policies	How Would Tempo Policies Work?	Current period fertility rates in most very low fertility countries are depressed partly because of a tempo effect resulting from an increase in the mean age of childbearing. Lutz et al. (Europe's population at a turning point, Science, Vol.299:1991-2) demonstrated that population aging and shrinking in the EU would be significantly weaker without this tempo effect. Given widespread resistance to direct government interference with private family size decisions, policies that aim to affect the tempo rather than family size may be more acceptable. Policies reducing further delays in childbearing would also have a strong health rationale.  We discuss several mechanisms through which tempo policies could affect fertility, including the impact of changes in the educational system on the tempo of fertility.  We present calculations for Bavaria, where the duration of high school will be shortened by one year, a measure that is likely to affect the timing of births.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2004	82	Fertility Policies	A Fund for the Newborn. A Proposal for Italy	Fertility in Italy has been below replacement for the last quarter of a century, and around 1.3 during the last 15 years. Low fertility implies diseconomies that are widely acknowledged, but public transfers to families and children are way below the European Union average. An hypothesis of reform of the welfare system that could have pro-natalist effects envisages the creation of a fund for each newborn child that would be accrued by yearly public transfers (and, within limits, by donations of relatives and friends). Up to fifty percent of the yearly transfer can be used by the family in order to support the child. The fund comes to maturity when the child comes of age: at this point the young may use it in order to improve his education, as a startup for an economic activity or for any other productive use. Repayment is spread over the working life.	Massimo	 Livi-Bacci
2004	83	Non-Marital Fertility	Variation in Transition to the Next Birth by Parity and Marital Status	Much attention has been devoted to the consequences of non-marital births in terms of women's future achievements and children's well-being.  However, little is known about the subsequent fertility behavior of women with non-marital first births.  Surprisingly, there is very little difference in completed fertility by marital status at first birth.  However, this overall similarity masks differences in fertility behavior at different parities.  In this paper, I analyze parity progression ratios at parities above one, concentrating on differences in parity progression patterns between women married and unmarried at the previous birth.  I find that women with non-marital first births are less likely to have a second child than women whose first births take place within marriage.  At higher parities, on the other hand, marital status is unrelated to parity progression ratios.  I turn to the social meaning of children within the context of a marriage to interpret these results.	Sarah	R. Hayford
2004	83	Non-Marital Fertility	Community Context and Race/Ethnic Differences in Non-Marital Fertility	Drawing from theory based on Black-White differences, this research uses the NSFG and the NSFG-CDF to look at the role that structural/economic factors play in maintaining Mexican American/White differences in non-marital fertility.  Multilevel event history models are employed. While many county level variables have a 'baseline relationship' with non-marital fertility, controlling for race/ethnic specific unemployment rates do the most to  reduce race/ethnic differences in the risk of a non-marital birth. Importantly, there are significant interactions between individual level socioeconomic status and county level characteristics on the risk of a non-marital birth. While Mexican American women of low socioeconomic status are no different than White women, higher SES Mexican American women have 5 times the risk compared to otherwise similar White women. Additionally, county level variables are more strongly linked to the risk of a non-marital birth among women of higher socioeconomic status.	Elizabeth	M. Wildsmith
2004	83	Non-Marital Fertility	Pre-Marital Birth, Marriage, and Welfare	This paper investigates the transition into premarital birth or marriage for a sample of young women from the NLSY. Overall, welfare has a significant effect on a woman's decision to marry and an insignificant effect on an unmarried woman's fertility decision. We find the strongest welfare effect on the likelihood of marriage among disadvantaged women, and the strongest positive effect of welfare on fertility among hispanic women. Most of the observed differences in behavior between white women and disadvantaged women are the result of differences in endowments. The women that experience a premarital birth are characterized by a high probability of fertility and low marital prospects over their teen years.	Jose	J. Canals-Cerda
2004	83	Non-Marital Fertility	What Did the Out-of-Wedlock Birth Reduction Bonus Reward?	The 1996 welfare reform act awarded a $100 million Out-of-Wedlock Birth Reduction Bonus each of five years to states that experienced the greatest reduction in nonmarital births, provided the abortion/birth ratio also fell.  The Bonus has received little scholarly attention and there are no analyses of its demographic impact.  We describe changes in martial and nonmarital births and abortions 1995-2001, both nationally and in bonus states.   Abortion data come from an NBER-AGI effort that gathered individual-level data on abortions from state health departments. We examine whether nonmarital fertility fell in bonus states because marital fertility rose or nonmarital fertility declined; whether births fell among women at highest risk of welfare use, such as less-educated single mothers; whether the abortion/birth ratios fell because they fell among unmarried women, among married women, or both; and we describe changes in abortions for unmarried women and women at greatest risk of welfare use.	Sanders	 Korenman	Theodore	 Joyce	Jennifer	 Walper
2004	84	Social Determinants of HIV Dynamics	Does Community Ethnic Diversity Slow the Spread of HIV in Uganda?	This paper assesses the relationship between community ethnic diversity and sexual behaviors that are associated with the spread of HIV.  Survey data from 1754 households in 121 Demographic and Health Statistics (DHS) clusters in 12 districts in Uganda in 2001 was merged with data on the number of different languages spoken by households in the DHS sampling frame for each cluster.  In monolingual communities, 22% of unmarried and 9% of married respondents reported sex with someone other than a spouse, a fraction which rose to 34%  (p      	David	 Bishai	George	 Pariyo	Priya	 Patil
2004	84	Social Determinants of HIV Dynamics	Do Social Interactions Affect Individual HIV/AIDS Attitudes and Prevention Strategies in Rural Malawi?	AIDS awareness alone is a necessary but insufficient condition for individual change in risk behaviors. Instead, it appears that social networks and social participation may be important forces encouraging positive attitudes towards condoms and marital fidelity. In this paper, I analyze network and social participation data gathered from a 1998-2001 household survey in rural Malawi using multivariate models that control for individual socio-economic characteristics and exposure to AIDS prevention information. I find that attendance in local community events, and structure of AIDS conversation networks influence AIDS attitudes and behaviors. Social isolation has the most negative effects on the outcomes examined. Social participation in weddings, funerals, and other gatherings, on the other hand, appears to increase the approval and use of condoms.	Patrick	 Gerland
2004	84	Social Determinants of HIV Dynamics	Exchange and Risky Behavior in Sexual Relationships in Urban Kenya	There is emerging interest in the role of economic exchange, or transaction, between sexual partners in the continuing HIV/AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa.  Women, particularly adolescents, are believed to be vulnerable within exchange relationships, as men can induce them to accept unsafe sexual activities with small amounts of money or gifts.  This paper examines these assumptions using a unique data set on male non-marital sexual partnerships and exchange from urban Kenya.  Our analysis uses fixed effects to identify the causal effect of various types of exchange on condom use and if the effect of exchange is pronounced in partnerships involving adolescent girls.  We find a strong negative relationship between the amount of exchange and condom use, which is upheld in non-commercial partnerships and for non-monetary exchanges.  In addition, men are no less likely to use condoms in exchange partnerships with adolescent girls than with adult females.	Nancy	 Luke
2004	84	Social Determinants of HIV Dynamics	The Influence of Cross-Gender Conversational Networks on Responses to AIDS in Rural Malawi	In this paper, we examine the influence of husbands' (wives') social networks on their spouses' responses to AIDS. Social networks in are quite gendered: women talk with women, men with men. Communication between husband and wife, however, may bridge the gender gap. We use data from a longitudinal survey conducted in 1998 and 2001 in Malawi that provides information on the conversations in social networks and between spouses. The data include four sets of variables central to our analysis: 1) responses to AIDS; 2) whether both members of the couple agree or disagree on whether a spousal conversation on AIDS occurred; 3) the gender composition of respondents' networks; 4) individual characteristics. We utilize for our analyses several different methodologies, including (a) context analyses of qualitative data, (b) regression analyses of the influence of social interaction and spousal communication on AIDS risk perceptions and AIDS-related behaviors, and (c)  fixed effects models.	Susan	 Watkins	Hans-Peter	 Kohler	Jere	 Behrman
2004	85	Wealth Inequality	Utility Evaluation of Risk in Retirement Saving Accounts	The shift from defined benefit to defined contribution plans in the United States has drawn attention to the effect of participants' asset allocation decisions on their financial resources for retirement. This paper develops a stochastic simulation algorithm to evaluate the effect of holding a diversified portfolio of common stocks, or a portfolio of index bonds, on the distribution of 401(k) account balances at retirement. We compare the alternative distributions of retirement wealth both by showing the empirical distribution of potential wealth values, and by computing the expected utility of these outcomes. Our analysis highlights the critical role of other sources of wealth, such as Social Security, defined benefit pensions, and saving outside retirement plans in determining the expected utility cost of holding equities in the retirement account. Our findings also demonstrate the importance of the equity premium in affecting investors' utility from different retirement asset allocations.	James	 Poterba	Joshua	 Rauh	Steven	 Venti	David	 Wise
2004	85	Wealth Inequality	Grasshoppers, Ants, and Pre-Retirement Wealth: A Test of Permanent Income Consumers		Erik	 Hurst
2004	85	Wealth Inequality	Immigration and Wealth Inequality in the U.S.	This paper addresses two possible ways in which immigration can affect inequality in the United States.  First recent immigrants may enlarge the bottom of the wealth distribution.  Second, the stratification of wealth by ethnicity and education may differ by nativity.  Based on nine surveys of the SIPP (1984-96) with a large sample of immigrant households, we performed quantile regression analysis at the bottom, median and top locations for five age groups.  Findings include (1) later arrival cohorts and non-naturalization contribute to a larger bottom of the wealth distribution; (2) having no high school education harms natives more than immigrants, suggesting that immigration reduces the polarizing effect of education at the bottom of the wealth distribution; and (3) high-educated immigrants do not accumulate as much wealth as their native counterparts, suggesting that immigration also reduces the polarizing effect of education at the top of the wealth distribution.	Lingxin	 Hao
2004	85	Wealth Inequality	Cross-Population Comparability and PPPs: Using Micro-Data on Indicators of Consumer Durables	This paper addresses the issue of cross-population comparability of economic status indices estimated from household-level indicator variables on consumer durables using latent variable statistical models. The problem is similar to the one faced in estimation of PPPs. The same basket of consumer durables need not imply the same level of economic status across countries. This is because, even for the same level of the true economic status, the likelihood of ownership of a given consumer durables is not the same across countries. This may be due to different prices structures, preferences, or other environmental factors. We propose one way of making the estimates of economic status comparable across countries. This enables us to estimate economic status on a common scale across countries. We apply the model to indicator-variable data from DHS. The results seem promising: there is a high degree of association between the economic status index and PPP-based economic status measures from other sources.	Ajay	 Tandon	Angelica	 Sousa	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Christopher	J.L. Murray
2004	86	Race and Ethnic Inequalities in Health Outcomes	Race/Ethnic Differences in Non-Specific Psychological Distress: Evidence from the National Health Interview Survey	Race/ethnicity differentials in mental health are often used to explore the experience of minority status relative to the majority.  Recent examinations of these patterns have focused on a limited number of race/ethnic groups or used small-scale surveys. We investigate the differences in prevalence of psychological distress among several race/ethnic groups using a five-year pool of the National Health Interview Survey, and a new measure of psychological distress--the K6 scale (Kessler et al 2002).   Using multivariate logit models, we analyze the likelihood of psychological distress across race/ethnic sub populations compared to non-Hispanic Whites.  The results indicate that African Americans and Mexicans have lower levels of distress relative to Whites, while Asians appear to have similar levels of distress. These results inform the larger question of what minority status refers to within the arena of mental health, particularly when majority members are not necessarily more advantaged in this respect.	Jenifer	 Bratter
2004	86	Race and Ethnic Inequalities in Health Outcomes	Testing the Paradox in Birth Weight amongst a Population in Juarez-El Paso	This paper focuses on birth weight and the very well known phenomenon named the epidemiological paradox. Objectives: 1) to contrast the factors predicting low birthweight for a survey population in a hospital in El Paso compared to the general population in El Paso 2) to test the selective migration and cultural hypotheses to explain better birth outcomes for babies born to women born in Mexico in comparison to women born in the US through the variables of nativity and place of education. We use a sample of babies born during 1996-1997 in Thomason Hospital and the vital registrations for births in El Paso County. We use Ordinary Least Squares to establish variables predicting low birth weight and we will perform a multinomial logistic regression adding cultural and migration variables to evaluate their effects on low birth weight according to where mothers were born and completed their education.	Georgina	 Martinez	Ann	M. Moore
2004	86	Race and Ethnic Inequalities in Health Outcomes	Racial/Ethnic Differences in Asthma Prevalence: The Role of Housing and Neighborhood Environments	The focus of this paper is on evaluating the potential role played by housing and neighborhood conditions in moderating racial/ethnic differences in the prevalence of asthma among New York City households with children.  The prevalence of asthma bears a direct relationship to housing quality, in that many asthma triggers--including dust mites, pet dander, cockroach and mice feces, and mold--are found in the home, and particularly in substandard housing, while others triggers are found in higher quantities in poor inner-city neighborhoods. Given that blacks and Hispanics inhabit lower-quality housing and neighborhoods than do whites or Asians, these differences may help to explain the higher prevalence of asthma among blacks and Hispanics.  The analysis relies on data from the 2002 panel of the New York City Housing and Vacancy Survey, supplemented by contextual variables on neighborhood conditions.	Emily	 Rosenbaum
2004	86	Race and Ethnic Inequalities in Health Outcomes	Changes in Race-Ethnic Disparities from Adolescence to Young Adulthood	We follow a cohort of adolescents for six years into young adulthood, and show how race/cohort trends differ over the period.  When shown developmentally, race/ethnic trends emerge that show how race disparities  change with age.  To make our comparisons we use data from Add Health wave 1 in 1995 and Wave 3 in 2001-2. Examination of race disparities and how they change from adolescence to adulthood reveals that the relative position of the race ethnic categories is unstable.  Even by sex, the races show different disparities.	J.	Richard  Udry
2004	87	International/Comparative Research on Mortality	One Hundred Years of Mortality in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Fragile Path from Hunger to Longevity	We use a new set of life tables to characterize the mortality experience of Latin American countries during the period 1900-2000. We describe the procedures applied to estimate these life tables, construct models of mortality that capture the diversity of experiences during the period 1950-2000, and then use these models to estimate life tables for the period 1900-1950. We also examine the relation between early childhood and adult mortality through the century, estimate patterns of old age mortality to evaluate the march toward longevity, and assess the magnitude of the contribution that the mortality decline experienced in 1930-1970 will have on the growth of the elderly (60+) population during the period 1990-2030.	Alberto	 Palloni	Guido	 Pinto
2004	87	International/Comparative Research on Mortality	International Distributions of the Age at Death and Mortality Convergence	Near-linear increases in life expectancy at birth in industrialized countries during the postwar period have been interpreted by some as indicating convergence to a single, universal mortality schedule.  Although there has been much convergence in the mean age at death conditional on surviving to any age, convergence in the variance of the age at death has followed a different pattern.  Universal reductions in infant and child mortality have raised life expectancies and lowered unconditional variances of the age at death, but there are differential trends in variances in the age at death conditional on early survival among advanced economies. Vastly different patterns of later-life variance in the age at death during the postwar period are suggestive of differential individual-level heterogeneity in health outcomes that may be connected to differential mortality decline.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2004	87	International/Comparative Research on Mortality	Using the Lee-Carter Method to Explain Linear Increases in Life Expectancy	Recently, life expectancy rising approximately linearly has been observed in many low-mortality nations, we find that this phenomena is a conditional output of k(t) changing linearly in the Lee-Carter method, which characterizes stable mortality declines across all ages. The conditions for such an output to occur are low mortality at young ages, and at old ages the Gompertz law works and mortality decline at rates that are constant across age and over time. Using data of the G7 countries, we illustrate that these conditions roughly stand since 1950s, and show that the changes of k(t)s are as linear as that of life expectancy. In general, we do not recommend using life expectancy as the predictor to forecast mortality, because it does not provide age-specific death rates, it could hardly be more linear than k(t), and to be as linear as k(t) it requires three conditions that may not stand widely.	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar	Nan	 Li
2004	87	International/Comparative Research on Mortality	Gompertzian Mortality Curves Are a Natural Consequence of Biological Damage and Repair Mechanisms	Exponentially increasing mortality rates during adulthood are a common feature of human populations as well as many species of animals.  Most explanations of this phenomenon invoke particular distributions of frailty or rates of aging.  A simple mathematical model that makes no such assumptions shows that exponential increases in mortality rates can arise directly from known processes of biological damage and repair.  The cellular and biochemical systems that repair damage are themselves produced and regulated by the very systems that they repair, so damage is eventually self-catalyzing.  The result is an exponential increase in damage as the individual ages, and, by extension, an exponential increase in mortality due to that damage.  It is possible that mortality plateaus may arise at relatively high levels of damage as new damage overlaps existing damage rather than affecting intact components.	Lloyd	P. Goldwasser
2004	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	Are There Persistent Effects of Early Maternal Employment on Child Cognitive Outcomes? A Longitudinal Look at Children from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care	Negative associations between full-time maternal employment during the first year of life and children's cognitive outcomes at age three have been reported, using data on non-Hispanic white children from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care (Brooks-Gunn, Han, and Waldfogel, 2002).  In this paper, we examine whether those effects persist beyond age 3.  Using newly released data from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care, we examine the links between early maternal employment and cognitive outcomes for these children at age 3, age 4 ½, kindergarten, and first grade.  We consider whether the results differ for children with different characteristics (e.g., gender and temperament).  We also examine the role that income may play in buffering the associations between early full-time maternal employment and later cognitive outcomes for children.	Jane	 Waldfogel
2004	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	The Effects of an Anti-Poverty Program on Children's Cumulative Risk: Exploring the Role of Program Services	Prior anti-poverty programs, such as comprehensive early childhood programs, appear to have impacts on multiple risks for negative child outcomes. However, program effects on cumulative risk have not been examined with programs that directly impact employment and income. This paper aims to examine the effect of New Hope, a comprehensive anti-poverty program, on children's cumulative risk. New Hope provided a number of services to individuals working full time. Results show that New Hope decreased children's cumulative risk and that this decrease was concentrated among children in early childhood at study entry. Results also indicate significant indirect effects of New Hope on children's parent-reported school performance and behavior problems, via cumulative risk Finally, results show a relationship between use of different program services and cumulative risk. Use of the health insurance and child care subsidies, as well as the total number of services used, were related to lower cumulative risk.	Anna	 Gassman-Pines
2004	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	Welfare Reform and Preschoolers: Are Certain Children at Risk?	A growing number of studies have examined the effects of welfare and work on young children's development during the era of welfare reform; however, few have investigated the role of individual differences in child temperament.  Drawing data from Welfare, Children, and Families: A Three-city Study, the current investigation (n=445) seeks to identify subgroups of children who may be at risk given their temperamental characteristics and mothers' welfare and work patterns.  Even after controlling for children's self-regulation and reactivity, two major components of temperament, few effects of mothers' welfare and work experiences on young children's functioning were found.  However, self-regulation was modestly related to increases in quantitative skills and decreases in behavior problems, and reactivity was modestly associated with a rise in behavior problems and a decline in social competence over time.  Results suggest that the association between mothers' welfare and work patterns and preschoolers' outcomes depends on self-regulation and reactivity.	Christine	P. Li-Grining	Elizabeth	 Votruba-Drzal	P.	Lindsay  Chase-Lansdale
2004	88	Public Policy and the Wellbeing of Children and Youth	Income and Children's Achievement: Leveraging Data from Random-Assignment Experiments	Although many studies have examined the association between family income and child development, two crucial issues remain to be settled. First, what is the causal relationship?  Second, do the effects of economic conditions on children depend upon the child's age? By exploiting random assignment to income-boosting welfare-reform programs, this study utilizes an instrumental variables (IV) estimation strategy to identify the ways in which changes in parents' income affect children school achievement, controlling for changes in parents' employment.  Preliminary results find significant, although small, benefits of increased income for preschool children's achievement.  At the same time, few effects of income are found for middle childhood and adolescent children.  By integrating an IV estimation strategy with the strength of an experimental design, this work has the potential to significantly advance our understanding of the causal effects of income on children's development, and thereby inform research and policy.	Pamela	 Morris	Greg	J. Duncan	Chris	 Rodrigues	Heather	D. Hill	Elizabeth	 Clark-Kauffman
2004	89	Child Health in Developed Countries: New Methods and Findings	The Impact of Low-Income on Child Health: Evidence from a Birth Cohort Study	This paper studies the link between parental income and child health. Using a UK data set that has rich information on mother's early life events, her health, her behaviours that may affect child health, and her child's health, we examine the impact of having low income on child health. The expected correlation between current income and the current health of the child exists, but allowing for mother related factors that are associated with both low income and poor child health we find the direct impact of income is considerably reduced. We find little evidence to suggest that the transmission mechanism from income to child health is through specific mother child related health behaviours, such as diet, breastfeeding, smoking, and mother's employment. Instead, the mechanism appears to be mother's own health, particularly her mental health, and events in her early life. In less rich data, such links would not be apparent.	Simon	 Burgess	Carol	 Propper	John	 Rigg
2004	89	Child Health in Developed Countries: New Methods and Findings	Racial and Residential Disparities in the Health Outcomes of Infants Born to Teen Mothers	The past decade has witnessed dramatic declines in teen pregnancy and childbearing for all racial, ethnic and teen age groups.  Despite this positive trend, teen childbearing rates remain high and are associated with poor maternal and child outcomes, including poor infant health outcomes.  The consequences of teen childbearing also display considerable variation by race, ethnicity, and degree of rurality.  How race and rurality interact to impact the health of infants born to teen mothers has not been studied in depth and is a primary focus of this study.  We use the National Survey of Family Growth to examine racial and residential disparities in the health outcomes of infants born to teen mothers.  The NSFG allow us to examine factors that impact low birth weight, pre-term status, and overall health of a nationally representative sample of infants born to teen mothers.	Anastasia	R. Snyder	Bridget	K. Gorman
2004	89	Child Health in Developed Countries: New Methods and Findings	Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Birthweight in the United States: New Models and New Results	In this paper we investigate race and ethnic disparities in birthweight using a new modeling approach, namely quantile regression.  This technique allows us to fit a model to the median as well as other fixed percentiles of the birthweight distribution using a family of jointly estimated models.  Together, these models provide information on how the effects of covariates vary across the entire birthweight distribution and also allow us to focus on the determinants of low birthweight but without resorting to a dichotomous outcome measure.  Graphical presentation of the quantile regression results provides valuable additional insights.  We use these models to investigate differentials in birthweight by race and ethnicity and the factors that account for these differentials.  Data for this study come from the 2001 Natality Data Set, which covers all births in the U.S. and hence allows us to examine finely graded differences in birthweight across the entire distribution.	Narayan	 Sastry
2004	89	Child Health in Developed Countries: New Methods and Findings	Probability Samples or Clinic Populations to Study Pregnancy and Children's Health? Contrasting Approaches of Demography and Epidemiology	Research on pregnancy and children's health has two distinct research traditions, the study of geographically defined populations and clinical populations, such as prenatal care sites or hospitals, each bringing distinctive strengths and weaknesses.  To make more informed choices for programs such as the National Children's' Study, we examined influences on pregnancy outcome in a clinic population enrolled for the Pregnancy, Infection, and Nutrition (PIN) Study (N=2,289) compared to births in counties served by participating clinics (N=59,979) in 1996-2000.  Pregnancy outcomes were preterm birth (      	David	A. Savitz	Nancy	 Dole	Diane	 Kaczor	Amy	H. Herring	Anna	Maria  Siega-Riz	Jay	S. Kaufman	John	M. Thorp, Jr.
2004	90	Fathers and Families	The Involvement of Young Men in Fathering: What Their Own Fathers Taught Them	Drawing upon both quantitative and qualitative data, this study examines the relationship between the contact young men had with their own fathers during their teens, and their own involvement with children they have fathered.  Past research argues that young men have fewer role models of positive fathering, yet many new fathers desire to be good parents to their children.  Quantitative analyses are based on data from the National Survey of Adolescent Males and model the effect of family structure and father contact at age 14 on parenting by young fathers as reported in 1995.  Qualitative research draws upon in-depth interviews with 37 low-income, single fathers and explores how single men define fathering and their role as parents in relation to the role modeling they received from their own fathers.	Renata	 Forste	Rebecca	 Allen
2004	90	Fathers and Families	Exploring the Effects of Fatherhood Experiences on Single, Cohabiting, and Married Men's Lives	The proposed study uses data from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to analyze the associations between men's fatherhood experiences and their psychological and physical health, social interactions, family involvement, and work behaviors.  The project extends previous work by focusing on the significance of fatherhood experiences among single, cohabiting, and married men.  To date, no study has explored the relative impact of fatherhood experiences on single, cohabiting, and married  men's well-being and social behaviors.  The expectation is that the presence of a romantic partner, and the permanency of this relationship, conditions the association between men's fatherhood experiences and their well-being and social behaviors.	Chris	 Knoester	Anna	 Cunningham
2004	90	Fathers and Families	Paternal Engagement and Responsibility in Low-Income Families: Longitudinal Links with Adolescent Well-Being	Longitudinal data from Welfare, Children and Families: A Three-City Study are used to assess links between paternal accessibility, responsibility, and emotional attachment and adolescent development over time, using a sample of low-income, predominantly African American and Latino families (N = 850).  Interviews with multiple reporters and direct assessments provide standardized measures of paternal involvement, family processes, and adolescent behavioral, emotional, and cognitive development.  Longitudinal autoregressive change models help control for both measured and unmeasured time-invariant characteristics, thus partialing out the independent relationship between father involvement and adolescent trajectories.  The second level of analyses consider different patterns by child gender and race/ethnicity.  Initial results indicate that paternal responsibility and emotional engagement predict improvements in adolescent cognitive achievement and psychological and behavioral well-being over time.  Patterns differ by child gender and race/ethnicity.  Results are discussed in light of cultural norms and expectations concerning fathers? roles in families.	Rebekah	 Levine Coley	Bethany	 Medeiros
2004	90	Fathers and Families	Complex Families and Implications for Parents' Support of Their Children	Recent research suggests the importance for both demographers and policy analysts of considering patterns of multiple partner fertility.  Many of the early insights have come from ethnographic research.  Quantitative research on complex families is difficult given data limitations (including inherent problems with sample definitions given complex family structures).  We use data derived from statewide administrative records of welfare recipients to map the multiple obligations and sources of support available to mothers and fathers of low income families in Wisconsin. Using these data, as well as survey reports of family structure and informal support, we gain a better understanding of the implications for parents who have children with multiple partners and who are simultaneously custodial and noncustodial parents and/or step-parents. We discuss implications for theories of the family that emphasize social or biological ties, as well as implications for current policy initiatives related to marriage promotion and child support	Maria	M. Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2004	91	Race, Ethnicity, and the Family	The Life Course of Family Structure and Adolescent School Achievement: Racial and Ethnic Differences	This paper examines racial and ethnic differences in the effects of family structure on adolescent school grades. I envision family structure as a process throughout the life course, characterized by three mechanisms of influence: family structure status during adolescence, exposure to family types, and instability caused by family structure changes. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I examine models separately for Non-Hispanic White, African American, Hispanic, and Asian adolescents. Results suggest that status and exposure measures are particularly important in predicting GPA for White adolescents, while for African Americans status during adolescence and having a recent change influence their school achievement. Hispanics show no family structure effects, while for Asian adolescents the presence of a stepfather incurs educational disadvantages. Unique strengths and cultural adaptations may help to explain why minority adolescents, unlike Non-Hispanic Whites, show no long-term effects of family structure.	Holly	 Heard
2004	91	Race, Ethnicity, and the Family	Race and Ethnic Differences in Mothering Behaviors: Does Family Structure Matter?	I use data from the Fragile Families Study to determine if mothering behaviors differ across family structures within race and ethnic groups.  I examine three domains of mothering behaviors: cognitive stimulation, warmth and responsive behaviors, and spanking for white, black and Hispanic mothers.  The results suggest that there are few differences in mothering behaviors across married, cohabiting, visiting, and single-parent families within race and ethnic groups. White mothers have the largest differences in mothering behaviors across family structures.  Moreover, for white mothers, education has the largest impact on mothering behaviors, whereas for black mothers, religiosity has the largest effect.  For Hispanic mothers, the largest differences in mothering behaviors are between foreign and native born mothers.  These results show that cultural differences in mothering are more salient than the benefits of marriage. These findings also suggest that policies aimed at promoting marriage to increase child well-being may have limited success.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2004	91	Race, Ethnicity, and the Family	The Sociology of African American Nonresident Fatherhood	Researchers commonly compare the parental involvement of black and white nonresident fathers without considering the unique life circumstances of African American men.  Using a sample of men drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), this study examines the characteristics of African American and white nonresident fathers.  Unlike previous research, nonresident fathers are separated into men who were married, cohabiting, and not in a union at the time of their child's birth.  Given dramatic race differences in family formation patterns, this may be a potentially important distinction.  Moreover, this study examines a wider array of men's characteristics than have prior studies, such as the planning status of the child, time spent working nonstandard hours, church attendance, and support from extended family members.  The results of this study will provide insight into African American nonresident fathers' lives and will have important implications for social policy aimed at increasing African American men's involvement with their children.	Susan	D. Stewart
2004	91	Race, Ethnicity, and the Family	Assessing the Myth of Familial AWOL: Kin Support among Euro and African American Men	Disorganization theories postulate that African American men have in many ways abandoned their familial roles. Using the NSFH data, the paper tests this hypothesis by examining African American men's extended family involvement relative to Euro American men. Overall, the hypothesis of African American men's familial disengagement is refuted by the data. The paper shows that African American men are astonishingly similar to Euro American men in their kin support, even though they differ on a number of socioeconomic and cultural predictors of kin support. This paradoxical outcome is mostly due to the fact that the effects of different groups of predictors cancel each other out as far as race differences are concerned: while African American men's economic disadvantage hinders their kin support, their cultural values and extended family structures tend to bring their involvement with kin to the levels of the more economically advantaged Euro American men.	Natalia	 Sarkisian
2004	92	Educational Differences among Immigrants in the United States	Schooling for Newcomers: Variation in Educational Persistence in the United States in 1920	Using PUMS data, we conduct a multi-level analysis of individual, familial, and community-level variables influencing educational persistence for immigrant and Southern-born adolescents in the non-southern U.S in 1920.  We employ logistic regression to compare educational persistence among adolescents from different demographic groups: Northern- and Southern-born Blacks and Whites; and foreign-born Jewish and non-Jewish Whites.  We also examine the effects of contextual characteristics on schooling for youth living in cities with populations of 25,000 or greater.  Our dependent variable is whether the adolescent was in school and not working.  The primary individual-level, independent variables are gender, age, race, being Jewish, and nativity.  Family-level predictors include family structure and parental literacy.  State and type of residence are also controlled. Within our urban subsample, we consider residential segregation, percent black or foreign-born, and socioeconomic factors.  Significant between-group differences are found.  Results are interpreted in light of previous work on historical racial and ethnic variation in schooling.	Stewart	E. Tolnay	Amy	K. Bailey
2004	92	Educational Differences among Immigrants in the United States	Educational Mobility among Black and White Immigrants in the Post-Civil Rights Era	Recent immigration from the Caribbean, Africa and Europe has been overshadowed by immigration from Asia and Latin America, but these newcomers are of particular theoretical importance because they represent the immigrant analogs of the two most disparate and diametrically opposed American racial groups, Black and White Americans.  This study employs data from the Current Population Survey (1996-2002) to compare patterns of educational achievement and mobility among Black and White immigrants.  It is found that while the adult children of immigrants, irrespective of race, are doing significantly better than the immigrants themselves, racial disparities do exist.  Upward mobility is more pronounced in the White immigrant population.  While Black and White immigrants are practically identical in terms of educational attainment, the adult children of White immigrants have completed, on average, more years of education and are significantly more likely to have graduated high school than their Black counterparts.	Amon	 Emeka
2004	92	Educational Differences among Immigrants in the United States	Educational Attainment among Immigrants: Eight Years after High School	As more and more full-time employees go back to school or attend school part-time, it is necessary to examine educational achievement several years after high school graduation. We use data from the National Education Longitudinal Study (88) to examine the educational trajectories of Asian and Hispanic immigrants eight years after high school. Our main research questions are 1): To what extent does time in the U.S., family backgrounds, and high school characteristics explain any of the difference in educational attainment eight years after high school graduation between immigrant groups and native-born whites? 2) Do these characteristics have differential explanatory power across different ethnic groups and generation status? We also distinguish our study by including a variable measuring direct acculturation level: improvement of spoken-English over time.	Chunyan	  Song
2004	92	Educational Differences among Immigrants in the United States	Choice of Fields of Study of Asian American Youth in the U.S.: Ethnic and Gender Differences	This study examines the ethnic and gender differences in terms of the choice of fields of study of Asian American youth, paying attention to their generational status. The classification of fields of study will employ horizontal dimension in terms of hard/soft, and hierarchical dimension in terms of earnings power. With data from 1988-1994 National Educational Longitudinal Survey, I expect to find: 1) Asian American youth, men and women alike, tend to gravitate toward hard lucrative fields, as compared to their white counterparts. 2) Filipino and Japanese are more likely to choose soft fields than other Asian groups. 3) Asian women are more likely to choose hard fields than white women, but still less likely than Asian men. 4) First generation Asian immigrants are more likely to choose hard and lucrative fields than their native-born counterparts.	Yingyi	 Ma
2004	93	Very Low Fertility II	Explaining Differential Fertility Trajectories within Europe: The Roles of Catholicism, Pro-Natalist Policy, and Family Structure	Northwestern Europe has been known historically as the leading edge of the fertility decline associated with the demographic transition, with Southern and Eastern Europe later following a similar trajectory.  However, in the 1980s through most of the 1990s, Northwestern Europe's TFR rose quickly, while Southern Europe's remained at very low below replacement levels and Eastern Europe's actually declined further.  Using micro-level data from the Luxembourg Income Surveys (LIS), in conjunction with pooled time series data for 23 European countries, the authors analyze the influences of religion, pro-natalist social policy, and family structure, as well as political and economic factors, on the distinctive regional patterns of fertility within Europe.  It is found that this combination of factors largely explain current European fertility trends.  These results emphasize the importance of cultural factors, such as religion, which are often neglected in demographic research.	Daniel	 Adkins	Francois	 Nielsen
2004	93	Very Low Fertility II	Working Women, Husband's Home Time, and Lowest-Low Fertility in Europe	Traditional economic models predict a negative correlation between female labor force participation and fertility. However,  rapid fertility declines in Southern Europe have lead to a reversal of this relationship at the aggregate level. We reconcile these results by developing a simple model that looks at the heterogeneity in attitudes toward women's home time and husbands' willingness to participate in housework. We use the ISSP 94 data to test the model. This multi-country household survey contains detailed information on attitudes toward gender roles as well as data on division of housework. Consistent with the model we find that more conservative countries with less egalitarian views on gender roles have lower average fertility. This relationship operates through lower average levels of husbands' home time. Our estimates also suggest that the intertemporal reversal in the correlation may be attributed to a secular increase in female schooling over this period.	Joost	 DeLaat	Almudena	 Sevilla-Sanz
2004	93	Very Low Fertility II	Compatibility of Children and Work Preferences: Two European Cases	Nowadays female participation in the labor market and motherhood are competing and the conciliation between them can be solved in different ways. In this paper we analyze children and work preferences in two European countries with very different behavior: Italy and France. Italy shares with Spain the lowest fertility level (the TFR is around 1.25) whereas French TFR reaches the highest level (1.89) among the European Community countries. Moreover female employment rate in Italy is about 40% whereas in France reaches 70%. In these two contexts, using data from the European Community Household Panel, we consider fertility as a function of both household income and female participation in the labor market, taking into account unobserved heterogeneity in children and work preferences and the social benefits from the welfare system. We even consider the opportunity costs of having children, through a measure of the earning potentials, obtained as predicted wages.	Anna	 Giraldo	Stefano	 Mazzuco	Francesca	 Michielin
2004	93	Very Low Fertility II	The Influence of Coping Mechanisms and a Positive Outlook on Childbearing during Periods of Economic Uncertainty	While aggregate studies have shown a correlation between economic crisis and fertility decline, few micro-level studies have demonstrated a direct link between economic uncertainty and fertility preferences and behavior. Russia, which is experiencing very low fertility is one such case; there is no support for a direct link between labor force participation and fertility behavior on the micro-level. In this paper, I provide evidence that previously unexplored coping mechanisms and positive psychological attitudes significantly predict fertility dynamics in Russia, while conventional methods of operationalizing economic uncertainty do not. Using the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, I analyze the relationship between coping mechanisms and indicators of positive outlook on both desired fertility and additional childbearing behavior for women of reproductive age.  These results reveal how people take charge of their lives, regardless of the structural changes that create strain and hardship.	Brienna	 Perelli
2004	94	Population, Development, and the Urban Environment	A Spatial Analysis of Childhood Mortality in West Africa	It is suggested that environmental or geographic factors--e.g., population density, climate, and disease environment-- play an important role in determining infant and child survival above and beyond that played by individual and household level factors.  Only recently, however, have relevant spatial data become available and have demographic survey data systematically recorded geographical location of surveyed households and has the technology to integrate these data become accessible. This study estimates the risk of infant and child death in 10 West African countries attributable to individual, household and spatially explicit geographic factors; 120,000 births occurring in the 10 years prior to 1997-2001 Demographic and Health Survey dates are evaluated. Results from a generalized linear model show that spatial variables explain away a good deal of the country-specific variation in mortality and that they are associated with (and may be mediated by) the household characteristics.  Implications for research and policy will be addressed.	Deborah	 Balk	Thomas	W. Pullum	Adam	 Storeygard	Fern	 Greenwell	Melissa	 Neuman
2004	94	Population, Development, and the Urban Environment	Struggling with Population Heterogeneity in African Cities: The Urban Health and Equity Puzzle	African cities are growing fast and yet their health systems remain totally inadequate. Part of the urban health problem results from the very characteristics of African cities: cultural heterogeneity, loose and volatile social organization, abundant, expensive and unregulated healthcare, undermined by unaccountable, incompetent and abusive health workers. As a result, malaria continues to be the leading cause of infant and child mortality despite the availability of inexpensive and effective antimalarials. This paper analyses the challenges of urban health in SSA using the example of childhood malaria in Ouagadougou, the fast growing capital of Burkina Faso. It then evaluates an alternative health strategy designed specifically for the urban setting and discusses the feasibility, effectiveness and equity of population-based distribution of antimalarials in the light of the intrinsic characteristics of African cities.	Gabriel	 Pictet	Robert	 Pond
2004	94	Population, Development, and the Urban Environment	Socioeconomic Determinants of Mortality at Young Ages	The purpose of this study is to estimate 15q5 (probability of dying between 5 and 19 years old, measured by indirect techniques) for population groups exposed to different socio-economic conditions, using data from the 1991 Demographic Censuses. In this particular age group, 3/4 of the deaths are violent, they may be attributed to external causes (accidents, homicides and suicides) and we will be able to associate this risk of dying early with violence. According to the research already done, for the time being at the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro, we can affirm that the risk of dying young is not equally distributed within the population. On the contrary, it is bigger for the population groups submitted to unfavourable social conditions, such as low income groups, families headed by women and shantytown dwellers, to whom social and civil rights (to life and security) have been systematically menaced.	Mario	F.G. Monteiro	Maria	Isabel C.A. Parahyba
2004	94	Population, Development, and the Urban Environment	The Effect of a Livelihoods Intervention in an Urban Slum in India: Does Vocational Counseling and Training Alter the Attitudes and Behavior of Adolescent Girls?	This paper examines whether an experimental intervention that provided vocational counseling and training to adolescent girls aged 14-19 in an urban slum of Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh, India: 1.increased physical mobility and contact with individuals outside the family; 2.increased savings behavior; 3.altered work aspirations and ncouraged more progressive gender role norms; 4.reduced gender differentials in time use. Baseline and endline surveys have been conducted among over 4,000 adolescents aged 14-19 in the experimental and control areas. In addition to descriptive analyses, regression models will be employed to assess change in dependent variables associated with the intervention, controlling for characteristics of the parents and households at baseline, as well as characteristics of girls that may have changed between the baseline and endline, e.g. educational attainment and marital status. Outcome variables will include measures of physical mobility, time use, savings behavior, work aspirations and gender role attitudes.	Barbara	 Mensch	Monica	 Grant	Mary	 Sebastian	Paul	 Hewett	Dale	 Huntington
2004	95	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Children and Youth	Community Contributions to Scholastic Success:  Exploring the Interplay among Parental Perceptions and Objective Features of Community Environment	The goal of this paper is to further our understanding of the role of community factors by examining the influence of neighborhood characteristics on youth outcomes.  Prior research has utilized measures of structural features of the community and has evaluated their associations with youth outcomes.   Other research has related perceptions of community environment to problematic youth development.  Our work seeks to bridge these two streams of research by considering the effects of both objective and subjective measures of community environment for youth development.  Data are drawn from the 1990 Census and the 1997 Panel Study of Income Dynamics Child Development Supplement to form a sample of approximately 1349 children aged 6 through 12.  Because PSID data is geographically clustered, we model our data using hierarchical linear models.  Preliminary results suggest a positive association between living in a community with a high concentration of immigrants and school success.	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones	Rachel	 Dunifon	Geoffrey	L. Ream
2004	95	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Children and Youth	How Norms Shape Teenagers' Health Behaviors	This paper uses new data from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (L.A. FANS) to examine how norms shape teenagers' health-related behaviors.  Specifically, it uses multilevel models to describe the effects of adult neighbors' beliefs about smoking, drinking, and marijuana use, which we treat as norms, on these behaviors among teens, taking account of neighbors' behavior, parents' attitudes and behavior, and other family-level characteristics.  We investigate how the association between neighborhood-level attitudes and teenagers' behavior depends on three factors that are likely to condition the association between adult neighbors' attitudes and teens' behavior: consistency in the signal neighbors provide about appropriate behavior, the ability of neighbors to enforce norms, and the degree to which teens are exposed to their neighbors.  Finally, we examine the sensitivity of our results to how neighborhoods are defined, and we consider alternate reference groups who may affect teenagers' behavior.	Kelly	 Musick	Judith	A. Seltzer	Christine	R. Schwartz
2004	95	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Children and Youth	Gender and the Nexus of Parental and Community Control: Contextual Effects on the Timing of First Intercourse	We integrate insights from social capital and collective efficacy theory with emerging research on the intersection of parental supervision, child gender, and neighborhood to develop a contextual model of the timing of first intercourse during early adolescence.  We hypothesize that the effects of family and neighborhood controls on the timing of first intercourse will exhibit opposing patterns by gender.  Family controls are likely to be more consequential for girls while neighborhood controls will target the more visible behavior of boys.  Findings from multilevel discrete-time models of the timing of first intercourse indicate that family supervision exerts significantly greater influence on the timing of first intercourse for girls than boys.  Neighborhood supervision capacity--captured by the concept of collective efficacy--delays sexual onset for boys.  For girls, the effect of collective efficacy is conditional, emerging only for those who experience lower levels of parental supervision.	Christopher	 Browning	Tama	 Leventhal
2004	95	Community and Neighborhood Influences on Children and Youth	The Social Context of First Birth Timing in Nepal	This paper examines the influence of social context on first birth timing. Drawing on socialization models, I develop a theoretical framework to explain how different aspects of social context, defined as neighbors, may affect first birth timing. I argue that neighbors as individuals' immediate social context has important influence on first birth timing.  Taking advantage of a setting in the midst of dramatic social change, measures of social context designed explicitly for this purpose, and statistical analytical techniques appropriate to these measure, I develop models of the influence of social context on first birth timing.  These models include innovative measures of a broad array of neighbors' experiences. Neighbors' schooling, media exposure, age at marriage, and contraceptive use also tend to reduce the first birth rate. Neighbors' non-family work and childbearing experiences, on the other hand, increase this rate.    These effects are robust against several key variations in model specification.	Dirgha	J. Ghimire
2004	96	Applied Demography with a Neighborhood Perspective	New Approaches to Spotting Enclaves of the Elderly Who Have Aged in Place	Across the nation, certain neighborhoods are evolving naturally into de facto retirement communities populated by elderly residents who continue to live independently.  An increasingly visible manifestation of such aging in place is the naturally occurring retirement community (NORC)--existing buildings and neighborhoods not planned or intended for older people, but where older adults have stayed on after younger people left.  What defines a NORC is residential persistence and gradual evolution into a senior community.  NORCs are naturally suited to the centralized delivery and/or marketing of services to prolong independent living.  Our paper will (1) illustrate applications of demographic analysis and Census 2000 data to delineating incipient NORCs and (2) elaborate on their significance as target markets, both for community planners interested in centralizing service delivery to the elderly and for businesses offering types of services that can be bundled most profitably for residential concentrations of elderly.	Thomas	M. Bryan	Peter	A. Morrison
2004	96	Applied Demography with a Neighborhood Perspective	Evaluating Policy Decisions with Demographic Data: Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Study	The Moving to Opportunity program was initiated by The Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1992 to test the efficacy of housing vouchers for generating moves away from low poverty areas and into integrated residential settings. The experimental program divided voucher holders into groups and tracked the movement behavior of assisted and unassisted recipients. By examining the neighborhood demography of the initial and subsequent locations of the samples it is possible to assess the success of the objectives of decreasing poverty and increasing integration. While the program has shown some success in decreasing poverty the same is not true for increasing integration. The rather somber conclusions are that it appears to be relatively difficult to intervene in such dynamic processes as housing selection and mobility to create policy outcomes.	William	A.V. Clark
2004	96	Applied Demography with a Neighborhood Perspective	Estimating AIAN Migration on Indian Reservations in the Western United States	This paper will examine migration patterns between 1990 and 2000 for Indians living on reservations.  Several factors complicate this issue. First, in 1990, the census bureau estimates that AIAN populations living on reservations were undercounted at a rate of 12.2 percent nationwide.  While census undercounts in 2000 improved, the multiracial question in Census 2000 further confuses the connection between 1990 and 2000 reservation populations.  At the same time socio-cultural transitions, such as improving economic opportunities on reservations and a widespread renewal of interest in Indian heritage, mean that more and more people are moving onto reservations.  This paper will estimate migration patterns between 1990 and 2000 for 12 Indian reservations in the Western United States and compare and contrast the results.	Gretchen	 Greene	Jeri	 Sawyer
2004	96	Applied Demography with a Neighborhood Perspective	Viability of a Church-Based Sampling Strategy for Latina Immigrant Women	The U.S. is experiencing its highest immigration rate since the 1930s. The vitality of our nation is greatly dependent on the productivity, health, and civic participation of the foreign-born and their children. How can we include new immigrants in public health research and interventions? No adequate sampling frame exists, and participation may be threatening to the undocumented. In recent years, the Federal Government has been encouraging faith-based initiatives.  This study tests in four North Carolina counties a church-based sampling frame for Latina immigrant women in their reproductive years.  In the study area, on an average week, 20% of the Spanish-speaking population attends church (2/3 Catholic). Compared against Census data, our sample (N=706) met our goal by over-representing new entrants to the U.S. and providing an accurate representation of different national origins. However, it under-represented the young (under 30), and women at the lowest and highest extremes of educational attainment.	Melanie	R. Wasserman	Deborah	E. Bender	William	D. Kalsbeek
2004	97	What Have We Learned Since the 1986 NRC Study of Population and Development?	Population and Poverty: What Do We Really Know?		Dennis	A. Ahlburg	Ragui	 Assaad
2004	97	What Have We Learned Since the 1986 NRC Study of Population and Development?	Population Growth, Age Structure, and Economic Growth		David	E. Bloom	David	 Canning
2004	97	What Have We Learned Since the 1986 NRC Study of Population and Development?	Population, Consumption, and the Environment		Sara	 Curran
2004	97	What Have We Learned Since the 1986 NRC Study of Population and Development?	Gender Equality and Development:  Demographic and Economic Linkages		Karen	O. Mason
2004	98	Union Formation	What Money Can Buy: The Relationship between Marriage and Home Ownership in the United States	In the last several decades, the median age at marriage in the United States has risen dramatically.  A leading explanation for this trend points to a series of economic transformations that has made attaining economic security more lengthy and more difficult for many and impossible for some. However, this account is incomplete because it does not take into account the role of  changing material aspirations.  I assess the relationship between material aspirations and the timing of marriage by focusing on the relationship between home ownership and marriage over the last thirty years.   I organize my analysis around two questions.  First, I examine the occurrence, timing and sequencing of marriage and home ownership.  Second I examine the impact of housing costs on marriage and home ownership.  I use data from the 1968-1997 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, a longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of American families	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes
2004	98	Union Formation	Resources, Living Arrangements, and Union Formation in the United States, the Netherlands, and West Germany	This paper addresses the impact of differences between previous living arrangements (living in the parental home versus living away) on first union formation. Unlike in most previous research, we do not just include the previous living arrangement in the analyses as a single variable, but we investigate differences between the living arrangements in the impact of individual and parental resources. Analyses are performed for three countries with different welfare regimes: the United States, the Netherlands and West Germany. Most of our findings are in line with the general hypothesis that individual and parental resources matter less to union formation for those living away from the parents than for those still living in the parental home. Furthermore, the results suggest that resources matter less in Conservative Continental European welfare regimes than in the United States, a typical example of a Liberal Market welfare regime.	Clara	H. Mulder
2004	98	Union Formation	Money and Marriage: How Money Shapes Orientations towards Marriage among Cohabitors	Unmarried cohabitation has become increasingly prominent in the United States and a growing literature in demography and other social sciences has sought to understand the factors that spur cohabiting couples to marry.  While several studies suggest that good economic circumstances are associated with marriage, whether and how cohabitors perceive finances as a part of their decision-making about marriage is unclear. Drawing on data from 115 in-depth interviews with cohabiting Black, Latino/a, and White young men and women, this paper builds on quantitative studies by exploring whether and in what ways economic circumstances shape cohabitors' thinking about whether and when to marry.	Pamela	J. Smock	Wendy	D. Manning	Meredith	J. Porter
2004	98	Union Formation	No Time for Marriage? Time Constraints and Low-Income Mothers' Marriage and Cohabitation Decisions	As welfare reform debates turn to marriage promotion, research is beginning to explore low-income single mothers' union formation decisions. Findings from the qualitative component of the Fragile Families study suggests that one barrier to marriage is time constraints associated with raising and supporting a family. Using data from the Welfare, Children and Families study, this paper explores how time constraints associated with balancing work and parenting may limit opportunities for single mothers to establish and maintain stable relationships. Findings from multinomial logit models indicate that decisions to cohabit or marry may be driven by different factors. While mothers' human capital characteristics play a significant role in either outcome, the time constraints associated with working nonstandard schedules has deleterious consequences for marriage. Decisions to cohabit are not influenced by work schedules. These results suggest that policies focusing on increasing employment and marriage promotion, without considering mothers' shift work, may be misguided.	Pamela	 Joshi	James	 Quane	Elisabeth	 Jacobs
2004	99	Mutual Dynamics of International and Internal Migration	Immigration, Domestic Migration, and U.S. Metropolitan Area Change: Contrasting the 1990s with the 1980s	A new demographic dynamic affecting metropolitan populations was identified after the 1990 US Census:  the tendency for immigrant flows and domestic migration flows to dominate growth in different metropolitan areas, nonmetropolitan areas and regions.  This dynamic lead to concerns about  emerging  dual economies in some areas, and brain drains in others. New analyses of 2000 Census data suggest that these distinctions between immigrant and domestic migration processes are less clear-cut, with domestic migration from immigrant port-of-entry areas more broadly based, and  immigrant destinations more dispersed and differentiated by skill level.   Their changing impacts on high immigration, high domestic migration and high out-migration metro areas are assessed in this analysis of race-ethnic and education selective immigration and domestic migration for 1985-90 and 1995-2000.  The changing nature of possible linkages and complementarities between these two migration processes are evaluated.	William	H. Frey
2004	99	Mutual Dynamics of International and Internal Migration	Do the Native Born and Foreign Born Show Differential Migratory Responses to Immigration and Labor Market Conditions?	We study migratory responses of native- and foreign-born men to recent immigration in U.S. labor markets. Preliminary analysis indicates that foreign-born men leave high immigration areas at comparable or higher rates than do the native born, suggesting that forces other than recent immigration drive internal migration. The analysis focuses on individual and contextual economic and social correlates of migratory responses of foreign- and native-born men. The 1990 and 2000 Census 5% PUMS files provide the core data. The contextual units are labor market regions. The multi-level analysis assesses, net of individual characteristics, whether there is a difference between foreign- and native-born males in the likelihood of out-migration from labor markets of high immigration, whether the migratory responses of foreign- and native-born males differ by origin characteristics of recent immigrants, and whether the migratory responses of foreign- and native-born males differ by labor market context.	Douglas	T. Gurak	Mary	M. Kritz
2004	99	Mutual Dynamics of International and Internal Migration	The Impact of Lifetime Mobility on the Native Migratory Response to Immigration	In this paper we examine the relationship between the lifetime mobility of the native population and their migratory response to immigration.  Previous studies that have examined the native migratory response generally interpret increases in native out-migration as reflecting decreases economic opportunities due to the influx of immigrants.  These studies assume that all natives are equally likely to move.  In fact, individuals who have migrated in the past have a higher probability of moving.  We argue that research that does not take into account the migration experiences of the native population may overestimate the impact of immigrants on native's economic opportunities in local labor markets as well as native out-migration.  We find that lifetime migrants are significantly more likely to move from states with high immigration than either the foreign born or natives living in their state of birth.  We discuss the planning and policy implications of these findings.	Regina	M. Bures	Hideki	 Morooka
2004	99	Mutual Dynamics of International and Internal Migration	Second Generation Internal Migration: Dispersion from States of Immigration?	Much analysis of immigration has focused on the residential mobility and resulting concentration or dispersion of the foreign-born population,.  Little is known, however, about where the second generation reside, their mobility or its determinants, and to what extent they resemble the foreign-born or native-born (at least third generation) in these regards.  As the children of the post-1965 immigrants reach adulthood, such questions are critical in examination of ethnic concentrations and immigrant integration. We examine both the second generation, identifiable in the Current Population Survey data, and the 1.5 generation (children of foreign-born parents who arrived in the U.S. before reaching ten years of age) from the 5% Public Use Microdata Files of the U.S. Census, and determine both their local and inter-state mobility.    Further, we model inter-state mobility as an outcome of socioeconomic covariates, race/ethnicity, and a continuous measure of origin state concentration of the foreign-born.	Mark	 Ellis	Jamie	 Goodwin-White
2004	100	Maternal and Infant Health in Developing Countries	Impact of the Community-Based Health Planning and Services (CHPS) Program on Maternal Health in the Abura Asebu Kwamankese District in Ghana	In 1999, the Ghana Ministry of Health launched the Community-based Health Planning and Services (CHPS) Initiative to transform primary health care from clinical to community-based services. Utilizing the Navrongo experiment as the model, CHPS seeks to mobilize community health planning and services. This paper assesses the impact of CHPS in Abura-Asebu-Kwamankese District in the Central Region of Ghana where the program has operated in half of the district since August 2000. Although qualitative research has showed that front-line health workers are convinced of the benefits of CHPS, there is a need to validate this evidence with impact research. A 60-cluster survey of 1314 women aged 15-49 was conducted in August 2003 to compare health indicators in clusters exposed and unexposed to CHPS. Regression analyses reveal that health knowledge and service utilization is associated with exposure to CHPS, suggesting that the program contributes to improving maternal and child health in Ghana.	Patricia	 Antwi	Frank	 Nyonator	Tanya	C. Jones	Emmanuel	 Kuffour	Emerson	 Arhia
2004	100	Maternal and Infant Health in Developing Countries	Poor Pregnancy Outcomes among Adolescents in South Nyanza Region of Kenya	In this paper, we examine factors associated with and the circumstance of adverse pregnancy outcomes among teenagers in the South Nyanza region  of Kenya. The analysis is based on a recent WHO funded study on Adolescent safe motherhood in the region, which involved a survey of 1247 adolescents aged 12-19 and in-depth interviews with 39 of the adolescents who had experienced very early pregnancies or a pregnancy wastage. The indicators of poor pregnancy outcomes analysed include pregnancy wastage, premature delivery and small size of baby at birth.  A striking finding is the unusually high rate of premature deliveries, especially in cases of unintended pregnancies. Preliminary analysis of the qualitative data based on in-depth interviews begin to shed some light on possible explanations for the adverse pregnancy outcomes observed among these adolescents. In particular, unsafe abortion attempts and poor maternal health care emerge as important issues of concern.	Monica	A. Magadi	David	 Omollo	Alfred	Otieni  Agwanda
2004	100	Maternal and Infant Health in Developing Countries	Understanding the Effects of Birthspacing on Infant and Child Survival: An Analysis of Data from Matlab, Bangladesh	A number of analyses have examined the relationship between birth intervals and infant and child mortality, but few have adequately controlled for potentially confounding variables so that they can clearly understand the effect of varying birth intervals on child health and the reasons for these effects.  Using a large, high-quality longitudinal dataset gathered over twenty years from an experimental setting in Matlab, Bangladesh, we seek a better understanding of the relationship between the lengths of birth intervals and infant and child mortality.  Using both descriptive and multivariate analyses, we explore the shape of the relationship between the lengths of birth intervals and child survival, the cumulative effects of birth intervals, and how confounding variables (e.g., premature births, breastfeeding, availability of contraception) affect these relationships.  We used fixed-effects to assess whether, within a family, children born after very short or very long intervals more likely to die than siblings born after medium intervals.	Julie	 DaVanzo	Abdur	 Razzaque	Mizanur	 Rahman
2004	100	Maternal and Infant Health in Developing Countries	Survival of Orphans: An Example from Southern Zambia	The HIV/AIDS pandemic in sub-Saharan Africa is producing large numbers of orphans who are at increased risk of dying, even if they do not acquire HIV from their mothers.  If the magnitude of the excess risk associated with orphanhood is non-negligible, overall child mortality in sub-Saharan African countries with high HIV prevalence will increase significantly simply because larger fractions of young children will be orphans.  Using detailed data from prospective community studies in Zambia and South Africa, this paper quantifies the excess risk of dying experienced by children who lose one or both of their parents.  Preliminary findings from the Zambia site demonstrate a nearly seven-fold increase in the likelihood of dying for children younger than ten years during the year of a mother's death, and a nearly two-fold increase during the year of a father's death.  These translate into exceptionally low survival probabilities for young orphans.	Samuel	J. Clark
2004	101	Family Exchanges	The Evolution of the Income Gradient in Marriage	This paper explores the evolution of the income gradient in the likelihood of marriage among men.  We find that, in any given year, the relationship between income and marriage is strongly positive for men below the median income.  Furthermore, the association between income and marriage has become more pronounced over time for low-income men.  We propose an identity model to explain this change, in which the utility of marriage is a function of how closely the couple approximates an idealized marriage norm.  Several factors have generated an increase in the household income of a typical married couple, thus raising the financial bar new couples attempt to reach before marrying.	Tara	 Watson	Sara	 McLanahan
2004	101	Family Exchanges	Rotten Husbands: The Determinants of Marriage in Spain	In contrast to predictions of comparative advantage or bargaining theories of the household, a higher female wage has not led to a more equalitarian division of housework within the household. This is particularly apparent in traditional societies such as Spain, where gender roles are strongly entrenched. This paper attributes the current low age-specific marriage rates among young Spanish cohorts to the prevailing gender norms no longer compatible with higher female education levels. This hypothesis is formalized in a model that follows Gary Becker's specification of the marriage market. I show that when the perfect contractibility assumption is relaxed the probability of marriage decreases and the man's share of housework is less responsive to the female wage. Implications of the model are tested using the ISSP 94 data. Preliminary results are consistent with the model: More egalitarian countries toward gender roles have higher marriage/cohabitation rates and more equal division of housework.	Almudena	 Sevilla-Sanz
2004	101	Family Exchanges	Marriage and Assortative Matching in Rural Ethiopia	This paper examines the determinants of human and physical capital at marriage. Using detailed data from rural Ethiopia, we find ample evidence of assortative matching at marriage. Assets brought to marriage are distributed in a highly unequal manner. Sorting operates at a variety of levels--wealth, schooling, and work experience--that cannot be summarized into a single additive index. For first unions, assets brought to marriage are positively associated with parents' wealth, indicating that a bequest motive affects assets at marriage. Parents' wealth also positively affects inheritance of both brides and grooms, although sibling competition also affects grooms' inheritance.  Unlike most brides, grooms appear to accumulate individual assets over time and over marriages. The marriage market is a major conduit for rural and gender inequality, although avenues do exist for couples to accumulate wealth over their life cycle.	Marcel	 Fafchamps	Agnes	R. Quisumbing
2004	101	Family Exchanges	Love at What Price? Estimating the Value of Marriage	Using a Social Security law that provides clear financial incentives to delay marriage, we estimate the value of a month of marriage.  The law provides that widows eligible for Social Security benefits on their deceased spouse's earnings records are eligible for benefits at age 60, unless they remarry before that age.  Remarriage before that age negates her claim to widow benefits and the widow must wait until age 62 to claim spousal benefits, which are typically less generous than widow benefits, on her new husband's record.  With data from five panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation linked to administrative records, we estimate the cost of marrying before age 60 imposed by the Social Security rule.  By taking advantage of the variation in these costs and when or whether widows remarry before age 60, we use a maximum likelihood technique to estimate the benefit of marriage is $8000/month.	Michael	 Conlin	Stacy	 Dickert-Conlin	Melissa	L. Koenig
2004	102	Household Structure and Child Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Disappearing Sex-Bias in Child Health in Bangladesh	Although Bangladeshi children still are at risk of long-and short-term malnutrition, significant improvements are found during the past decade.  We find a surprising lack of sex differences in wasting and stunting, a tremendous change from previous observations in Bangladesh.  Further, we find a striking lack of significance of family structure on health; neither the total nor the number of male siblings is found to impact child health, nor do girls with surviving older sisters have higher risks of poor health.  Competition for nutritional resources is not observed until girls with three or more older brothers are examined.  Maternal education is found to significantly impact child health, a relationship that holds with controls for household resources and ready access to treatment. Overall, children of both sexes in Matlab show remarkable increases in health, and maternal education is found to dramatically increase the diffusion of equality norms related to child nutrition.	Erin	 Trapp	Jill	 Williams	Jane	 Menken	Shannon	 Fisher
2004	102	Household Structure and Child Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Sibling Rivalry and Birth Order Effects on Nutritional Status of Children	Children are rivals for household resources. In the presence of an in-kind transfer from a maternal and child health program, the question of intra-household allocation of these resources becomes even more interesting. Previous work by the same author indicates that improved resources reduce gender gap amongst children. To extend it further, this paper investigates the extent to which investment in girls and boys is affected by their birth order, the number of siblings sharing the resource as well as by the gender composition of siblings. Using reduced form demand functions and data from the 1996 Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey, preliminary results indicate that birth order has no significant effect on the nutritional status of boys and girls. However, having more siblings result in poorer nutritional status in children and this effect is larger if there are more male than female siblings.	Anoshua	 Chaudhuri
2004	102	Household Structure and Child Wellbeing in Developing Countries	The Role of Parental Schooling vs. Cognitive Ability on Child Health	The literature on child health suggests that mothers play a central role in child rearing activities.  While some efforts have been made to separate the differential mechanisms through which mother's education impacts child health outcomes, controversy still exists on how much estimated returns to schooling reflect pure knowledge and how much they reflect parental  background and ability characteristics in processing new information when procuring their children health.  This paper investigates the separate effect of parental schooling vs. cognitive ability on child health.  We make use of the information of parental cognitive ability through application of tests that require no literacy.  Our results show that mother's cognitive ability to process new information is an important factor in improving her children health as measured by child's weight-for-age and height-for-age.  The returns of mother's cognitive ability on child health are robust to usual human capital controls, such as age, education and parental height.	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel
2004	102	Household Structure and Child Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Sibship Size and Educational Attainment in Indonesia: A Cohort Perspective	Numerous studies of educational attainment in the United States show that education is negatively correlated with sibship size. The evidence from the developing world, however, is mixed with some societies having a negative association and others a positive one. These differences are often explained by differences in development levels, household production, wealth flows, and the relative role of the nuclear family versus larger kinship networks. In this context Indonesia is an interesting case study because it has experienced dramatic demographic and economic changes in recent decades. This paper examines the relationship between family structure and educational attainment in Indonesia using a cohort perspective. Analyses show that earlier cohorts in Indonesia experienced a positive effect of larger sibships while recent cohorts experience a negative effect of larger families. The analysis explores how sibling effects have changed over time and how these vary by family structure, sibship composition, and different educational levels.	Vida	 Maralani
2004	103	Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality in India	Safe Water, Household Sanitation, and Child Mortality in India	This paper examines correlates of child mortality in India, a country where child mortality rates have been stagnating at relatively high levels since the 1990s. This study focuses on the impact of safe water and household sanitation on child mortality, an impact that is still largely debated in the literature. The analysis is based on data from the 1998-99 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-II).  Results indicate that the effect of water access on child mortality disappears after controlling for the socio-economic characteristics of the household. The type of sanitation facility, however, remains an important correlate of child mortality for most Indian states. In a context where 64% of the population has no sanitation facility, this study identifies a potentially important barrier to low child mortality.	Michel	 Guillot	Sudip	 Gupta
2004	103	Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality in India	Revisiting the Relationship between Women's Education and Child Immunization: A Multilevel Analysis of Rural Districts of India	Using multilevel models, this study extends previous research on the relationship between maternal education and child health by directly examining both the individual and contextual effect of women's education on complete and timely immunization of children in rural districts of India. I hypothesize that: 1) A significant and positive relationship exists between female literacy rates in a district and children's immunization status in that district. 2) The contextual effect of female literacy on children's immunization status is likely to persist and be significant even after controlling for individual-level characteristics such as maternal education and macro-level characteristics such as district-level socioeconomic development. The study concludes by discussing limitations of the study and policy implications.	Sangeeta	 Parashar
2004	103	Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality in India	Contextual Influences on Domestic Violence in Uttar Pradesh, India	Previous research on the determinants of domestic violence in developing countries has been limited by an almost exclusive focus upon individual-level factors from the perspective of female respondents. By incorporating the effects of community- as well as individual-level variables, and considering domestic violence from the perspective of husbands, the present study makes new and important contributions to the field. Using multi-level modeling for a representative sample of 4582 husbands from Uttar Pradesh, North India, our study explores the roles of individual (demographic, socioeconomic) and contextual (socioeconomic development, norms regarding wife beating, and district-level crime rates) factors in shaping women's risks of violence. Our results show strong influences on domestic violence at the individual, household and community levels. Community attitudes towards violence, district-level crime rates, socioeconomic factors, and the husband's previous exposure to violence in the home all exert strong effects upon the likelihood of domestic violence.	Rob	 Stephenson	Michael	 Koenig	Jackie	 Campbell
2004	103	Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality in India	Anthropometric Failure and Persistence of Poverty in Rural India	Recent studies with regard to the high prevalence of stunting among children in rural India point to more pervasive deprivation than conventional measures of poverty based on income or consumption expenditure shortfalls imply. Since stunting reflects cumulative nutritional and health deprivation, it is likely to persist despite higher incomes. The present analysis of the determinants of stunting based on a recent all-India survey of rural households finds that while income matters, other factors acting independently of it matter too like household size, whether household head is male, caste affiliation, mother's age at marriage, mother's age, age composition of children, male-female wage differences, hygiene and sanitation facilities, and prices of food items. So, while higher incomes will help mitigate stunting, careful attention must also be given to enhancing women's autonomy through more remunerative employment opportunities,  enabling households to improve hygiene and sanitation facilities, and facilitating more competitive local markets for food.	Raghav	 Gaiha	Veena	 Kulkarni
2004	104	Health and the Life Course	Health Dynamics over the Life Course: The Effect of Childhood Health on Adult Health and Disability	This paper models health over the life course using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. It explores whether infant and childhood health have lasting effects on various measures of adult health including: self-reported health, chronic disease, disability, and changes in health over time. I find that low birth weight (LBW) individuals experience substantially worse childhood health. Furthermore, LBW and poor childhood health are associated with worse adult self-reported health, increased odds of having a work-limiting disability or a chronic disease. Those with poor early-life health are also more likely to experience a decline in their health across waves. I find no evidence that the experience of LBW and poor childhood health are further compounded by disadvantaged social background. Though education continues to be associated with adult health, this relationship is attenuated somewhat with the inclusion of childhood health into the model suggesting some effect of health selection.	Steven	 Haas
2004	104	Health and the Life Course	Does the Impact of Socioeconomic Status (SES) on Mortality Decrease with Age?	The impact of SES on mortality is an established fact. I examine if this impact decreases with age. Most research finds this decrease but it is unknown whether it is due to mortality selection. My data come from the US-Health and Retirement Study with 9376 persons from age 59+ followed from 1992 to 2000. The variables allow a time varying measurement of SES, health and behavior. Event-history-analysis is applied to analyze differences in mortality rates. Socioeconomic mortality differences are stable across ages whereas they decline clearly with decreasing health. The first finding that health is the equalizer rather than age combined with the second finding that health itself is unequally distributed leads to the conclusion that in old age, the impact of SES is transferred to the health status and hence it is stable across ages.	Rasmus	 Hoffmann
2004	104	Health and the Life Course	The Shifting Signification of Self-Rated Health	Self-rated health is one of the most pervasive measures of health in the social sciences, but scientists know little about the psychological processes behind it.  The present study tests four theories of self-rated health using a large, nationally-representative, and longitudinal data set.  The changing association between objective measures of health and self-rated health is examined.  Three objective measures show three distinct age-patterns:  Consistent with social comparison, the correspondence between functional limitations and self-rate health is exceptionally strong, but decreases precipitously after middle-age.  Similarly, the correspondence between chronic conditions and self-rated health generally declines with age, although not all the declines are equally steep.  The most pronounced finding, however, is entirely inconsistent with social comparison:  the correspondence between depressive symptoms and self-rated health increases substantially and monotonically with age.  This shift has several important implications and the results are discussed in light of demographic studies that employ self-rated health.	Jason	 Schnittker
2004	104	Health and the Life Course	Effect of Selective Mortality on the Education-Mortality Relationship across the Life Course	Two opposing hypotheses have been proposed to explain the relationship between education and health across age: cumulative advantage and age-as-leveler.  Empirical studies generally found a pattern consistent with the latter perspective, showing a diminishing strength of the education-health relationship in later life.  Some researchers have suggested that the observed trend does not necessarily support the convergence hypothesis but that it is the result of selective mortality in the population where the true effect is cumulative.  The goal of this paper is to show that the observed curvilinear pattern between education and mortality across age can be caused entirely by mortality selection due to unobserved heterogeneity in population frailty.  We use simple macrosimulation models to show that in a population characterized by heterogeneity in mortality hazard, a true linearly increasing effect of education on mortality will appear to have the inverted U-shape curve observed in many empirical studies.	Anna	 Zajacova
2004	105	International Responses to Low Fertility	Labor Market Performance and the Timing of Births: A Comparative Analysis across European Countries	During the last two decades total fertility rates in Europe have plummeted, particularly in Southern Europe. I use the 1994-2000 waves of the European Community Household panel for 13 European countries to study how varying institutional and economic indicators across countries account for differences in the timing of the first three births. Female unemployment has a negative impact, stronger after the mid-eighties, in transitions to all parities. Maternity benefits boost transitions to first and second births. Large government employment has a positive impact on first births while part-time availability is crucial for second and third birth transitions.  Later, I add individual employment history to the original data to estimate transitions to second and third births. Women's public sector and/or part-time employment provide stability and flexibility, and, as a result, increase hazard to second and third births. Long-term unemployment spells have lasting negative effect. Spouse's education and job stability are critical in Spain and Italy.	Alicia	 Adsera
2004	105	International Responses to Low Fertility	Below Replacement Fertility in Eastern Europe. Case Study of Romania	Below replacement fertility currently characterizes most of the European countries. Although the theory of the second demographic transition offers a coherent explanation for fertility decrease in Western Europe, fertility changes in Eastern Europe (a region with a different political and social context) are still poorly explained. This paper will focus on an Eastern European country, Romania, with a special fertility history during the last thirty years.  It will focus on live birth and pregnancy trajectories for women born between 1954 and 1984. Using a Sickle transition rate model, we argue that the higher than replacement fertility during the period of 1967-1989 was not a natural phenomenon, but a direct result of political restrictions on using contraceptives and performing abortions. As a consequence, low fertility after 1990 is not a strange evolution, but an expected trend, only interrupted during 1967-1989 period.	Cristina	 Bradatan	Nancy	S. Landale
2004	105	International Responses to Low Fertility	Child Care Availability and Fertility in Norway: Pro-Natalist Effects	Perhaps no other change has had such a widespread influence on fertility as changes in women's work roles. Many would argue that this is behind the extremely low levels of fertility in Japan and numerous European countries.  There have been a number of arguments that the availability of acceptable child care would have a positive effect on fertility.  To date there has not been empirical support for this intuitively appealing hypothesis.  The reasons involve both the lack of appropriate data in most countries to test this hypothesis and inappropriate analytical strategies.  Using data from the Norwegian Registration System together with child care availability data from 1973 to 1997 for Norway's 435 municipalities the analysis includes all women born in Norway 1957-1962, and still resident there at age 15.  Using a fixed effects model, we find strong, statistically significant, positive effects of child care availability on the transition to motherhood.	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	David	 Guilkey	Oystein	 Kravdal	Karen	B. Guzzo
2004	105	International Responses to Low Fertility	Low Fertility: Will Governments Make a Difference?	Many Governments in low fertility countries are increasingly alarmed about the economic, social, cultural, as well as geo-political consequences of a shrinking and ageing population.  Some countries consider the low birth rates with the resulting population decline and ageing to be a serious crisis, jeopardizing the basic foundations of the nation and threatening its survival.  Economic growth, defence, and pensions and health care for the elderly are all areas of major concern.  In attempting to raise birth rates, Governments are seeking to address the underlying causes of low fertility and adopting polices, programmes and incentives to encourage couples to have more babies.  Job security, maternity and paternity leave, childcare, after school programs, cash allowances and other financial incentives are among the issues being carefully reviewed by Governments.  Will such Government efforts make a difference? is the central focus of this paper.	Joseph	 Chamie
2004	106	Immigrant Children in the U.S.	Examining the Influences of Gender, Class, Race, Social Capital, and Linguistic Assimilation on the Subjective Health and Well-Being of Adolescents	The authors investigate the influences of gender, race, SES, adolescent development, parental support and social capital on adolescent self-assessed health, employing survey data from a sample comprised of the pooled 2000, 2002 and 2003 senior classes of 5 high schools in Washington State (N=3300). Because all of the high schools sampled draw from an urban area with a large concentration of immigrant and refugee families, the authors also examine the role of linguistic dissonance (Portes and Hao, 2002) on self-assessed health in a subsample of adolescents from immigrant families (N=750).  In preliminary analysis of the 2000 and 2002 cohorts, a robust negative effect of gender on self-assessed health was unmodified by demographic, developmental, social capital, and parental support variables. In addition, there were negative effects of Cambodian and Vietnamese heritage and linguistic dissonance on self-assessed health that persisted despite controls for gender, SES, adolescent development, social capital and parental support.	Gunnar	R. Almgren	Ratna	M. Magarati	Elizabeth	A. Mogford
2004	106	Immigrant Children in the U.S.	Risky Behavior among Young Adolescents in Immigrant Families: Evidence from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97)	The first major aim of this paper is to examine whether the effects of maternal employment on children's cognitive outcomes differ by mothers' work schedules.  The second major aim of this paper is to examine whether or not the effects of maternal work schedules may differ in different contexts (e.g. low-income families or welfare families).  This paper, thus, builds on and extends prior research on the effects of early maternal employment by utilizing data on a large national sample of children in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child Supplement (NLSY79-CS).  The NLSY79-CS is well suited for this analysis because, in addition to collecting detailed information on family demographic background, it also contains information on various dimensions of maternal work schedules (e.g., working at evenings, nights, or rotating shifts) at every assessment point along with a rich set of information on early child care and home environment.	Wen-Jui	 Han	Andrew	 Fuligni
2004	106	Immigrant Children in the U.S.	The Acculturation of Parent-Child Relations in Immigrant Families	This research examines processes of acculturation in parent-child relations across immigrant generation among adolescents in the United States using data from Add Health.  We assess acculturation by contrasting parent-child relations among first generation youth with second generation youth and according to the length of time immigrant families have lived in the U.S.  We capture the concept of generational dissonance, when parents' values and expected norms of behavior differ substantially from youth's, with measures of parental control, parent-child conflict, and educational expectations.  In contrast, generational consonance is measured by family cohesion and parent-child closeness, communication, shared activities and weekly dinner meals, and satisfaction with the relationship.  We test the hypothesis that generational dissonance is greater and consonance lower in the second generation compared to the first, and with longer time in the U.S., arguing that when adolescents acculturate more rapidly than parents, a generation gap in values and expectations for youth occurs.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Ping	 Chen
2004	106	Immigrant Children in the U.S.	The Economic Well-Being of Children among Immigrant Generations: A Comparison across Racial and Ethnic Lines	Previous research on children of immigrants distinguished the socioeconomic and demographic differences of first-generation and second-generation children but frequently considered third- and higher-generation children as a homogenous group. By using the newly available information on immigration characteristics in the Current Population Survey (CPS) March Supplement data, this study documents the similarities and disparities in family economic resources between third-generation and the other children by racial and ethnic groups. The results show that the family economic status improved over generations, but the improvement is curvilinear. Third-generation children on average have a higher family income-to-needs ratio than first-, second-, and even higher-generation children. Similar curvilinear patterns can be observed across racial and ethnic groups, and the curvilinear patterns remain after we control for parental and family characteristics.	Hsien-Hen	 Lu	Yuval	 Elmelech
2004	107	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Gender and HIV Risk Behavior in China	Gender differences in the prevalence of HIV risk behaviors and infection are well established. Gender differences in major causes leading to HIV risk behaviors are much less researched in China. Using data from a large and population-based survey conducted in 2002 in southwestern China, this paper tries to examine gender-specific correlates of HIV risky sexual and drug use behaviors in the general population. Both bivariate and multivariate analyses will be performed. The findings are expected to shed light on whether and how men and women differ in their causes of HIV risk behaviors. A better understanding of gender-specific correlates of HIV risk behaviors will be critical in developing targeted and gender relevant prevention intervention programs.	Yelan	 Guo	Xiushi	 Yang
2004	107	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Gender, Religious Involvement, and HIV/AIDS Views in Mozambique	Using survey and semi-structural interview data collected in 2003 among members of randomly selected religious congregations in Mozambique this study analyzes how gender differences in HIV/AIDS views and preventive behavior are mediated through membership and participation in different types of religious institutions. Logistic regression is employed to examine the effects of gender and the interaction between gender and type of denomination--mainline or indigenous--on the sources and type of HIV/AIDS-related information that individuals receive, the social circles in which they exchange and negotiate this information, their knowledge and perceptions of risks and prevention, and the prevention measures they favor. The statistical analysis detects both significant overall gender differences and variations in these differences across the two types of denominations. The semi-structural data further underscore the importance of how gender ideology is shaped in different religious environments. The paper discusses implications of the findings for both research and policy.	Victor	 Agadjanian
2004	107	Gender and HIV/AIDS	Tolerance of Domestic Violence as a Sexual Health Risk: Insights from Kazakstan	This paper utilizes data from the 1999 Demographic and Health Survey in Kazakhstan, in-depth interviews with health care providers, and abuse hotline reports in Almaty to examine the associations between male attitudes towards wife beating and their reported levels of sexual health knowledge, attitudes and practices.  In the 1999 KDHS nearly one quarter of the 1,440 men questioned on acceptability of wife beating under 5 specific scenarios, supported abuse in one or more situations. Men accepting domestic violence in two or more scenarios are more likely to lack information concerning sexually transmitted diseases other than HIV/AIDS, hold incorrect beliefs concerning the transmissions of HIV/AIDS, and are more likely to normalize risky behaviors (multiple partners, paid sexual partners) than men reporting wife beating as unacceptable. Utilizing attitudes on wife beating as a proxy for power relationships, we highlight the association between perceptions of women's status and elevated sexual health risk.	Cynthia	 Buckley	Jennifer	 Barrett
2004	107	Gender and HIV/AIDS	The Influence of Women's Empowerment on Treatment-Seeking Behavior for Sexually Transmitted Infections in Rural India: Implications for HIV Prevention	Addressing treatment-seeking behavior for STI is essential for HIV prevention.  In India, there is a high prevalence of STI and a rapid increase in HIV prevalence among women. This study examines the role of women's empowerment in treatment seeking for STI symptoms in rural India.  The analysis is based on a survey conducted in 4 villages in Gujarat among all ever-married women 15-49 years reporting one or more of 7 STI symptoms.  The sample size is 256 representing 45% of 573 women who were surveyed.  Logistic regression was conducted with three outcomes: symptom communication, any treatment sought outside the household, and allopathic treatment.  The findings indicate that large emotional support networks, lower marital inequality, and participation in household financial decisions are significant predictors of at least two outcomes of treatment seeking.  The findings make a compelling argument for increasing male involvement, women's social capital and access to economic resources, and reducing gender-based violence in HIV/AIDS programs	Avni	 Amin
2004	108	Men's Reproductive Lives: A Developed Country Perspective	Partner Commitment, Condom Use, and High Risk Behavior among Young Adult Men	Using data from the National Survey of Adolescent Males, 1995, this study examines the relationship between partner commitment, risk taking, and condom use at last sex.  In terms of partner commitment, married men are the least likely to use condoms and casually dating men the most likely.  Men engaged in high risk taking behaviors (high tobacco, alcohol, and/or drug use) are less likely to report using condoms than low risk taking men.  However, interactions between high risk behavior and relationship type indicate that high risk taking married men are more likely to use condoms compared to low risk taking married men. This interaction effect is not found among single men. Thus, the influence of high risk behavior on condom use is influenced by the commitment level of young men to their partner.	Renata	 Forste
2004	108	Men's Reproductive Lives: A Developed Country Perspective	The Effect of Young Men's Education and Labor Market Outcomes on Relationship Formation and Fertility in the United States	We hypothesize that young men's socioeconomic standing has a positive impact on the timing of first births within the U.S.  This paper utilizes theories of marriage formation and economic theories of fertility to investigate the effects of socioeconomic variables (i.e., education, duration to first job, employment stability, occupational status, and income) on the marital and non-marital fertility of young men.  Previous research indicates that the socioeconomic standing of young men impacts union formation, but little research has investigated the link between their socioeconomic standing and first births.  It is expected that the socioeconomic outcomes of young men will impact the timing of first births both directly and indirectly through union formation.  We are also interested in how the effects of socioeconomic factors differ among racial/ethnic groups within the U.S.  This paper will contribute to our growing understanding of men's role in the fertility process and delayed fertility within developed countries.	Troy	A. Powell	Audrey	N. Beck
2004	108	Men's Reproductive Lives: A Developed Country Perspective	Timing and Trajectories of Canadian Men's Fertility: Is There a Bifurcation by Social Status?	This study analyzes the timing of men's fertility, and the pathways through life course events involving education, work, marital unions, and fertility. In particular, it examines whether there is a bifurcation by socio-economic status in men's timing of and trajectories towards first birth. Young Canadians have delayed their transition to adulthood including having a child but there is a concern that those with lower parental and personal resources make the transition at younger ages and are thus more likely to separate or divorce. This concern has been mainly expressed about women but the same may hold true for men as well. The study uses data gathered through Statistics Canada's 2001 General Social Survey on Family History and focuses on men born from 1922 to 1975. It makes use of event history techniques of analysis including single decrement life tables, hazard models, and sequence analysis.	Zenaida	R. Ravanera	Fernando	 Rajulton
2004	108	Men's Reproductive Lives: A Developed Country Perspective	Becoming a Parent in Sweden: Differences between Men's and Women's Attitudes about Parenthood and in Their Relationship to Later Childbearing	We analyze Swedish survey data on perceived positive and negative consequences of parenthood among young adults aged 22-30. Our results show that both men and women regard parenthood as something that makes life more meaningful, but men are more likely than women to perceive negative consequences of parenthood, such as loss of personal freedom, economic problems, less time for friends. Preliminary bivariate analyses of the effect of parenthood attitudes on the transition to parenthood indicate that such attitudes are important for later behavior. This paper will report on these findings in more detail, and also pursue the question whether the arrival of a (first) child has positive, neutral or negative effect on parenthood attitudes. This analysis has become possible since there is now a second wave of the survey, conducted in the spring of 2003, four years after the first survey.	Eva	 Bernhardt	Fran	 Goldscheider
2004	109	Child Work and Schooling II	Household Electrification, Child Labor and Education in India	While child labor and children's school enrollment are correlated in developing countries, causality is often difficult to establish. Research on schooling in India suggests that poor school quality and low returns to education may be far more important in school drop out than labor demands on children. However, once children drop out, they may begin to work. We argue that household electrification is an important exogenous variable that can be used to identify the relationship between child labor and schooling. Using data from an all India survey of  41,922 children aged 6-14, this paper tests the following hypotheses: 1. Household electrification is positively related to children's school enrollment. 2. Household electrification has a larger positive impact on school enrollment in households with larger demands for child labor. 3. Household electrification has a larger positive impact on school enrollment of household members most subject to high labor demands.	Mitali	 Sen	Sonalde	B. Desai
2004	109	Child Work and Schooling II	Adolescent Employment and Social Capital: The Impact of Working with Family on School Performance	Despite the increasing attention researchers have devoted to adolescent employment, specifically number of hours worked, there is little research that addresses how context of employment affects school performance. However, some studies of job quality highlight the importance of moving beyond a time trade-off perspective in explaining the association between employment and schooling outcomes.  Coleman's research on social capital suggests that intergenerational closure has a positive impact on academic achievement by reinforcing high educational values and expectations.  This paper extends these ideas to the workplace by analyzing how working for or with family members impacts grades in high school.  Using data from the University of Washington Beyond High School project, I investigate racial and ethnic differences in employment context and to what extent they mediate the association between race/ethnicity and school performance.	Jennifer	C. Lee
2004	109	Child Work and Schooling II	Changes in Time Use over the Transition to Adulthood in Developing Countries: New Insights from Comparative Analysis	We address three research questions in this paper: (1) How does time-use change over the transition to adulthood? (2) Does gender role differentiation intensify over the transition? (3) Does school attendance attenuate gender differences? In the last 5 years, various researchers at the Population Council have been involved in the collection of 24-hour recall data on time use from adolescents in Pakistan, Vietnam, rural Kenya, urban India, urban South Africa and rural Bangladesh.  Sufficient data have now been collected to allow for comparative analysis.  These data are supplemented by comparable data from Guatemala and Nicaragua from the Living Standard Measurement surveys. Our research addresses significant gaps in the literature including the lack of attention to how time use is affected by school attendance, the lack of attention to domestic work as a form of child labor and the focus on participation rates rather that overall work burdens.	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Amanda	 Ritchie	Monica	 Grant	Barbara	 Mensch
2004	109	Child Work and Schooling II	Colonisation of Children's Work	This paper argues against the conventional wisdom, that children should have lost their usefulness in the transition to industrial society. Modern schooling is rather understood as a continuation of children's organic participation in activities deemed necessary in any mode of production, a view affirmed by a concomitant historical shift from manual to mental child work. This perception of children's school work logically entails that children remain a part of a societal division of labour and therefore legitimate claims makers on societal resources as well as a fundamental economic responsibility on the side of the public. A practical realisation of this insight would (1) alleviate parents' economic burdens and children's relative poverty risks, (2) create incentives to fertility increases and hence (3) in the long run prepare for solving the pending pension crisis. In this way a reestablishment of a lost intergenerational balance might come about.	Jens	 Qvortrup
2004	110	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling: International Contexts	Educational Expectations in South Africa: Comparisons between Adolescents and Parents	We use data from the Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS) to examine the educational expectations of black, coloured, and white South African adolescents and their parents. Our results show that prior educational history, a subjective measure of academic ability, and objective literacy and numeracy scores all influence adolescents' educational expectations and parents' educational expectations for adolescents, though the findings show some differences in these factors among the three racial groups. Blacks enter school at a later age than coloureds or whites, and among blacks only, age at school entry plays an important role in producing educational expectations. The history of grade failure and repetition is important for coloureds and whites, but not blacks. Literacy and numeracy scores are important predictors of educational expectations for all three racial groups.	Ann	M. Beutel	Kermyt	G. Anderson
2004	110	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling: International Contexts	Neighbourhood Effects on Immigrant Educational Attainment: Evidence from 2nd Generation Polish and Turkish Immigrants in Sweden	This study tests for the existence of community effects on educational attainment among some 2000 young indigenous Swedes and 2nd generation Polish and Turkish immigrants to Sweden born in 1972 and 1976. It links data from two surveys with area data and uses Sequential Probit to model educational progress. Two community-level constructs (indicating economic deprivation and immigrant concentration) are used along with three family-level and four individual-level variables as correlates of educational attainment. Preliminary results show that individuals from economically deprived neighbourhoods have lower educational achievement, while those from high immigrant concentration have better educational attainment. Further, we find that children from highly educated families make educational advancement while children from divorced families and those of Turkish origin lag behind. More importantly, except for parental education, which continues to be an important factor throughout all educational levels, the importance of the other factors is limited only to lower educational levels.	Gebrenegus	 Ghilagaber
2004	110	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling: International Contexts	Vidya, Veda, and Varna: The Influence of Religion and Caste on Education in Rural India	Vidya (education), Veda (religion) and Varna (caste) are inter-linked in India. This paper examines whether, and to what extent, the enrolment of children at school in India is influenced by community norms such as religion (Hindu or Muslim) or caste (Scheduled or non-Scheduled). The econometric estimates are based on unit record data from a survey of 33,000 rural households, in 1,765 villages, from 16 states of India. The equation for the likelihood of being enrolled at school is estimated separately for boys and for girls, with the slope coefficients differing according to whether children are Hindu, Muslim or Scheduled Caste. The main findings are that the religion or caste effect depends upon the non-community circumstances in which the children are placed.  Under favourable circumstances (for example, when parents are literate), the size of the community effect is negligible.  Under less favourable circumstances, the size of the community effect is considerable.	Sriya	 Iyer	Vani	K. Borooah
2004	110	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Schooling: International Contexts	Demographic and Socioeconomic Status of China's Minority Ethnic Population: Any Closing of the Gap?	In the 1990s China experienced enviable economic growth but at the same time also faced rising inequality.  One dimension of inequality that is of concern to government officials is the socioeconomic gap between minority ethnic groups and the Han majority.  This paper examines recent trends in the demographic and socioeconomic status of China's ethnic groups, utilizing data from the 2000 and 1990 population censuses and a county-level data set that combines 2000 census results with other economic statistics.  The paper assesses whether the ethnic gap is narrowing or widening and discusses the factors underlying the trends.  Education attainment and employment are the major socioeconomic indicators evaluated in the paper.  Changes in the geographic concentration of minority ethnic groups between 1990 and 2000 and the potential leveling effect of migration are also evaluated.  Multivariate regression analysis is used to further disentangle the link between ethnicity and socioeconomic status.	Loraine	A. West
2004	111	Demography of Disability	Trends in Selected Health Dimensions among the U.S. Elderly, 1982-1999	This paper estimates and analyzes levels and trends in selected health dimensions (i.e., chronic conditions, sensory limitations, functional limitations, ADL disability, and IADL disability) among the US non-institutionalized elderly, using detailed data from the National Long Term Care Surveys (NLTCS) for 1982 to 1999.  This paper also compares trends using measures that include the use of assistive devices versus measures that do not.  The generalized estimating equation (GEE) approach is then adopted to examine whether there are significant time trends in various measures after controlling for sociodemographic characteristics, and whether there are differences in the probability of having various limitations among the sociodemographic groups.  The results show evidence of improved health and declined disability.  Moreover, whether to  include the use of assistive devices in the definition greatly affects the levels and trends of selected sensory limitations and ADLs.  The effectiveness of assistive devices in reducing disability is suggested.  Significant differences have also been found for most sociodemographic groups for various measures.	Peiyun	 She
2004	111	Demography of Disability	Trends in the Health of the Older Population: Disability versus Biomarkers of Health Risks	Health among the older population as measured by most indicators has improved over the last two decades.  Mortality has continued to decline, while disability and functioning loss are less prevalent than in the past.  The prevalence of many diseases, however, has not declined, as people survive longer with disease.  In this study, we use two waves of the NHANES (III and IV) to examine whether time trends in biomarkers for good health indicate the same improvement in health that has been observed using disability.  Biomarkers examined include systolic and diastolic blood pressure, cholesterol levels, signs of compromised endocrine function, and signs of inflammatory responses.  Among our findings, there is conflicting evidence of change between the early and late 1990s, with improvements in diastolic blood pressure, pulse, HDL and LDL cholesterol, and others. We find deterioration in systolic blood pressure and body mass index.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Dawn	 Alley	Sandra	L. Reynolds	Melanie	 Johnston
2004	111	Demography of Disability	Disparities in Trends in Old-Age Disability	A consensus has emerged that disability prevalence rates have declined among older Americans (Freedman, et al, 2002). If such declines continue, their effect on the nation's health and economic well-being could be incredibly far-reaching, with potentially more older Americans able to work longer and relatively fewer needing medical and long-term care (Cutler 2001a, 2001b; Lubitz et al. 2001; Singer & Manton 1998). Our proposed study provides new evidence on trends in disability among older persons from 1982 to 2001 with a focus on identifying socioeconomic and demographic groups that have and have not experienced improvements. We will use the 1982-2001 National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) to estimate the prevalence of disability and test for disparities in trends. The expanded content of the NHIS from 1997 to 2001 will also be used to examine a broader set of disability measures and socioeconomic factors than have been previously analyzed.	Bob	 Schoeni	Vicki	A. Freedman	Linda	G. Martin
2004	111	Demography of Disability	Disability in Later Life: Exploring Patterns of Limitations across Age	Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) indexes are the most commonly-used instruments in estimating active life expectancy (ALE).  Virtually all research on ALE has relied on counts of ADLs, but such indexes obscure heterogeneity in the disability process.  That is, we know little about exactly which patterns of limitation are most common and which lead to the lowest estimates of ALE and overall life expectancy.  Here, we use two waves of data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to begin investigating patterns of disability.  With two waves of data, six measured ADLs at each wave (plus death as an outcome at wave 2), there are 26X(26+1)=4,160 possible disability patterns.  Preliminary results, however, show that there are only 260 empirical patterns, with many of those patterns represented by only one person.  In this paper, we examine these patterns and begin to examine sociodemographic factors that sort individuals into them.	Scott	M. Lynch	J.	Scott  Brown
2004	112	Innovations in State and Local Population Estimation	Post-Census 2000 Population Estimates for the Municipios of Puerto Rico: The Traditional Demographic Formula in the Context of a Regression Estimation Technique	In this presentation, I describe a new method being investigated by the U.S. Census Bureau for producing the official estimates of total population for the municipios of Puerto Rico and present preliminary results from its application.  This method consists of a demographic-component estimation technique couched in a regression framework.  As such, the components of population change (births, deaths, and migration) are treated as parameters to be estimated, with particular emphasis on estimating the level of migration.  The resulting component estimates are then combined into a set of total population estimates for the 1990s and confidence intervals are calculated for these estimates.  Finally, these test estimates are evaluated in light of the results from Census 2000.	Matthew	 Christenson
2004	112	Innovations in State and Local Population Estimation	Estimating Population Trends for Census Tracts: Street Weighted Areal Interpolation Using GIS	Small area demography often requires combinations of data spatially aggregated to incompatible zone systems in a region, such as a set of enumeration districts that changes over time.  Such situations can be addressed by areal interpolation, the transfer of data between zonal systems according to spatial algorithms.  The authors test a technique of areal interpolation using Geographic Information Systems (GIS) that uses a digital map layer representing streets and roads to derive weights for small areas within aggregation zones.  Errors in estimation are measured by comparing local estimates to true local source counts aggregated to target areas from smaller zones.  The street weighting technique reduces errors in estimation as compared to estimates derived using the commonly applied area weighting technique, and it is much easier to use than other interpolation techniques that have also been shown to reduce error.  Keywords:  areal interpolation, dasymetric mapping, small area demography, census geography	Michael	 Reibel
2004	112	Innovations in State and Local Population Estimation	Dealing with Inconsistent Race Data in the Production of Population Estimates: Improvements at the Subnational Level	Changes in the U.S. racial categories make it necessary to modify the Census Bureau's methodology to produce population estimates by race.  This decade a technique for modeling race for the vital statistics birth component data has been needed.  This modification ensures consistency across racial categories while the various administrative data systems transition to the new race standards. Currently, the model is based on Census 2000 data for the population under age one and their parents and is implemented at the national level.  The purpose of this paper is to explore modeling at lower levels of geography with the aim to improve subnational population estimates.  Census 2000 data indicates important regional and state variations in race reporting.  This research outlines a statistical model to incorporate such differences and provides a first look at descriptive statistics.	Amy	S. Smith
2004	112	Innovations in State and Local Population Estimation	Highways and Population Change	In this paper we return to an issue often discussed in the literature regarding the relationship between highway expansion and population change.  Often it is simply assumed away that this relationship is well established and understood.  However, we argue that an exhaustive review of the relevant literature fails to unambiguously support the notion that highway expansion leads to increased population growth.  Using data on all major highway expansions covering the period from the late1960s through the early 1990s from the Wisconsin Department of Transportation, and a series of population counts at the minor civil division (MCD) level from the decennial census, we employ the analytical tools in geographic information system (GIS) software and theory from the expanding literature in spatial analysis and modeling to take a fresh look at this relationship.	Paul	R. Voss	Guangqing	 Chi
2004	114	Values, Attitudes, and the Family	A Demographic Perspective on Depictions of the Harmfulness of Single-Parent Families in U.S. Magazines and Social Science Journals, 1900-1998	The number of U.S. children living in single-parent families has risen  rapidly since 1960 due to increases in divorce and non-marital childbearing. But neither single-parent families created by divorce and non-marital childbearing nor controversy about them is new. This paper uses primary data to examine trends over the 20th century in depictions of the harmfulness of single-parent families in popular magazines and social science journals.  Several aspects of harmfulness are depicted, including whether authors and commentators who write about single-parent families depict them as harmful and, if so, who or what is harmed and how. I establish trends over time in depictions of harmfulness and use multivariate models to explore factors likely associated with these depictions. These include trends in magazine and academic publishing, like the growth of women's magazines and empirical research; changing characteristics of authors and commentators; demographic trends in divorce and non-marital childbearing; and selected socio-economic factors.	Margaret	 Usdansky
2004	114	Values, Attitudes, and the Family	Attitudes about the Transition from Cohabitation to Marriage: A Qualitative Perspective	Recently, the U.S. has witnessed changing union formation patterns, with dramatic changes centering on increases in cohabitation.  While cohabitation is sometimes perceived as representing a threat to the institution of marriage, it has not been decoupled from marriage. However, there appears to be some decline in transitions from cohabitation to marriage.  This research examines beliefs about determinants of marriage from the perspective of cohabitors.  We move beyond prior research by using a qualitative approach allowing for respondents' subjective appraisals of what is necessary to move from a cohabiting relationship to marriage.  We look beyond often-studied economic factors to a broader scope of factors.  We use data collected as part of the Cohabitation and Marriage in America project, specifically, in-depth interviews of 115 young adults who are currently cohabiting or have recent cohabitation experience.  We attempt to better understand processes and mechanisms underlying the decision to marry among young adult cohabitors.	Meredith	J. Porter	Pamela	J. Smock
2004	114	Values, Attitudes, and the Family	How Do Attitudes Affect Relationship Stability? Content versus Concordance	Extant research on attitudes and relationship dynamics documents that attitudes toward marriage, gender roles, and the importance of sameness affect the likelihood of marriage and of divorce. The prevailing argument is that attitudes reflect internalized cultural values that guide behavior.  Yet, attitudes can also affect behavior through structural concordance, which promotes cohesion in ways that encourage union formation and prevent dissolution.  This paper uses paired couple data on diverse attitudes from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to test the hypothesis that cohesion from attitudinal concordance promotes marriage and prevents dissolution independently of attitudinal content. With the exception of marriage attitudes, we find no effect of attitudinal content on marriage or dissolution.  However, we find that concordance is positively associated with marriage and negatively associated with relationship dissolution, suggesting that attitudinal homogeneity may be an important form of social capital that promotes union formation and relationship stability.	Jeanette	W. Chung	Mario	L. Small	Sara	 McLanahan
2004	114	Values, Attitudes, and the Family	Go Forth and Multiply: Changes in the Timing of Marriage and Childbearing among Young Amish Women	Using data from two large Amish communities in Ohio, we examine patterns of marriage and motherhood among young Amish women.  Marriage and parenthood are often viewed as key markers of the transition to adulthood.  This is especially so among the Amish where following formal schooling at 8th grade, Amish girls may work outside of the home before deciding to be baptized, marry and settle down to raise their own family.  Rates of pre-marital conceptions and out-of-wedlock births have traditionally been low among the Amish.  However, in recent decades the Amish have had to respond to social and economic changes in their way of living, which in turn might impact the transition to adulthood among Amish youth.  We examine potential associations between different lifestyles of Amish families, and the timing of marriage in relation to that of motherhood across various birth cohorts of young Amish women across more than 50 years.	Elizabeth	 Cooksey	Joseph	F. Donnermeyer
2004	115	The Economic Adaptation of Immigrants	Selectivity and Economic Assimilation of Immigrants from the Former Soviet Union in Israel and the U.S.	During the late 1970s and 1980s, Jewish emigrants from the Former Soviet Union (FSU) could choose between Israel and the US as their destination counties. Drawing on US census data (1980 and 1990 PUMS) and Israeli cross-sectional and longitudinal data, we find that immigrants from the FSU in Israel failed to reach earnings convergence with natives.  The earnings growth of FSU immigrant in Israel lagged behind that of natives, as well as behind the earnings growth observed among FSU Jewish immigrants in the US between 1980 and 1990. Patterns of self-selection to immigration--on both measured and unmeasured productivity-related traits--are identified as the major reason for the relatively poor performance of FSU immigrants in Israel.  Apparently, the more educated and skilled Jewish emigrants from the FSU immigrated to America and other countries, while less educated and less skilled immigrants reached Israel.	Yinon	 Cohen	Yitchak	 Haberfeld
2004	115	The Economic Adaptation of Immigrants	Gender, U.S. Immigration Policy, and the Wages of Latino Immigrants	Prior studies suggest that the passage of the Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) in 1986 signaled a deterioration in the labor market conditions of U.S. Latino migrants--especially Mexicans.  In this paper, we examine whether and how labor market conditions worsened for migrant women after 1986, and the extent to which these shifts were comparable to those experienced by men.  Using a new source of data that offers comparability across four national origins, we estimate multivariate models that capture the effects of a variety of variables on migrants hourly wages and their receipt of cash wages on their last U.S. trip.  Interaction models reveal significant sex differences in pre- and post-1986 effects.  IRCA comparably affected the wages of men and women, but it raised women's odds of receiving cash wages.  These findings suggest a negative impact of IRCA never before documented for men and women.	Katharine	M. Donato	Chizuko	 Wakabayashi	Amada	 Armenta
2004	115	The Economic Adaptation of Immigrants	Earnings and English Language: Asian Indians and Chinese in the United States	Asian Indians and Chinese are the two largest immigrant Asian groups in the United States. Though, while Asian Indians are heterogeneous with respect to the English language ability, Chinese are more or less homogenous. Past research shows that knowing the language of the receiving country  is a crucial variable in determining the extent of assimilation and subsequently the earnings of the immigrants. There have not been however studies comparing the Asian Indians and Chinese in this regard and also none so far among the Indians. This paper using the 1990 and 2000 United States Census data examines the relation between English language ability and the earnings for Chinese and Asian Indians. The dependent variables are; a) household income per year b) income earned by the person per year. The independent variable is English language ability and controls are age at entry, education, years of stay, martial status, occupation.	Veena	 Kulkarni
2004	115	The Economic Adaptation of Immigrants	Determinants of Occupational Ranking after Legalization among Immigrants to the United States	This paper uses New Immigrant Survey Pilot data to compare the skill level of immigrants' last home country job with that of their first U.S job since legalization.  I find that 47% of legal immigrants experience occupational downgrading with their first job in the United States.  Determinants vary by sending region. Class of admission, English ability, and location of education are strong correlates of occupational downgrading.  Overall, immigrants who legalize through employment visas are less likely to experience downgrading.  For most immigrants, English ability is associated with positive labor market outcomes.  For immigrants from Asia, Europe, Australia, and Canada, education acquired abroad is associated with a decrease in the probability of downgrading.  Results further suggest that education from Latin America and the Caribbean is of low value in the U.S. and that formal education is more important than English ability for Asian immigrants.	Ilana	 Redstone
2004	116	Demography of the Labor Force	Causal Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Random-Assignment Iron Supplementation Intervention	Iron deficiency is widespread throughout the developing world.  We provide new evidence on the effect of iron deficiency on labor market outcomes drawing on data from a random assignment treatment control design intervention.  The Work and Iron Status Evaluation is an on going study following over 10,000 adults in Central Java, Indonesia.  Half the respondents receive a treatment of 100 mg of iron every week for a year; the controls receive a placebo.  Compliance is monitored carefully.  Contrasting changes in labor market outcomes for treatments with changes in outcomes for controls, we are able to pin down the causal effect of iron supplementation on economic success.  We focus on hours of work, type of work and income from work.  In an effort to identify pathways through which iron status affects economic prosperity, we examine changes in physical and psycho social health as well as self  reported indicators of overall health.	Duncan	 Thomas	Jed	 Friedman	Nathan	R. Jones	Bondan	 Sikoki	James	P. Smith	Wayan	 Suriastini	Christopher	 McKelvey
2004	116	Demography of the Labor Force	Behaviour Surrounding Childbirth: An Examination of Labor Force Behaviour among Immigrant and German Women	In this paper, we analyze and compare the labor force behavior of women from different immigrant groups with the labor force behavior of native born German women in the west and in the east during the period before and following childbirth. In our analyses, we differentiate between part-time and full-time labor market attachment. We also investigate whether differences exist between immigrant and native born German women in subjective well-being and in amount and types of household income available in the first three to five years following the birth of a child. For the analyses, we use longitudinal data from the German Socio-Economic Panel for the years 1992-2000. Our results indicate that patterns of labor market participation differ for immigrant versus German women both prior to and after the first and higher order births. However, the nature of these differences depends on the type of employment and on birth order.	Eileen	 Trzcinski	Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2004	116	Demography of the Labor Force	Young Married Women in Australia: Decomposing Changes in Labour Force Participation	In recent decades the increased labour force participation of married women has been one of the most significant changes in the Australian labour market. This analysis focuses on the increased participation of younger married women, those aged 25-29, between 1981 and 2001. Over this period the participation rate of these women increased from 46% to 71%. Within this age group there have been changes in fertility and education, with the characteristics of the 2001 population much more favourable towards employment. The purpose of this analysis is to decompose the difference in rates between 1981 and 2001 into changes due to composition, and change due to differing effects of covariates. Logistic regression is used to model the data at each time, using the population census sample files. By calculating predicted values under different scenarios, these models investigate what role the effect of changes in education and fertility have on employment rates.	Jennifer	A. Baxter
2004	116	Demography of the Labor Force	The Future of Work in Russia: Population Projections and the Labor Force	This paper combines population projections for the Russian Federation with reported statistics on employment and rates of economic activity to assess changes in the size and composition of the Russian labor force.  Due primarily to peculiarities in the Russian population age structure, the size of the potential labor force has increased substantially since 1989, even while the total population has decreased.  In the near future, however, a rapid and continuous decline in the working age population is projected, as disproportionately large cohorts approach retirement, and the smaller cohorts of people born after the breakup of the Soviet Union enter the labor market.  Changes in educational attainment, labor force participation rates and the effects of high levels of both emigration and immigration are also addressed.	Dennis	J. Donahue
2004	117	Transition to Motherhood	Labour-Market Attachment and Entry into Parenthood: The Experience of Immigrant Women in Sweden	This paper investigates the impact of labour-market attachment on entry into motherhood for foreign-born women in Sweden. The study uses a longitudinal data set consisting of the entire population of immigrants from ten nations and a five-percent random sample of natives. The effects of earned income are evident, with increased income levels increasing the probability of motherhood for all observed nationalities. The effects of the various states of participation and non-participation in the labour force do not seem to vary greatly between immigrants and natives. Among all subgroups, we find a higher propensity to begin childbearing among those who are established in the labour market. Contrary to popular belief the effects of welfare recipience are more negative for immigrants than for natives. The similarity in patterns across widely different national groups gives support to the notion that institutional factors affecting all subgroups in society are crucial in influencing childbearing behaviour.	Gunnar	 Andersson	Kirk	A. Scott
2004	117	Transition to Motherhood	What Women Want: Antecedent Conditions for the Initiation of Childbearing	The transition to motherhood has gained increasing significance in demography, particularly in low-fertility societies. Yet past research on determinants of first-birth timing offers little practical insight to policy-makers faced with the difficult task of arresting, if not reversing, fertility decline. More theoretical explanations of fertility behaviour provide deeper insights but are difficult to test empirically. This paper argues that the main tenets of such theories operate through antecedent conditions (such as marriage, financial security and home ownership) that individuals want in place before initiating childbearing, and that decisions about the transition to motherhood are based on the interplay of such conditions, how strongly these conditions are valued, and the strength of an individuals' desire for children. Quantitative and qualitative analytical approaches are used to examine the antecedent conditions for childbearing initiation, drawing on data from a nationally-representative survey of Australian women aged 25-39 years and focus group data.	Rosangela	 Merlo
2004	117	Transition to Motherhood	Desperately Seeking Susan or Johnny: Transitions to Motherhood for Infertile Women	This study focuses on infertile women who desperately seek to become mothers.  Four different groups of infertile women are analyzed: biological mothers, adoptive mothers, wannabe mothers, and the child free. Data from focus groups and individual interviews are used in a qualitative analysis of their family building strategies.   All of the women in this study sought at least minimal medical intervention to overcome infertility; all were remarkably tenacious; and all spoke of infertility as a life altering experience.  The respondents were acutely aware of cultural norms and an innate biological desire to reproduce.  This study illuminates the difficulties and joys of reaching motherhood for infertile women who are successful in their attempt to make the transition, describes the ongoing optimism of the wannabe mothers, and details the difficult transformation some women experience in finalizing their decision to be child free.	Elizabeth	H. Stephen
2004	117	Transition to Motherhood	Is the United States a Pro-Natalist Destination? A New Look at the Recent Fertility of American Immigrants	The fertility dynamics of foreign-born women impact overall population growth and the racial, ethnic, linguistic, and generational composition of the country. Here we consider the patterns of recent fertility among immigrant women along the dimensions of national origin, education, geographic settlement, linguistic behavior, and the presence of grandparents using data from the Census 2000 Supplemental Survey. We estimate a total fertility rate among foreign-born women that is nearly 40% higher than that of native-born women, but also observe a wide array of period fertility rates across national origins subgroups.  Differences observed across national origin groups are scarcely attenuated by standard social and demographic control variables.  The processes associated with the marital and non-marital fertility of immigrant women are distinct. Our results point to the value of adopting a more life-course oriented approach with greater attention to the context of pathways to marriage and motherhood alike.	Gray	 Swicegood	Michael	 Sobczak	Hiromi	 Ishizawa	Gillian	 Stevens	Eileen	Diaz  McConnell
2004	118	Family Background Effects	The Intergenerational Transmission of Divorce. Results from a Fifteen-Country Study with the Fertility and Family Survey	This study investigates the intergenerational transmission of divorce in thirteen European countries, the United States and Canada.  We analyzed the cross-national data from the Fertility and Family Survey applying techniques of event history analysis.  Our analysis yields three main findings:  (1) In all countries in Eastern Europe, Western Europe and North America included in our sample the effect of intergenerational divorce transmission is significant.  The divorce risk of children of divorced parents is on average 2.03 times that of children of non-divorced parents, whereby the multiplier ranges from 1.5 in Hungary to 3.2 in Italy.  (2) When taking marriage and fertility patterns into account this effect is only marginally reduced.  (3) There is a strong negative correlation between the magnitude of the effect and the proportion of children experiencing their parents' divorce.  This finding supports the hypothesis that low acceptance and stigmatization of divorce aggravate the long-term consequences for children of divorced parents.	Andreas	 Diekmann	Kurt	 Schmidheiny
2004	118	Family Background Effects	Family Background, Schooling, and Childlessness in Australia	This paper addresses the relationships between the size and type of family in which an Australian woman grew up, the level and type of schooling she had, and her likelihood of being childless in the 40-54 age range, using data from Wave 1 of the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey. Multilevel logistic analysis shows that having fewer siblings, marital disruption of the family by age 14,  a father who was employed in a professional occupation, education in a non-government school, staying at school to Year 12 or above, and being a migrant from North-West Europe, North America, East or South-East Asia all are associated with higher rates of childlessness. The effects of these early lifecourse variables on marital and socioeconomic status in later life are considered. The paper concludes with a discussion of the implications of the findings for Australia's public debate.	Nick	 Parr
2004	118	Family Background Effects	Family Structure during Childhood: Survival Effects in Later Life. First Results of the Historical Sample of the Netherlands	This article studies the influence of childhood conditions on health in later life. Use is made of a random sample of births in the Netherlands during the period 1850-1922 (N=6000) to which death certificates and data from population registers and personal cards are added, covering the period from 1850 to 2002. Individual life histories are constructed and used to analyse the effect on adult mortality of the economic position of the child's family between birth and adolescence, of migration during childhood, taking into account regions of origin and destination, and of family circumstances of children during the first fifteen years of their life. The length of time during which children were in advantaged or disadvantaged positions is taken into account. Event history analysis with time-varying and fixed community level variables will be applied to analyse these data.	Frans	W.A. van Poppel	Aart	C. Liefbroer
2004	119	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Asia and the Near East	Adolescent and Youth Reproductive Health in the Asia and Near East Region: Status, Issues, Policies, and Programs	This paper synthesizes 13 country case studies of adolescent and youth reproductive health (AYRH) in the Asia and Near East region.   While differences emerged, the assessments found several challenges that are universal in the region.  These challenges include the paucity of research and data, particularly with regard to rural and minority adolescents and youth; insufficient attention paid to enormous gender disparities; lack of information and services available, including to married adolescents and youth, often leading to unwanted pregnancy and disease; weakness or lack of policies directly addressing AYRH; and small-scale and generally weak programs, even where national and other policies exist. Additionally, the global environment in terms of both information (e.g., from films and TV) and resources (e.g., dependence on foreign aid) has had both positive and negative effects on the status of AYRH throughout the region.  These issues need to be addressed for further progress to be achieved.	Karen	 Hardee	Pamela	 Pine	Lauren	 Taggart Wasson
2004	119	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Asia and the Near East	Knowledge of HIV/AIDS and Unsafe Sex Practices among Filipino Youth	The paper looks at the knowledge of Filipino youth on HIV/AIDS and how this impacts in their decision to engage in premarital sex and adopt safe sex practices.  The analysis is based on data from the 2002 Young Adult Fertility and Sexuality Study (YAFS 3), a nationwide study on Filipino young adults ages 15-27.  HIV/AIDS knowledge is measured based on whether respondents know of sexually transmitted diseases, whether they have heard of AIDS, whether they think AIDS is curable and their assessment of their likelihood of contracting HIV/AIDS.  Unsafe sexual practices on the other hand refer to failure to use condom during sexual encounters. Results show that while there is almost universal knowledge of HIV/AIDS among young people, there is still low level of condom use among sexually active young adults in the country.  Moreover, majority of young people do not consider themselves at risk of HIV/AIDS infection.	Elma	 Laguna
2004	119	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Asia and the Near East	Worried Lives: Poverty, Gender, and Reproductive Health for Adolescent Women in a Slum in Dhaka, Bangladesh	This is an anthropological study exploring the reproductive health needs of married adolescent women. Fieldwork was carried out in an urban slum [basti] in Dhaka, Bangladesh for 14 months with a survey of 150 young women, 50 repeated in depth interviews, and 8 case studies. I argue that it is critical to understand broader macro and micro factors which shape vulnerability to understandings, experiences and responses to reproductive health problems. Young women construct a political economy of the body in order to survive, gain advantages and power and manage under conditions of extreme poverty, thus putting their bodies and health at risk. This research gives an insight into the situations in which adolescent women make decisions surrounding marriage, fertility, childbearing etc, within the socio-economic constraints that surround them and the larger structural conditions which govern their lives.	Sabina	Faiz  Rashid
2004	119	Adolescent Reproductive Health in Asia and the Near East	Attitudes, Intervention, and Sexual Initiation among Chinese Adolescents	This study investigates the role of sex education in changing sexual attitudes and behaviors among adolescents in a developing nation where western influences and liberalizing norms have only taken hold over the last several decades. Based on pre- and post- intervention data from a treatment and control group study in suburban Shanghai, China, we investigate the effects of a WHO-sponsored comprehensive sex education program on adolescent sex attitudes and behavior.  We find that while the intervention did not deter adolescents from initiating sexual activity, it did have a significant effect on their attitudes about sex. In turn, attitudes influenced sexual initiation. In this way, the intervention program indirectly delayed the start of sexual behavior among Shanghai adolescents. Additionally, having sex leads to more favorable attitudes. This study suggests diffusion pathways through which rapidly changing adolescent sexual behavior may be influenced in this cultural context.	Bo	 Wang	Ann	 Meier
2004	120	Youth Behaviors and Risk for Pregnancy and HIV/AIDS	The Family as Protective Factor against Sexual Risk-Taking Behavior of Filipino Adolescents	The study examines the association between family factors and sexual risk-taking behavior among Filipino adolescents. The family factors considered include family connectedness, parental permissiveness and parent-child communication. Risky sexual behaviors refer to sexual activities that increase the risk of contracting AIDS and other STDs.  This includes commercial sex, sex with the same gender, sex with multiple partners, casual sex and unprotected sex.  Each of these sexual practices is analyzed individually in addition to a composite index that measures the extent of sexual risk-taking.  The sample is comprised of 16,651 Filipinos in the ages 15-24 drawn from the 2002 Young Adult Fertility and Sexuality Survey.  Data indicate that adolescent males engage in risky sexual behaviors at higher rates than females, and this is consistent in each of the sexual practices.  Regression analyses reveal differences in the mechanisms by which the family influences sexual risk-taking behaviors of Filipino adolescents.	Maria	Paz N. Marquez
2004	120	Youth Behaviors and Risk for Pregnancy and HIV/AIDS	Adolescent Perspectives on the Social Consequences of Premarital Sex and Pregnancy in Urban Kenya	I examine the perceptions of school-going adolescents in Nairobi, Kenya, regarding the possible reaction of the significant others to premarital sex, and their own likely response to a premarital pregnancy exploring whether such perceptions are associated with preferred ideal age of sexual debut and HIV/AIDS risk perception. Data used are from a survey conducted by the Population Council and the Nation Media Group in June/July 2001 involving 3598 students. Results show that females were more likely to perceive negative peer reaction while no gender differences are noted in perceived parental/guardian reaction, or in the possible response to a premarital pregnancy. Perceived negative peer reaction is strongly associated with preference for later ages of sexual debut; perceived negative parental/guardian reaction is not significantly associated with any of the dependent variables; possible response to a premarital pregnancy gives unexpected results; while none of the variables is strongly associated with HIV/AIDS risk perception.	Francis	O. Onyango
2004	120	Youth Behaviors and Risk for Pregnancy and HIV/AIDS	Sexual Behaviour, Intravenous Drug Use, and Perceived Susceptibility to HIV/AIDS: A Study among Drug Users in Manipur, India	Research to prevent HIV transmission among injection drug user (IDU)populations have traditionally focused on the risk of HIV infection associated with the drug use itself. Little is known about the sexual behaviour of injection drug users and about the sexual transmission of HIV between IDUs and their sexual partners. An attempt has been made in this study to understand the drug use, sexual behaviour pattern, among 500 IDUs in Manipur India. It was found that more than 40 per cent of the drug users involved in multi partner sex and condom use was very low. The perceived susceptibility to HIV/AIDS was very low. Knowledge about various STI were almost negligible. An attempt has been made in this study to find out the context of sexual behaviour pattern and a multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to determine the association between various factors with sexual behaviour	Gurumurthy	 Rangaiyan	Latashori	 Kethlapam
2004	120	Youth Behaviors and Risk for Pregnancy and HIV/AIDS	Trends in Contraceptive Use among U.S. High School Students 1991 to 2001	Teen pregnancy in the United States declined steadily during the 1990s.  We used national Youth Risk Behavior Surveys to estimate trends in contraceptive use at last sexual intercourse among high school students between 1991 and 2001.  We calculated weighted-average contraceptive failure rates (WACFR), to summarize the overall effectiveness of contraceptive use among groups.  Contraceptive use improved for girls but not boys.   The largest improvements occurred among 9th grade, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic black girls.  Improvement in contraceptive use among girls included declines in use of withdrawal and no method and increasing condom use.  Overall, use of hormonal methods among girls changed little during this time.  Based on the WACFR index, in 2001 almost one quarter of sexually active teens would have been expected to become pregnant within a year.  Although contraceptive failure among teens is common, these data demonstrate significant improvement in contraceptive practice among high school students during the 1990s.	John	S. Santelli	Brian	 Morrow
2004	121	Demography of Asian Americans and Asian Canadians	Trends in Asian American Educational Attainment: Evidence from the 2000 Census	By Asian Americans we refer to American residents who are either immigrants or descendants of immigrants from a general area in Asia.  The economic conditions, political systems, religious practices, and languages are quite different across countries in Asia.  As a result, Asian Americans vary greatly by country of origin, which we call ethnicity.  However, Asian Americans as a group have different socioeconomic experiences and demographic profiles from whites and blacks.  We call differences across these three major groups racial differences.  A story about Asian Americans should tell us both how Asians differ from other racial groups and how they vary among themselves across ethnic groups.  Furthermore, the experiences of Asian Americans have also changed over time.  In this paper, we uses Census and other data to compare the educational attainment and achievement of Asian Americans relative to whites and blacks and across Asian American ethnicities over the 1960-2000 period.	Yu	 Xie	Kimberly	 Goyette
2004	121	Demography of Asian Americans and Asian Canadians	Educational Attainment among Asian Canadians	Using 1996 Census data, our study investigates the model minority hypothesis (the notion that Asians are a successful minority group in North America) by examining how educational attainment differs between Asian and white Canadians. A major criticism of the model minority hypothesis is that it treats Asians as a homogeneous group, when this population is diverse in numerous respects. Hence, our study disaggregates the Asian population by ethnic group and immigrant status. We also examine educational attainment differences within our selected ethnic groupings. Our results confirm that some Asian ethnic groupings are indeed comparatively successful in terms of educational attainment. However, the model minority hypothesis mischaracterizes the Asian community, for educational attainment varies significantly across and within Asian ethnic groupings. We conclude that factors such as ethnicity, immigrant status, and social class modify educational attainment levels within the Asian Canadian population.	Zheng	 Wu	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2004	121	Demography of Asian Americans and Asian Canadians	Do Native-Born Asian Americans Face a Glass Ceiling? Evidence from the Current Population Surveys	The Asian American population is growing rapidly, and additional information about the socioeconomic outcomes of this demographic group is needed in order to provide a broader perspective on the nature of racial inequality in modern American society.  In this paper, we investigate the glass-ceiling hypothesis which states that Asian Americans face a net racial disadvantage in obtaining employment in executive/managerial positions in large firms.  We pool the Current Populations Surveys from 1994 to 2002, and estimate multinomial logistic regression models to provide systematic evidence about the glass-ceiling hypothesis which heretofore has not been investigated with nationally representative data using multivariate statistical methods.  Our analysis also investigates whether Asian Americans are disadvantaged in terms of employment in the unionized sector for blue-collar occupations.	Arthur	 Sakamoto	Keng-Loong	 Yap
2004	121	Demography of Asian Americans and Asian Canadians	Why Do Skilled Women and Men Emigrating from China to Canada Get Bad Jobs?	We examine the career achievements of 50 professional couples that immigrated from China to Canada. We contrast past careers in their country of origin with those in the host country several years after immigration. We further compare types of barriers for different occupational subgroups, and finally, the performance of women and men in the two countries. We frame the paper in terms of competing theories of human capital and institutional theories. Human capital theory explains their past career achievements in China, but explains poorly why job contenders are shunted away from fields in which credentials are entrenched. The institutional framework explains employees' career attainment in terms of social recognition of career paths. Institutional concepts do better in explaining the structural barriers to achievement that affect those in the controlled professions, and especially women. We discuss data on other skilled  ethnic groups in Canada, and US immigration policies for skilled workers.	Janet	W. Salaff	Arent	 Greve
2004	122	SES and Child Mortality	Socioeconomic Status and Child Mortality: An Illustration Using Housing and Household Characteristics from African Census Data	Housing characteristics and household possessions such as sources of water, type of toilet facilities, housing construction materials, and household possessions like radio, television, as well as animal possessions, often reflect socioeconomic status of households, especially in developing countries. It is possible therefore, to use these variables to proxy for household wealth or socioeconomic status in developing countries where income data are lacking. This is because the type of houses people reside in and their possessions tend to speak to their economic ability or purchasing power. We created a composite poverty index from these variables and examined its association with childhood mortality in three southern African countries. The results are reassuringly consistent with expectation, both simply by examining the mean distribution of the variables by the socioeconomic groups and by the relationship of these groups to childhood mortality. The chances of mortality decreased consistently with higher levels of the index.	Ayaga	A. Bawah	Tukufu	 Zuberi
2004	122	SES and Child Mortality	Can We Reduce the Level of Both Average Rate and Inequity in Infant Mortality? The Case of Colombia	Previous studies for Colombia show important infant mortality inequalities by socioeconomic status. This document advances in that direction. It first measures socioeconomic inequalities in infant mortality, estimates the socioeconomic and demographic determinants for infant mortality using a Cox hazard model with time-varying variables, and then simulates the impact of particular public policy interventions on the level of both infant mortality rates and its inequity. It uses secondary data from 1995 and 2000 Demographic and Health Surveys. An asset index was constructed as socioeconomic status indicator. Extreme groups and the concentration index are used as key inequality indicator. Results indicate that development of appropriate sanitary installations, the promotion of education and the promotion of the use of health services during pregnancy or at delivery would lead directly to a reduction in both the level of infant mortality and its inequities.	Carmen	E. Florez
2004	122	SES and Child Mortality	Socioeconomic Determinants of Exposure to Multiple Risk Factors for Child Mortality	Child mortality has received renewed attention as a part of the United Nation's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The contributions of specific risk factors (e.g. undernutrition and poor water, sanitation, and hygiene) to child mortality have been documented in different world regions. However, many childhood deaths are caused by multiple risk factors which may be concurrently higher in disadvantaged groups. The socioeconomic patterns of multi-risk exposure (i.e. causes) and mortality (i.e. outcomes) have not been adequately and comparatively studied. Using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys, this paper presents an analysis of socioeconomic gradients of childhood mortality and its major risk factors for 55 countries. We also provide a detailed analysis of similarities and differences of such gradients within and between countries and regions. This is an important step in considering how wealth or income may interact with other factors, from geography to policy, to affect child survival.	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Margaret	 Hogan	Cecilia	 Vidal	Majid	 Ezzati
2004	122	SES and Child Mortality	National Mortality Trends and Differentials in South Africa	During the apartheid system South Africa was a racially segregated society, with major inequalities along inter-ethnic lines. This perpetuated racial and geographic inequalities in health and socio-economic status in the population. This paper aims to demonstrate how the history of South Africa continues to have an effect on health differentials as measured by mortality. This is done by examining differentials and trends in adult and childhood mortality during the period 1987 to 1998 using data from national household surveys and census 1996. The main focus is on examining trends in mortality by sex, area of residence and population group. The results show that vast racial and geographic inequalities in health persist over time, with the African population having the worst health outcomes compared to other groups. Furthermore areas that were previously homelands continue to have poor outcomes.	Nompumelelo	B. Nzimande	Suraya	 Dawad	Akim	 Mturi
2004	123	Gender, Sexuality, and Health	Sociocultural Prohibitions against Sexual Activity among Teenagers in a Chinese City	This paper examines several case studies that exemplify how sociocultural prohibitions were effective in preventing sexual activity among teenagers in a Chinese city, even in the absence of sex education in schools and homes. Romantic relationships between teenagers were prohibited at Chinese high schools, junior high schools, and elementary schools. Even the student romances that did develop usually did not lead to sex. Most teenagers had little unsupervised time or space in which to be sexually active. Parents carefully guarded their children's chastity because those known to have had premarital sex were seen as less desirable on the marriage market than those presumed to be virgins. This was especially true for women, but also true for men. For all these reasons, teen pregnancies were rare in China, even though China's fertility limitation policies, family planning education, and distribution of contraceptives focused almost entirely on married adults.	Vanessa	 Fong
2004	123	Gender, Sexuality, and Health	Sexual Stigma and Infant Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa	Several studies have demonstrated that infants born outside of marriage face higher mortality rates than do infants born within marriage (e.g. Arntzen et al., 1996; Gaudino, Jenkins and Rochat, 1999; Holt et al., 1997). In much of sub-Saharan Africa, however, premarital conception leads more often to bridal pregnancy than to premarital birth. This paper argues that the consequences of premarital conception depend on the local gender context, and particularly on the degree of stigma associated with premarital sexuality. Using data from African DHSs that include ethnic identifiers in conjunction with ethnographic literature, I show that infants born after bridal pregnancy have significantly higher mortality rates than do infants conceived within marriage in societies intolerant of premarital sex, whereas in more tolerant groups the rates do not differ. By contrast, children borne outside of marriage have higher mortality rates than do children borne within marriage in both kinds of societies.	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2004	123	Gender, Sexuality, and Health	Premarital Sex, Procreation, and Problems of HIV Risk in Nigeria	In Nigeria, research has documented a significant disparity between people's knowledge about HIV/AIDS and the extent to which they behave in ways to protect themselves. Combining data from a survey of 863 adolescent and unmarried young adults, in-depth interviews, and participant observation, this paper aims to explain some of this discrepancy. The paper argues that young migrants' sexual and contraception decisions are made in relation to norms about gender and values concerning procreation at least as much as they are in relation to fears of disease. Assessments of current and potential partners, choices about whether or not to have sex, and decisions about whether or not to use condoms are affected by shared cultural values regarding the importance of parenthood. These cultural conceptions of parenthood are gendered and put men and women in very different negotiating positions with regard to sex and contraception.	Daniel	 Smith
2004	123	Gender, Sexuality, and Health	Where the Streetwalk Ends: Fuzzy Boundaries and Shifting Risks among Women Sex Workers in Antananarivo, Madagascar	This presentation will focus on the results of an in-depth study of the social organization and hierarchy of women's sex work in the capital city of Madagascar.  Research uncovered three general categories of sex work in Antananarivo including ambany (low), antontoniny (middle), and ambony (high).  Women in these categories negotiate the meanings and boundaries of sex work within unique social and institutional circumstances.  Ambany women are perceived slave descendants, and negotiate for survival, antontoniny women face law enforcement exposure and discovery by neighbors, and ambony women fluctuate between seeking money and romance.  Their worlds are described in their own words, conveying these complex relationships and fluid boundaries.  The health and social risks they endure both as women, and specifically as women sex workers in each social position are discussed.  Finally, there are program implications for women's health relevant to this context as well as beyond it.	Kirsten	 Stoebenau	Constance	A. Nathanson
2004	124	Parents and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Father Absence, Childhood Stressors, and Reproductive Maturation in South Africa	The hypothesis that father absence and childhood psychosocial stress influence age at menarche, first sexual intercourse, and first pregnancy is tested using data from Wave I of the Cape Area Panel Study, which collected data on sexual behavior and childhood environment from a representative sample of 2,215 girls ages 14-22 in Cape Town, South Africa. Using Cox proportional hazards modeling to control for censoring, the results find weak support for the hypothesis. Father absence has no effect on menarche, and only weak effects on first sex and first pregnancy. Childhood stressors have no effects on age at menarche. Of the childhood stressors examined, only the presence of alcohol and/or drug abuse in the childhood household has a consistent association with earlier first sex and first pregnancy. In general, father absence and childhood stress have no effects on reproductive behavior for blacks, and the largest effects are seen for coloureds.	Kermyt	G. Anderson
2004	124	Parents and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	The Role of Parent-Adolescent Communication on the Sexual Behaviour of Young People in South Africa	This paper addresses the role of parent-adolescent communication on the sexual behaviour of young people in South Africa using data from 1435 adolescents and their parents or guardians in the 2001 South African National Youth survey. Descriptive analyses and logistic regression, controlling for socio-demographic factors addresses the following questions: To what extent is parent-adolescent communication taking place? Is parent-adolescent communication associated with lower levels of sexual risk behaviours among adolescents? Does the content of communication influence sexual behaviour?  Is there a consensus in the reports given by parents and adolescents about communication? Do the attitudes of parents towards open communication on reproductive health issues influence their propensity to have discussions with their children. These findings enable us to draw conclusions for programme development as debates on risk avoidance have continued to emphasise the role of communication to promote safer sex.	Ntsiki	 Manzini	Audrey	 Pettifor	Helen	 Rees
2004	124	Parents and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Sexual Attitudes and First Sexual Experiences among Youth in Mexico: Are Families a Source of Change or Tradition?	This study examines how families shape the sexual attitudes and first sexual experiences of young Mexican men and women coming of age in the 21st Century. Results suggest that the parental family significantly affects young men and women's sexual attitudes and first sexual experiences. Indeed, the type of families youth belong to, how much control parents exert over the lives of their adolescent children, what techniques they use to discipline their children, and how much they talk to their children about sex, impacts the sexual attitudes and choices youth make about their own sexuality. Through these mechanisms families can facilitate the maintenance or transformation of sexual values and attitudes. It appears then, that in the case of Mexico, families continue to play a pivotal role in shaping adolescent sexuality. These effects, however, appear to be stronger for the case of sexual attitudes than for the case of sexual behavior.	Elisa	 Munoz-Franco
2004	125	Maternal Health and Mortality II	Access vs. Traditional Beliefs: Use of Health Professionals for Obstetric Care in the Kassena-Nankana District of Northern Ghana	This study explored the role of access vs. traditional beliefs in decision-making to seek obstetric care with health professionals. 18 purposively sampled homogenous groups in 15 communities participated in focus group discussions on traditional beliefs, barriers to the use of health professionals, and ways to improve obstetric care. All the groups were knowledgeable about life-threatening signs and symptoms of pregnancy and labor complications. Decisions on the place of delivery were made after the onset of labor. Accessibility (cost, distance, transport, availability of health facilities, and attitude of nurses) were major barriers, whereas traditional beliefs were reported to be less significant barriers. Informants made pertinent recommendations on how to improve obstetric services in the district. These findings demonstrate that even in this district where African Traditional Religion is the religion of a third of the population, compared to a national average of 4 percent, access was perceived as the main barrier.	Samuel	L. Mills	Jane	T. Bertrand
2004	125	Maternal Health and Mortality II	Poverty and the Evolving Public/Private Divide in Institutional Delivery Care in Egypt and India	Neither the debate on the benefits of public/private mix in maternity provision nor the evidence on poverty-constrained access to skilled attendance have addressed the effects of poverty in a maternity service environment which is increasingly run by Private For Profit or Private Not For Profit providers.  In two countries with an increasing share of institutional deliveries, mainly taken up by the private sector, we investigate the determinants of private delivery care focusing on the role of household wealth as an indicator of poverty.  Using Demographic and Health Survey data from successive surveys in Egypt and contrasting states of India, we use regression models to investigate the effect of poverty on delivery options over time.  Results indicate firstly that private delivery care is increasing rapidly and secondly that poverty influences delivery care choice even after controlling for other factors.  Despite this, an increasing proportion of those from the poorest wealth decile are accessing private care.	Zoe	 Matthews	Oona	 Campbell	Fiifi	 Amoako Johnson
2004	125	Maternal Health and Mortality II	Correlates of Maternal Mortality in Adama Town and Environ: Evidence from Hospital Records	The socio-demographic and pathogenic correlates of maternal mortality among 16,279 women admitted for maternal causes in Adama hospital, in central Ethiopia, over the seven-year period, 1993-2000 were investigated. The results showed that, age and gravidity of the women had no significant influence on the risk of maternal mortality among the study population. However, parity and residence exhibited strong predictive influence. Pathogenic factors like hemorrhage, infection, hypertensive disorder of pregnancy, malaria, obstructed/prolonged labour, anemia and abortion, constituted the major predictors of maternal mortality in the study. Interestingly, abortion was found to reduce the risk of maternal death among the study population. It was surmised that the availability and effectiveness of post-abortion care in the hospital would largely explain the result. The study thus, provides an insight to the important correlates of maternal mortality in the area around the study hospital, which those concerned with improving maternal health might find useful.	Samuel	I. Kalu	Habtamu	 Hika
2004	125	Maternal Health and Mortality II	Mortality by Time since Pregnancy in Rural Bangladesh	Pregnancy and postpartum are often represented as vulnerable periods in a woman's life. It is thought that the adverse effects associated with pregnancy extend up to six weeks postpartum, although longer term effects have also been suggested, particularly after numerous closely-spaced pregnancies. Epidemiological evidence in support of these effects is weak. The objective of this work is to improve our understanding of the relationship between pregnancy and mortality in the months and years after birth, by comparing mortality rates during pregnancy with mortality rates by time since pregnancy and in never-pregnant women in a rural population in Bangladesh. Mortality is lowest during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy and, as expected, is highest around the time of delivery. Mortality decreases markedly over the first six weeks postpartum and remains low in the long-term. This study provides little evidence for medium or long-term adverse effects of pregnancy in this population.	Lisa	S. Hurt	Carine	 Ronsmans
2004	127	Mathematical Demography	The Relationship between Period and Cohort Life Expectancy	We map the life expectancy observed in periods to specific birth cohorts. We find that the life expectancy of the current period in low mortality populations is about equal to that of cohorts born 50 years earlier. The period lag behind cohorts has been growing over time. A century ago, period life expectancy was only about 10 or 20 years behind cohort life expectancy. A century from now, the lag will be some 60 or 70 years. We present empirical findings and a mathematical model explaining cohort-period lags. We find that lags do not depend so much on the pace of mortality improvement as on a measure related to the entropy of the life table. Our approach offers an alternative to Bongaarts and Feeney's tempo-adjusted life expectancy and solves a problem set forth by Ryder in his classic work on tempo-cohort translation.	Joshua	R. Goldstein	Kenneth	 Wachter
2004	127	Mathematical Demography	A Population with Continually Declining Mortality	Many countries have recently experienced sustained declines in mortality, and the paper presents a new model for analyzing such declines.  Every year there is one birth in the model.  Mortality increases exponentially over age at rate b, while decreasing exponentially over time at rate c.  The model population is strikingly linear in its behavior over time.  The size of the population is virtually the same as its average age at death, and both increase annually by c/b.  Period life expectancy also increases linearly by c/b, while the average age of the population increases by c/(2b).  Preserving a constant ratio of persons in the economically active ages to those in the retirement ages implies an increase in the normal age of retirement of about 6.8c years per year.  The ability to accommodate varying rates of decline and the linearity of the changes enhance the model's potential for analyzing steadily increasing longevity.	Robert	 Schoen	Stefan	H. Jonsson	Paula	 Tufis
2004	127	Mathematical Demography	Long Range Trends in Adult Mortality: Models and Projection Methods	This study has two objectives: (1) to test a new model for the pattern of change in age-specific adult mortality rates, and (2) to develop a new methodology for projecting future trends in adult mortality. The first part of the paper presents a test of the goodness-of-fit of the logistic model for the force of mortality using data from the Human Mortality Data Bank for females and males aged 25-109 in 14 populations. The results from this exercise suggest a new version of the logistic model which is called the shifting logistic model, because the senescent mortality function is assumed to shift to higher ages over time. This approach contrasts with the conventional view that mortality declines as adult life expectancy rises. The last part of the paper proposes a new projection method based on the shifting mortality model. The proposed method is compared with the widely used Lee-Carter procedure.	John	 Bongaarts
2004	127	Mathematical Demography	The Evolution of the Life Cycle: An Integration of Competing Theories	Hamilton's classic mathematical theory of the evolution of the life cycle derived its results by differentiating the stable population equation of mathematical demography, considering only direct effects and ignoring costs and tradeoffs. Another approach finds the optimally shaped life cycle subject to assumed bio-engineering constraints, emphasizing the costs and tradeoffs. In a third approach, genetic theories stress either the accumulation of deleterious mutations affecting different ages, or antagonistic pleiotropy, which occurs when a gene has a beneficial effect at one age but an adverse effect at another age. In a fourth approach, I recently added production, consumption, intergenerational transfers, and density dependence to the Hamilton theory. Here, I will integrate these four approaches in a single analysis, show how they are interrelated, and derive new results.	Ronald	 Lee
2004	128	Consumer Demographics and Market Research	Geodemographic Segmentation: New Methods, New Clusters	This paper describes the data, methodological framework, and results of a new geodemographic cluster system for the US. PSYTE U.S. Advantage -- represents a team effort involving extensive processing of Census 2000 and other databases culminating in a typology of U.S. neighborhoods. The paper includes a discussion of geodemographic fundamentals as well as the rational for developing neighborhood clusters in a consumer marketing context. The primary theoretical focus is on the use and interpretation of pattern recognition methodologies to make assignments of small areas (census block groups) to clusters. A variety of databases were used, however, the Census 2000 SF3 data was the primary source. The paper discusses the use of neural network techniques along with hierarchical clustering methodologies to generate the final cluster solution. The paper includes a discussion of results of field tests in which the cluster system was used in a consumer marketing environment.	Thomas	G. Exter	Ian	 Mosley
2004	128	Consumer Demographics and Market Research	PrimeSeg: Development of a Geodemographic Classification System	Decision Demographics has developed a national tract-level geodemographic segmentation system classifying persons age 60 and older.  Currently offered geodemographic systems are powerful yet these tools have never been specifically adapted to identify and target aging Americans beyond neighborhoods that are dominated by older people, particularly retirement communities of various sorts.  This paper presents a brief overview of trends within the commercial geodemographic marketplace and how PrimeSeg fills a need in the current data market.  Then it traces the processes, problems and opportunities encountered in the development of a nationwide neighborhood segmentation system.  Topics included are a discussion of data issues and problems encountered in the development and testing of the segmentation system to challenges in designing and developing a system that meet the expectations of today's data consumer.  The paper concludes with how this initial segmentation product development will be reworked, updated and recast with the 2000 Census data.	Tom	E. Godfrey	Stephen	J. Tordella
2004	128	Consumer Demographics and Market Research	Targeting the Low-Income Consumer: Financial Services	This paper describes a consumer segmentation system based on the use of financial products and services by low-income households.  While much prior work has been focused on segmentation of the affluent market, this is, to our knowledge, the first attempt to segment consumers at the other end of the income distribution.  The work is also novel in its consideration of the use of fringe banking services, such as check cashing and payday lending.  We find great variety in the consumer profiles of low-income households, ranging from the unbanked, who have no relationships with traditional financial institutions, to the cosmopolitans, who use complex combinations of overlapping services provided by fringe and mainstream institutions.  Our analysis is based on a survey of 1500 low-income households in Chicago, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC, the largest survey ever conducted for this income segment.	Christopher	 Berry
2004	128	Consumer Demographics and Market Research	Small-Area Market Potential of Hospitals	By analyzing annual hospital inpatient survey data, we can create propensity scores by age and sex for broad procedure categories by  for each region of the United States.  These scores may be joined with national household mailing lists (based on the attributes of the residents) then aggregated at very small levels of geography to assess hospital market potential and utilization rates.  We found that by aggregating hospital services to 18 high-level hospital service lines, and stratifying patients into 69 age-sex categories, we are able to successfully calculate a series of patient propensity scores.  These scores were used to rank patient likelihood for using hospital services, then were joined with a consumer household mailing list and tested against actual hospital inpatient data in North Carolina.  The results showed that certain service lines propensity scores performed exceptionally well and warranted further study.	Thomas	M. Bryan
2004	129	SES and Health across the Life Course	Health Selection in the Stratification Process: The Effect of Childhood Health on Educational Attainment, Labor Force Participation, and Earnings	This study investigates the role of health in the stratification process by examining the impact of childhood health on educational and occupational status attainment, adult health, labor force participation, and earnings using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). It also tests whether childhood health acts as a mechanism through which SES is transferred across generations. The results show health in childhood to be an important determinant of educational attainment, occupational status (men only), and adult health. Through these mechanisms, childhood health exerts a significant impact on labor force participation and earnings. The findings further highlight the need to move beyond the notion that health selection and social causation necessarily be seen as mutually exclusive causal explanations of socioeconomic differentials in health. It instead views the SES/health relationship as the result of a truly interactive process over the life course embedded within larger processes of social stratification and health attainment.	Steven	 Haas
2004	129	SES and Health across the Life Course	Early Socioeconomic Disadvantage and the Cumulative Impact of Socioeconomic Status over the Life Course on Adult Health	SES is hypothesized to affect health over the life course in two ways.  First, SES is thought to have cumulative effects on health, regardless of when adversity is experienced in the life course.  In addition to those cumulative effects, it is argued that the experience of adverse socioeconomic conditions early in the life course is more detrimental to adult health than later disadvantage, since it is reflected in lower education opportunities, which in turn restrict achieved status and health in adulthood.  Using data from the NLSY79, this study will therefore examine both the cumulative impact of life course socioeconomic status to health as well as the moderating contribution of early socioeconomic status at different life stages to this relationship.  Findings suggest that SES does have cumulative effects on health through the life course and that individuals who experienced poverty in late adolescence have a higher return to employment.	Amélie	 Quesnel-Vallée
2004	129	SES and Health across the Life Course	The Health Consequences of Debt: Evidence from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics	In the United States, most work in the area of socioeconomic differentials in health and mortality is based on various measures of income and education, but there is growing concern that such measures do not fully capture important aspects of socioeconomic status.  Analyses of potential relationships between health and other financial measures, such as income changes over time, wealth, and debt, may provide evidence for the singular importance of these specific measures and, further, may illuminate the mechanisms underlying more general patterns.  This paper looks at the relationship between health status and debt.  Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), I examine whether debt accumulation is associated with self-reported health levels, controlling for income and education.  I find evidence that that debt may be an important predictor of health beyond other measures of socioeconomic status including education and income.	Adair	 Crosley
2004	129	SES and Health across the Life Course	Financial Hardship, the Accumulation of Wealth, and Health Disparities at Older Ages	With the goal of better understanding health disparities at older ages, this paper examines the impact of past financial hardship on race differences in wealth and health in later life.  We argue that persistent financial hardship is likely to hinder lifetime earnings and the accumulation of assets, ultimately placing older adults at higher risk for chronic disease and disability.  To the extent that whites and blacks have faced different levels of hardship and accumulated different levels of wealth, we expect these factors to help explain the persistent race gap in health.  Our analysis is based on data from the Aging Stress and Health (ASH) study which interviewed over 1100 white and black adults ages 65 years and over, residing in the Washington, DC metropolitan area.  We utilize retrospective reports of financial hardship over the life course, and current measures of accumulated wealth to predict current physical and mental health outcomes.	Joan	R. Kahn	Elena	 Fazio
2004	130	Methodological Issues in Fertility Research	Deliberate Control in a Natural Fertility Population: Southern Sweden, 1766-1865	The paper analyses fertility adjustment in a rural population characterized by natural fertility, by using survival analysis on a longitudinal dataset at the individual level. Non-parity specific control is measured though the fertility response to short-term economic stress. In the landless group, fertility responded quite strongly to grain prices. The response was neither dependent on number of children previously born, nor on sex composition. The seasonality patter in the response shows that the fertility effect was strongest less than six months after the harvest, which points to the conclusion that the response was deliberate. People foresaw bad times already in the late spring and early summer and planned their fertility accordingly. This evidence shows that fertility was deliberately controlled in years of economic stress, and highlights the importance of not only focusing on parity-specific measures, but also on measures affecting birth intervals independent of parity.	Tommy	 Bengtsson	Martin	 Dribe
2004	130	Methodological Issues in Fertility Research	Childbearing Intentions: Beyond 'Yes' and 'No' Answers	This paper provides a critical examination of the validity of survey indicators measuring birth intentions. The empirical ground for the study is a suitable combination of survey data and in-depth interviews with Italian women of parity ranging from 0 to 4 and aged 30-39. We triangulate data on birth intentions collected in the year 2000 for the Indagine Sociale Lombarda with birth intentions expressed a few months later by the same women during the qualitative phase of the study. We are able to check whether birth intentions are realised three years later thank to a focused follow-up questionnaire on fertility intentions and behaviour. This rich and integrated data-set enable us to compare the two sources of information on intentions and to relate them to subsequent behavior, to formulate hypotheses about their divergences, and to propose a multi- dimensional indicator for childbearing intentions	Laura	 Bernardi
2004	130	Methodological Issues in Fertility Research	Simple Approaches to Estimating Births Averted Due to Contraception at the National Level	Background: Estimates of births averted were generated frequently in the 1970s to assess family planning program effectiveness. However, such estimates have not been recently available. This paper compares estimates of births averted from several approaches applied to recent national data.  Methodology: Three simple methods for estimating births averted are presented.  The first method is based on the relationship between the general fertility rate (GFR) and contraceptive prevalence rate for all women (CPR(AW)). The second is based on the relationship between total fertility rate (TFR) and CPR(AW), while the third method uses Bongaarts' proximate determinants model. Results: Estimates of births averted and the percent change in births in the absence of contraception, based on the three methods, are fairly consistent. Conclusion: The three methods provide reasonable estimates of births averted in the presence or absence of contraceptive use by national populations.	Li	 Liu	Stan	 Becker	Amy	 Tsui
2004	130	Methodological Issues in Fertility Research	Becoming a Parent in East Germany in the 1990's. An Event-History Analysis of the Transition to Motherhood and Fatherhood with Psychological Covariates	This paper presents results from a recently conducted dissertation study on the psychological determinants of fertility differentials in East Germany in the 1990s. We test the power of psychological covariates in an event-history model of first birth intensities and examine their impact against other groups of covariates. In order to structure our investigation and to relate it to current theory and research in fertility studies, we draw on a recent theoretical framework for fertility by de Bruijn (1999). Results convincingly show that psychological covariates (wishes and fears, coping-styles) do matter as explaining factors of the transition to parenthood in multi-covariate models. We find evidence that it is justified to grant a central place to people's personal considerations in an integrative macro-micro-model of fertility. A crucial point of our discussion deals with the strong sex-differentials in our results and we discuss them as indications of particular gender relations in East Germany.	Holger	R. von der Lippe
2004	131	Fertility Preferences	Fertility Intention Emergence, Persistence, and Process during Late Adolescence and Early Adulthood: Voluntary Childlessness as a Special Case	This study examines adolescents' reports of how many children they expect to have in adulthood and compares adolescents across various categories to (1) determine whether adolescents expecting to have zero children differ from other adolescents who expect to have children in terms of educational and marital goals in addition to marital and parental family formation values; and (2) determine whether adolescents who report expecting to have no children typologically resemble willingly childless adults. This study provides an alternative perspective on adolescent expectant fertility to the traditionally studied teenage pregnancy and contributes to our knowledge about childlessness and its underlying processes in an understudied population of persons who will constitute an increasing proportion of adults foregoing parenthood.	Jacinda	K. Dariotis
2004	131	Fertility Preferences	Fertility Intentions: Postpone or Reject a Birth? The Case of Bulgaria	Fertility in Bulgaria marked a swift drop during the last decade. Quantum dropped considerably, and the tempo effect was significant. A recent survey makes possible the study of fertility intentions of social, economic, and ideational factors, uncertainty, aspects of social capital. Fertility intentions are specified for having versus not having a child of a specific parity, as well as for the timing of an intended birth: within the next 2 years or later. These two specifications are analogous to level and timing of fertility. Problems of theory and adequate modeling are discussed. Findings based on a series of logistic regressions indicate how determinants of fertility intentions differentiate by parity of the intended birth (first or second) as well as by the intended timing of the birth.	Dimiter	 Philipov
2004	131	Fertility Preferences	Attitudes that Differentiate Alternative Family Size Ideals	Taking advantage of both a national survey on families (Canadian General Social Survey 2000 on Family) and a local qualitative survey (Orientations to Relationships and Childbearing over the Life Course), this paper analyses the attitudes that differentiate respondents in types of orientations regarding family questions.  While there is strong prevalence of two children as the desired family size, it is important to differentiate the sets of attitudes that are related to alternate family size preferences. It is also useful to differentiate persons who do not intend to have children. Preliminary analysis shows, for instance, that people who say they would stay together for the sake of the children are less likely to indicate that they do not expect to have children, as are people who attach less importance to marriage in contrast with relationships as a basis for having a happy life.	Roderic	 Beaujot	Amir	 Erfani
2004	131	Fertility Preferences	An Analysis of Intended Parity and Ideal Family Size in the United States, 1970-2002	Disagreement exists regarding whether intended parity in the United States is stable at approximately 2, or dropping below this mark.  A framework designed to explain the historic pattern in fertility variation developed by Bongaarts and elaborated by Morgan assumes intended parity is an important by stable phenomena.  Using repeated cross-sectional data from the GSS and CPS, we examine levels of intended parity and ideal family size in the U.S. over a 30-year period.  We argue that long-standing norms dictate the intended parity of young women in the United States, by both discouraging childlessness and one-child families, and regarding large families as incompatible with good parenting. Hence, the fertility intentions of young women have remained roughly the same over highly variable periods.  The implications of these trends and how they relate to overall fertility are discussed.	Kellie	J. Hagewen	S.	Philip  Morgan
2004	132	Sexually Transmitted Infections	Understanding High Levels of Sexually Transmitted Infections in the United States: Do Economic and Cultural Factors Predict Having an Undiagnosed Herpes Simplex Type 2 Infection?	The United States has among the highest levels of sexually transmitted infections in the developed world. The primary explanations cited in the literature are differential access to healthcare and culture related to sex and sexual health. In this paper, I analyze within-country differentials to evaluate whether these factors could contribute to the higher STI rates in the US, working through the mechanism of delayed or reduced diagnosis and treatment of STIs. I use data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to assess whether healthcare access and culture, as well as demographic and behavioral factors shown to increase risk in the US, are related to having an undiagnosed herpes simplex type 2 infection. By providing insight into risk factors for having an undiagnosed herpes infection in the US, this study advances understanding of why the US has higher rates of herpes and other STIs than most other developed countries.	Kirsten	 Smith
2004	132	Sexually Transmitted Infections	Sexual Histories: Does It Matter Who Is Asking?	Objective: To compare basic data on sexual behavior gathered in 9 different U.S. surveys, all of which used nationally representative samples.  Methods: Descriptive analysis and permutation tests are used to assess whether studies have significantly different estimates for the number of partners reported, controlling for the race, age, sex and marital status composition of the sample.  Topcoding, year of data collection and survey administration were investigated as potential contributors to differences in reporting.  Results: Studies showed significant differences in reported numbers of partners within demographic subgroups.  Effects were smaller in magnitude than those associated with the demographic attributes themselves.  There were no significant effects of study year.  Study design factors that significantly influence responses include top-coding and mode of administration.  In contrast to previous research findings, face to face interviews generated higher estimates of sexual partners than either telephone surveys or SAQs.  This trend held for both males and females.	Deven	 Hamilton
2004	132	Sexually Transmitted Infections	Sociodemographic Correlates of STD Biomarker Outcomes in a National Sample of Young Adults	This paper uses data from the recently released Wave III of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to investigate the effects of a comprehensive set of sociodemographic characteristics on risk of STD using biomarker measurements.  We begin by estimating separate equations for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomoniasis and then treat the problem of correlated outcomes from a multilevel modeling perspective (i.e. tests are nested within individuals).	William	M. Mason	Dawn	 Upchurch	Edward	 Hook
2004	133	Understanding Domestic Violence in Developing Countries	Domestic Violence in Nicaragua: The Roles of Individuals, Families, and Communities in the Cessation of Abuse	Because domestic violence is associated with negative outcomes for affected women and their children, it is important to investigate not only the factors associated with the occurrence of violence in the household, but also those factors associated with a cessation of violence, in order to better conceptualize the formulation of programs and policies aimed at ameliorating domestic violence. Domestic violence is a phenomenon that is determined at several societal levels, such that individuals, families and communities all contribute to a woman's experience or non-experience of intimate partner violence.  This analysis seeks to determine what factors allow for a cessation of violence once it has begun. Using data from the Nicaragua Demographic and Health Survey, this multivariate analysis finds that while families and communities contribute to the occurrence of domestic violence against women, it is primarily the characteristics of women themselves that are associated with bringing an end to violence.	Kiersten	 Johnson
2004	133	Understanding Domestic Violence in Developing Countries	A Feminist Study of Domestic Violence in Rural India	The focus of this paper is domestic violence among women in rural India. The question asked by this study is: How do regional, family, and personal characteristics of a woman affect her likelihood of being hit by her husband? Using logistic regression on the 1999 DHS data for India, I found clear regional and religious variability in the reported rates of domestic violence. As expected, higher levels of socio-economic status and education are powerful forces that dissuade violence against women. Contrary to predicted results, however, being in a nuclear family structure, having higher decision-making powers, and labor force participation increased the risk of women being assaulted by their husbands. These surprising findings, taken together, require an elaboration of the feminist analyses of motivations of domestic violence and suggest that the relationship between power and violence is not a clear-cut one.	Niveditha	 Menon	Michael	P. Johnson
2004	133	Understanding Domestic Violence in Developing Countries	Does More Dowry Make Life Better for Brides? A Test of Bequest Theories of Dowry in Rural Bangladesh	In recent years, dowry levels have skyrocketed to previously unforeseen levels.  Among Hindus in northern India dowry can amount to several year's worth of household income (Deolalikar and Rao, 1998).  Among Muslims in Bangladesh and Hindus in South India dowry has become commonplace whereas the practice did not exist a generation ago (Amin and Cain, 1997).  The institution of dowry is a considerable financial burden for the families of brides. It has been widely criticized, socially maligned, and legally banned, yet it persists.  Now some recent economic writings have begun to suggest that dowry is a bequest or a pre-mortem inheritance implying it persists because it is good for the bride.  Using longitudinal panel data from an adolescent study in rural Bangladesh, this paper explores the association between dowry amount and post-marriage time use patterns, social life and prevalence of abuse to test the bequest theory of dowry.	Luciana	 Suran	Sajeda	 Amin
2004	133	Understanding Domestic Violence in Developing Countries	Sexual Jealousy and Intimate Partner Violence in Urban China: A Population-Based Survey	This paper examines the links between sexual jealousy and intimate partner violence, with data from a nationally representative survey of China completed in 2000.  Among urban respondents age 20-64 during the previous year, 6% of women and 4% of men were hit by their partner without retaliation, and another 2% of couples experienced mutual hitting.  Women's empowerment reduces their risk of being hit, even though those with a laid-off or unemployed husband face a higher risk.  The results demonstrate that women are jealous as much as or more so than men and share similar triggers of jealousy with men.  Jealousy exacerbates hitting for both men and women in a reactive pattern ¨C the jealous partner gets hit.	Tianfu	 Wang	Edward	O. Laumann
2004	134	Adolescent Health and Obesity in the U.S.	Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Reliability and Validity of Self-Reported Health Status among U.S. Adolescents	This study examines the reliability and validity of standard self-reported health measures among adolescents.  Using data from Wave 1 of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (N = 13,275), this study compares the internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and construct validity of survey-based health assessments among non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Asian-American, Hispanic, Native American, and Multi-Racial adolescents. Self-reported morbidity demonstrates an acceptable level of internal consistency (Alpha = .775) but low test-retest reliability (Rho =.393). Likewise, self-rated health demonstrates poor test-retest reliability (Kappa =.272). However, self-rated health and self-reported morbidity operate in predictable ways and are found to be valid measures of physical health status. These results are not similar across race/ethnic groups. These findings suggest that adolescent's self-reported health status is temporally and contextually specific and population health estimates should not rely on data obtained from survey questionnaires administered to children and adolescents.	Jason	D. Boardman
2004	134	Adolescent Health and Obesity in the U.S.	Family Background and Adolescent Weight: An Examination of Social and Genetic Influences	This project seeks to better analyze the family-level social factors associated with adolescent weight after accounting for genetic influences.  We model adolescents' body-mass index (BMI) using sibling resemblance models and the genetic sample of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health.  By conducting sibling model analyses in a structural equation framework, we account for unmeasured family background characteristics and determine what proportion of the variation in adolescent weight is due to variation between families and variation within families.  We estimate separate sibling models for each sibling-pair type (i.e., monozygotic twins, dizygotic twins, full siblings, half siblings) and test for differences in the influence of various family background factors across sibling-pair types.	Molly	A. Martin	Gary	 Sandefur
2004	134	Adolescent Health and Obesity in the U.S.	Obesity, Sociodemographic Characteristics, and Quality of Life among a Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescents	The prevalence of adolescent obesity has increased substantially over the past two decades, raising concerns about quality of life (QOL) issues.  Recent clinically-based observations suggest that obese adolescents are comparable to children with cancer in terms of physical and psychosocial QOL.  To validate this claim, we examine the QOL of adolescents in the nationally representative National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health.  Our findings indicate that obese adolescents are more likely than normal weight adolescents to report poor overall health and physical limitations.  However, we only find evidence of poor psychosocial QOL among certain subgroups of obese adolescents.  For instance, contrary to existing theory, only younger obese adolescents (ages 12-14) exhibited significantly poorer QOL than their non-obese peers.  We examine models stratified by gender, race, and social class to further elucidate which groups of obese adolescents are at greatest risk of poor QOL and discuss the implications of these results.	Eric	 Reither	Karen	 Swallen	Ann	 Meier
2004	134	Adolescent Health and Obesity in the U.S.	Relationships between Obesity, Romantic Involvement, and Sexual Behavior in Adolescents	The role of body weight in affecting a host of fertility-related behaviors, including dating, intercourse, contraceptive use, and pregnancy, has been little studied by demographers.  This is surprising given the importance to adolescents of appearance in general and weight in particular.   Because of the stigmatization of obesity, we hypothesized that heavier boys and girls are less likely to date and have sex than healthy-weight adolescents. We examined these relationships using two large, nationally representative data sets: the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 Cohort (NLSY97). Overall, our results confirm our prediction that heavier adolescents, especially girls, are less likely to become romantically involved, to date, and to have sex.	Kara	 Joyner	John	 Cawley	Jeffery	 Sobal
2004	135	Abortion I	Abortion among Non-School Youths in Nigeria	Based on 452 interviews, this paper aims to explain the high incidence of abortion among young women in southeastern Nigeria, focusing particularly on the experiences of girls who have terminated their school careers. Two questions are explored. First, what are the circumstances that produce so many unwanted pregnancies among adolescents and unmarried young adults? Second, why are so many young women willing to undergo abortions, when the consequences for their own lives are potentially so tragic? Factors analyzed include: the continued value of procreation, the importance of marriage, the centrality of sexuality in the construction of 'modern' identities, and the ambivalence young people feel about their sexual behavior. Each of these elements intersects to produce a context where young women are simultaneously inclined or pressured to participate in sexual relationships, inhibited from negotiating contraception, but extremely motivated to terminate premarital pregnancies.	Igwe	 Aja-Nwachuku
2004	135	Abortion I	Implementing ICPD Recommendations for Safe and Accessible Abortion: Results of a Global Survey	At the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), the international community recognized unsafe abortion as a major public health concern, and, for the first time, governments at the highest levels agreed on a recommendation that where abortion is legal, it should be safe. In 1999, at a UN Special Session, they extended this recommendation, calling on health systems to ensure that abortion is safe and accessible to the extent the law allows. This paper presents the findings of a survey of over 60 key informants from about 20 countries across four regions - Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Europe - on the implementation of these recommendations.  In-depth interviews were conducted with officials of governments and international organizations, and representatives of NGOs and professional associations concerned with health and women's legal and human rights.  Issues addressed in the interviews include changes in national policies and in access to safe abortion services, postabortion care, and contraception.	Leila	 Hessini	Lucia	 Rayas	Charlotte	H. Smith	Daniela	 Draghici
2004	135	Abortion I	Changes in the Prevalence of Induced Abortion in the Philippines	In the Philippines, where abortion is legally restricted, many women nevertheless obtain abortions, often unsafe, given their motivation to avoid unwanted births. This study estimates the number of women having induced abortions during the late 1990s and the incidence of induced abortion at the national and regional level. We apply indirect estimation techniques to the average annual number of women treated in hospital for induced abortion complications over the period 1999-2001, data obtained from hospital reports to the Department of Health. Applying assumptions and adjustments, we estimate the total number having abortions, and the rate of abortion. These estimates are compared with 1994 estimates that used a similar methodology, to assess changes in abortion incidence, 1994-2001. Given recent increases in use of traditional methods and declines in modern method use, and given a social and political context of increased barriers to contraceptive access, assessing abortion trends has great policy relevance.	Fatima	 Juarez	Josefina	V. Cabigon	Susheela	D. Singh
2004	135	Abortion I	Abortion and Contraception in Pakistan: Birth Control Strategies in an Islamic Society	Research conducted by others reveals that, while women recognize the legal and moral issues surrounding induced abortion, they weigh these against their fear of contraceptive side effects and, above all, the costs of having an unwanted child (whether due to non-practice of contraception or ineffective practice).  Interviews with women and their husbands document a large gap in the stated rationale and the actual occurrence of abortion.  The aim of this paper is to explore the relationship between contraception and induced abortion, and the decision-making process that leads to an induced abortion, using exceptional data that have recently been collected in Pakistan.  A survey was conducted for over 400 women receiving post-abortion care (induced or spontaneous) in facilities all across Pakistan. Qualitative data are from in-depth interviews with 60 women and 42 men, 36 of which are couples residing in six urban and rural localities in Punjab and Sind.	Zeba	A. Sathar	Shafique	 Arif
2004	136	International Perspectives on the Effects of Family Structure	Intimacy at a Distance? Maternal Co-Residence and Contact in 20 Nations	For grown children and their mothers, the likelihood of shared housing and the frequency of face-to-face interaction are examined using 1994 International Social Survey Program data for 20 countries: Australia, Austria, Canada, the Czech Republic, East Germany, West Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway, Poland, Russia, Slovenia, Sweden, United States.  The analysis first identifies survey respondents at risk of co-residing, that is, adults whose mothers are still alive.  Hierarchical linear modeling investigates the determinants of shared housing and, for those who do not co-reside, frequent visiting.  Both individual-level and national-level factors contribute to these exchanges between adults and their mothers.  Although intimacy at a distance predicts that the association of co-residence and contact will be nil or even negative, the findings are consistent with the alternative hypothesis that familistic values promote both high rates of multigenerational co-residence and frequent contact between generations.	Judith	 Treas
2004	136	International Perspectives on the Effects of Family Structure	Do Social Institutions Soften the Blow of Family Dissolution? A Comparison of Family Structure Effects in Sweden and the United States	It is well known that children reared in non-intact families on average have less favorable educational outcomes than children reared in two-parent families.  Evidence from Sweden and the United States indicates that living in a non-intact family is correlated with lower educational attainment.  In this paper we compare the relationships between family structure and children's outcomes in terms of educational attainment and earnings using data from Sweden and the United States. Comparing Sweden and the United States is interesting because both family structure and family policy environments in the two countries differ significantly. We find the associations between family structure and children's outcomes to be remarkable similar in the U.S. and Sweden even though the policy and social environments differ.  Our results suggest that the true effect of family structure is more complex than the biological relationship of parents to children in both Sweden and the United States.	Donna	K. Ginther
2004	136	International Perspectives on the Effects of Family Structure	Single-Parenthood and Educational Achievement in Five Asian Countries -- Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and Thailand -- in PISA	Regarding the effects of family structure on children's educational outcomes, our knowledge has been limited mostly to American or European experiences. Extending our focus into non-Western societies with significantly different social and cultural structure will provide further insights into the roles of institutional contexts for the linkage. This paper addresses the extent to which children from single-parent families experience disadvantages in their educational achievement in five Asian countries--Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Indonesia and Thailand--participating in the first round of PISA 2000-2002 (Program for International Student Assessment). In terms of public welfare provision, prevalence of single-parent family, and family network, these Asian countries provide interesting contexts for comparison. In Asian contexts, this study compares the extent to which the gaps in reading literacy between students from single-parent families and two-parent families are explained by 1) economic conditions of family and 2) parental involvement in interaction with their children.	Hyunjoon	 Park
2004	136	International Perspectives on the Effects of Family Structure	How Do Demographic Changes Affect the Quality of Life? The Experience of Italy and France	During the last decades, many demographic events marking adult roles, have been postponed. Irreversible choices have been substituted by reversible ones, i.e. marriage by non marital cohabitation. Studying transition to adulthood, demographers have investigated the causes of such changes, but little has been said about their consequences. In this paper, we investigate the role of first marriage and first parenthood as cause of a potential change in the subjective perception of the quality of life, with respect to satisfaction with the financial situation and with the amount of leisure time. We use the ECHP data to compare the effects of two different family formation patterns: the Italian, where marriage is experienced simultaneously to leaving parental home, and the French, where changes are lived in a fuzzy way (i.e cohabitation usually anticipates marriage). To control for the potential endogeneity between the events and their outcomes, we use the propensity score matching.	Lucia	 Coppola	Stefano	 Mazzuco	Francesca	 Michielin
2004	137	Health Behaviors	Religion and Female Preventive Service Utilization in a Nationally Representative Sample of Older Adults	Despite the many benefits of preventive services, they are often underutilized.  Social factors, such as religion, can figure prominently in these discrepancies by either creating barriers or facilitating use.  Using data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), the current study examines the relationship between religious attendance, salience, and denomination and three female preventive services.  The results indicate that women who attend religious services more frequently use more preventive services.  Denominational differences also exist.  In general, women belonging to Mainline Protestant or Jewish denominations use more services than Evangelical Protestants.  Furthermore, women with higher levels of salience report greater utilization of breast exams.  These findings add to the growing literature on religion and health by illuminating a possible mechanism that may help to explain the association between religion and physical health.  This study also adds important information to the public health literature concerning factors that influence preventive service use.	Maureen	R. Benjamins
2004	137	Health Behaviors	The Social, Cultural, and Economic Dimensions of Socioeconomic Status, and Investment in Health	Socioeconomic status (SES) is a broad concept that includes cultural, social, and economic dimensions. I examine whether race/ethnic and sex differences in exercise, a significant behavioral investment in health, result from the various forms of cultural, social, and economic capital that comprise SES. Data from the 1998 and 2000 waves of the Health and Retirement Study, a nationally representative sample of U.S. adults aged 51 and older, allows me to examine SES related changes in regular vigorous physical activity over a two year period. Although the cultural, social, and economic dimensions all predict future activity status, only differences in cultural and economic capital account for race/ethnic disparities in exercise. Further, even after controlling for the full array of socioeconomic factors, sex disparities in exercise persist. Future work that seeks to explain race/ethnic disparities in health must account for the diverse aspects of SES that shape health outcomes.	Patrick	M. Krueger
2004	137	Health Behaviors	Pregnancy and Substance Use by Women: A Multi-Ethnic Evaluation	Alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use among pregnant women is one of the leading preventable causes of birth defects in the U.S. This paper is the first nationwide multiethnic study on the etiology of prenatal alcohol and tobacco use.  Previous studies evaluating risk profiles for substance abusing pregnant women:  have been on small/population specific samples that are not generalizable to any national population; have not comprehensively modeled both risk and protective factors at the individual, family, and community levels; and have lacked sufficient data to compare the relative importance of various risk and protective factors across ethnic groups or by immigrant status.  This study looks at the differences in the prevalence and etiology of alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy by mother's ethnicity and immigrant status and evaluates the relative importance of individual, family and community characteristics as risk and protective factors in alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy.	Kalena	E. Cortes	Krista	 Perreira
2004	137	Health Behaviors	On-the-Job Moms: Returning to Work and Breastfeeding Duration	This paper uses data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to test the effects of work on breastfeeding duration.  The diversity of the sample and its focus on low-income women provides a unique opportunity to examine work and breastfeeding.  Discrete-time logit models are employed to test the timing of the return to work and weaning, and to evaluate the differential effects of job characteristics.  The timing of the return to work and the timing of weaning are closely connected, indicating that working women are having a hard time combining work and breastfeeding.  Working full-time, working in an administrative position, and having a less flexible job all decrease the duration of breastfeeding, while more flexible jobs allow a longer duration, indicating that with the right workplace circumstances, combining work and breastfeeding is possible.	Rachel	T. Kimbro
2004	138	The Attractiveness of Marriage among Straight and Gay Couples in Europe and the U.S.	Divorce-Risk Patterns in Same-Sex 'Marriages' in Sweden and Norway	The present study provides an investigation of patterns in divorce risks of partners in same-sex marriages, or registered partnerships (partnerskap), in Sweden and Norway. A comparison with patterns in divorce risks in heterosexual marriages is provided. Our study is based on longitudinal information from the population registers of the two countries covering all persons in partnerships. Our demographic analyses involve information on characteristics such as age, sex, geographical background, experience of previous opposite-sex marriages, biological parenthood, and educational attainment of the partners involved. We find that to a large extent patterns in divorce are quite similar in same-sex and opposite-sex marriages, but that interesting differences nevertheless occur between the family types considered. If we only compare levels in union dissolution, divorce risks are considerably higher in same-sex than in opposite-sex marriages. The divorce risk in female partnerships is practically double that of the risk in partnerships of men.	Gunnar	 Andersson	Turid	 Noack	Ane	 Seierstad	Harald	 Weedon-Fekjaer
2004	138	The Attractiveness of Marriage among Straight and Gay Couples in Europe and the U.S.	Gender Differences in Same-Sex Partnering Trends, 1988-2002	Prior research indicates that sexual orientation is, in part, socially constructed.  It follows, therefore, that recent changes in the American social, economic, and legal environment may have been sufficiently great to have led to an increase in the prevalence of same-sex sexual partnering in the U.S., especially among women. Data from the GSS and NHSLS (N = 18,170) were used to examine gender differences in trends in same-sex sexual partnering between 1988 and 2002.  There was a greater increase in the proportion of women compared to men who reported having a same-sex sexual partner in the previous year.  The increase for women was present among both white and black women and was not limited to young adults.  Changes in normative climate accounted for the increase in same-sex sexual partnering among men and for a portion of the increase among women.	Amy	C. Butler
2004	138	The Attractiveness of Marriage among Straight and Gay Couples in Europe and the U.S.	Explaining Family Divergence? A Comparative Study of Education Differentials in Delayed Marriage and Childbearing	This paper examines the relationship between education and family change in the US and Western Europe.  First, by first examining the ways which changing timing of family formation varies by education, I contribute an element largely ignored in comparative studies of family change.  I find that although declining marriage rates among women in their 20s appear to be near universal within and across these societies, the relationship between marriage and childbearing did not change equally.  For more educated women, marriage delay appears to be part of a larger delay in family formation.  For the least educated women, fertility delays were always significantly smaller, resulting in increased concentration of nonmarital childbearing among the less-educated. In future analyses, I will incorporate explanatory variables (duration of schooling, changing economic opportunities for women and men, and policy differences) in order to understand the similar patterns of change and the differences that remain between countries.	Sheela	 Kennedy
2004	138	The Attractiveness of Marriage among Straight and Gay Couples in Europe and the U.S.	Are Men or Women More Reluctant to Marry in Couples Sharing a Non-Marital Birth?	Despite growing concern over the retreat from marriage, little is known about gender differences in men and women's attitudes towards marriage.  In order to examine whether one gender is driving the retreat from marriage, I capitalize on a new longitudinal study of unmarried parents--The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study.  I find that among romantically involved unmarried parents, unmarried fathers are more positive about marriage than unmarried mothers.  Using ordered logistic analysis, I find that, net of other factors, men have more positive attitudes regarding marriage and their current relationship than their female partners.	Emily	F. Shafer
2004	139	Race, Health, and Mortality II	Bi-Racial/Ethnic Infants and Infant Mortality in the United States	Objective: With the growing number of multiethnic persons in the United States, the validity of using only maternal race/ethnicity to categorize infants in studies of birth outcomes becomes questionable. We examine racial/ethnic disparities in infant mortality risk among bi-racial/ethnic groups as compared to their single-race counterparts in the United States using the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Linked Birth/Infant Death files from 1995-1998. Methods: Logistic regression models estimate infant mortality differentials across groups. Results: Clear differences in infant mortality risks are apparent by both maternal and paternal race/ethnicity.  Some groups of mixed race/ethnic infants experience very low mortality, while others exhibit higher mortality than their single race/ethnic counterparts.  Interestingly, infants for whom the race/ethnicity of father is unreported experience the highest risks of death among all maternal race/ethnic groups.  Conclusion: Both maternal and paternal characteristics, including race/ethnicity, should be considered in studies of infant and child health.	Jamie	Mihoko  Doyle	Robert	A. Hummer
2004	139	Race, Health, and Mortality II	U.S. Models of Infant Mortality by Race/Ethnicity: One Size Fits All?	Infant mortality research has historically utilized categorical variations of its two most important proximate determinants: birth weight and gestational age. In addition, these categorical approaches were primarily based on data from the majority population of the U.S. It has also been difficult to ascertain the relative importance of effects between birth weight and gestation age on infant mortality. Utilizing linked birth/infant death vital statistics files for the U.S., we standardize and model continuous birth weight, continuous gestational age and infant mortality by utilizing nonparametric regression strategies (GAM) combined with race/ethnic-specific standards for three groups: Non-Hispanic Whites, Non-Hispanic Blacks and Mexican Americans. We find that 1) All groups exhibit differing standards regarding birth weight effects on infant mortality; 2) Utilizing race/ethnic standards alters the effects of birth weight on infant mortality; and 3) Standardized birth weight and standardized gestational age are relatively equal in their effect on infant mortality.	Samuel	 Echevarria-Cruz
2004	139	Race, Health, and Mortality II	Increasing Racial Disparity in Infant Mortality: Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Other Causes	Dramatic innovations in perinatal care have led to a substantial decline in rates of infant death, but they have also fueled historic alterations in the structure of infant mortality. Among the most disturbing of recent trends is a significant increase in relative black-white disparity in risk of infant death. Based on data from linked cohort files for 1989-90 and 1995-98, our results are consistent with the view that the potential for a widening of the racial gap is high because advances in health care have occurred in a continuing context of social inequality.  This conclusion is especially well-illustrated in the case of respiratory distress syndrome by comparisons drawn from time periods before and after the widespread use of pulmonary surfactant therapy, but the conclusion may be valid for  other causes of infant mortality.	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song
2004	139	Race, Health, and Mortality II	Child Survival in Rwanda, an Analysis of 1965-1977 Crisis	The paper discusses the unexpected relationships between under-five mortality and economic development in Rwanda since 1950. Under-five mortality declined from 346 per 1000 in 1950 to 229 per 1000 in 1965; then it rose to 261 per 1000 in 1977, to decline again, reaching a level of 132 per 1000 in 1992. The period of mortality increase corresponded to a period of economic growth driven by increases in coffee prices on international markets and increase in income, whereas the period of mortality decline occurred during an economic downturn. The first period was marked by the rapid departure of expatriates, the lack of international aid, the flight of educated persons of Tutsi origin, following fights between Hutu and Tutsi between 1959 and 1966. During the second period, the political context and social indicators became more favorable with increasing political stability and more international aid.	Eneas	 Gakusi
2004	140	Internal Migration in Developed Countries	The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions	The paper develops a tractable econometric model of optimal migration, focusing on expected income as the main economic influence on migration.  The model improves on previous work in two respects: it covers optimal sequences of location decisions (rather than a single once-for-all choice), and it allows for many alternative location choices.  The model is estimated using panel data from the NLSY on white males with a high school education.  Our main conclusion is that interstate migration decisions are influenced to a substantial extent by income prospects.  On the other hand we find no evidence of a response to geographic differences in wage distributions.  Instead, the results suggest that the link between income and migration decisions is driven by a tendency to move in search of a better locational match when the income realization in the current location is unfavorable.	James	R. Walker	John	 Kennan
2004	140	Internal Migration in Developed Countries	Why Poor Families Move: Welfare Rules, Life Course Transitions, and Local Area Economic Explanations	This study tests alternative explanations for U.S. interstate migration of poor families in the post welfare reform period. In addition to micro-economic local labor market explanations, we examine the effects of family-level marriage, childbearing, and work transitions, and state-level variations in welfare eligibility and behavioral rules.  We argue that the 1996 welfare reform act created state welfare policy inequalities resulting in new incentives and disincentives to migrate. Data from three sources are merged for the analysis: 1) migration and family life course transitions from the 1996-1999 SIPP panel, 2) state welfare policy data from the Urban Institute's Welfare Rules Database, and 3) county-level labor market data from the Regional Economic Indicators Service. New migration behavior insights emerge from the discrete-time, event history migration model results of both destination (pull) and departure (push) effects of state lenient-to-stringent welfare policy scores, local labor market economic conditions, and family life course transitions.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe
2004	140	Internal Migration in Developed Countries	State Policy and Local Residential Sorting: Are Tiebout Voters Hobbled?	Study of residential location by households in the Health and Retirement Study reveals that while cross-state movers experience significant fiscal gains in the form of decreased exposure to school spending and lower property taxes, within-state movers experience little such fiscal gain.  The apparently limited ability of empty-nest households to reduce their exposure to public school spending and associated local taxes through near-distance moves presents a serious challenge to the Tiebout hypothesis that individuals vote with their feet to bring about efficient local public good provision.  In this paper, we will examine the effect of state policies such as school finance equalization and property tax restrictions (such as California's Prop-13) and property tax exemptions (such as circuit breakers) on the ability and incentive of older households to adjust their fiscal bundle through local moves.	Martin	P. Farnham	Purvi	 Sevak
2004	140	Internal Migration in Developed Countries	Barriers to Leaving the Barrio: Patterns and Determinants of Inter-Neighborhood Residential Mobility among U.S. Latinos	Merged data from the Latino National Political Survey, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and the 1990 U.S. census are used to examine patterns and determinants of inter-neighborhood residential mobility between 1990 and 1995 for 2,057 U.S. residents of Mexican, Puerto Rican, and Cuban origin.  Our findings confirm some of the central tenets of spatial assimilation theory but also point to substantial variations in the residential mobility process that are broadly consistent with the segmented assimilation perspective on ethnic and immigrant incorporation.  Latino residential mobility into neighborhoods inhabited by greater percentages of non-Hispanic whites (i.e. anglos) tends to increase across successive generations, with increasing human and financial capital, and with English language proficiency.  However, Puerto Ricans are less likely than Mexicans to move to more anglo neighborhoods, and the generational and socioeconomic differences anticipated by the classical assimilation model emerge more strongly for Mexicans than for Puerto Ricans or Cubans.	Scott	J. South	Kyle	D. Crowder	Erick	 Chavez
2004	141	Demography, Crime, and Incarceration	Race, Ethnicity, and the Spatial Patterning of Crime	In this paper, we examine the ways in which the social structural conditions of neighborhoods and the spatial patterning of these conditions influence differential rates of criminal violence in racially and ethnically distinct local areas.  When, under what circumstances, and why are crime patterns for different race/ethnic groups similar or dissimilar?  Are the levels and sources of crime for various groups comparable when the diverse populations are similarly situated?   We explore these questions for neighborhoods in two large cities--Chicago and Dallas.  Our focus is on understanding the influence of the spatial patterning of structural disadvantage, immigration, and community investments (e.g., mortgage loan patterns) for violent crime in predominantly White, Black, Hispanic, Black-Hispanic and integrated local communities.	Lauren	J. Krivo	Ruth	D. Peterson
2004	141	Demography, Crime, and Incarceration	Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Age Distribution of Violent Offending: Trends and Patterns of the Age-Crime Curve	Despite the centrality of age, race, and ethnicity in the criminological literature, significant gaps exist in the research addressing these issues. Notably, there is (1) a scarcity of research which includes Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asian Americans in analyses of racial/ethnic differences in crime and (2) an overall lack of research which examines variations in the age distribution of violent crime both over time and across population subgroups. This study uses relative distribution methods and other demographic techniques to examine California arrest statistics on violent crime over the 1980-2000 period to investigate: (1) changes in the age distribution of violent criminal offending over the 1980-2000 period, (2) racial-ethnic patterns of violent crime and changes in those patterns over the 1980-2000 period, and (3) joint effects of age and race-ethnicity on criminal offending both cross-sectionally and over time.	Darrell	 Steffensmeier	Stephen	 Demuth
2004	141	Demography, Crime, and Incarceration	Perceived Risk of Victimization: A Race Interaction Model	Previous research argues that the impact of both macro-sociological and micro-sociological factors affect residents' perceived risk of victimization in their neighborhoods. Rarely however has the literature examined residents' perceived risk of victimization in their local downtown and at two times, day and night. Even more infrequent are race interaction models proposed and tested to demonstrate differences in the predictors of varied perceived risk for African American and White respondents in these four situations. Using data from the 2002 Columbus Citizen Satisfaction Survey, 2000 U.S. Census for Columbus, and 2000 UCR Type I Columbus crime rates, this study presents the results from a multiple regression model.  Results show that there is a racial disparity in both the both macro-and micro-sociological factors affecting perceived risk of victimization for Columbus. Suggestions for policies targeted at these factors are provided.	Brandy	 Ethridge
2004	141	Demography, Crime, and Incarceration	Have High Black Imprisonment Rates Contributed to African American Child Poverty?	From the early 1980s through 2000, the number and the percentage of African American men in prison skyrocketed.  This would be expected to have negative impacts on Black well-being, but Black child poverty generally decreased during this period.  Using data from the U.S. Prison Census and the Current Population Survey for the period from 1983-1998, we examine the effects of Black imprisonment on Black household composition and Black child poverty, with special attention to the effect of state Black imprisonment rates on the presence of employed and unemployed men in the household.  Declines in Black child poverty are due largely to declining fertility and fewer children per household.  Net of controls, state Black male imprisonment rates appear to increase child poverty through reducing the prevalence of employed men in households, especially at low parental education levels.	Pam	 Oliver	Jessica	 Jakubowski	Jim	 Yocom
2004	142	Educational Attainment: Social and Economic Issues	High School Exit Examinations and State-Level Graduation and GED Rates, 1992-2000	We will use state-level fixed effects models to estimate the impact of high stakes graduation tests (and various characteristics of those tests) on state-level high school graduation rates (derived from 1988-2001 data from the Common Core of Data) and GED completion rates (derived from data from the GED testing service).	John	R. Warren	Krista	N. Jenkins
2004	142	Educational Attainment: Social and Economic Issues	The Effects of State-Mandated Testing on Educational Outcomes	This paper investigates how state-mandated tests and policies governing those tests have affected educational performance and dropout behavior of youth.  The project takes advantage of a unique compilation of state testing policies for all fifty states and the District of Columbia.  Because the testing policy data cover the history of state-mandated testing in each state, I am able to map the testing regime faced in grades K-12 by successive youth cohorts.  The longitudinal map of test policies to individuals allows me to exploit greater cross-state and temporal variation in testing policies.  In addition to simple counts of tests administered in particular grades, I bring to bear variation in the type of tests, the subject tested, and whether test results were used to retain, assign to remedial education, or graduate students from one grade to another.  Policy data are mapped to data on individuals from the NLSY79, HSB, NELS, and NLSY97.	Dean	R. Lillard
2004	142	Educational Attainment: Social and Economic Issues	Parental Divorce and Child Educational Attainment: A Dynamic Approach	A model of schooling duration is employed to examine (i) the differential effect of the timing of parental divorce; and controlling for uncorrelated unobserved heterogeneity, (ii) the changes in these effects over time, on children's educational attainment. Parental divorce during early childhood or teenage years are associated with a higher risk of dropping out of school for boys, while for girls it's before the age of 11. Controlling for pre-existing disadvantages prior to divorce, the net impact of divorce is worse the younger the child was upon the separation. Boys benefit from their parents staying together as long as possible, with the benefit working through the importance of resources in their development. For girls this is not true, possibly because of more weight on non-pecuniary family attributes.  Although the negative effect of divorce initially was more pronounced for boys, overtime boys do recover while the effect lingers for girls	Shirley	H. Liu
2004	142	Educational Attainment: Social and Economic Issues	Why Do Minority Men Earn Less? A Study of Wage Differentials among the Highly Educated	This paper contributes to the literature on minority wage gaps by using data with more detail on education than has been previously used and by using nonparametric matching methods.  Our data, the National Survey of College Graduates, provide detailed information on degrees received as well as information on wages.  Among the well educated we find substantial unadjusted wage gaps: approximately 19 percent for both blacks and Hispanics, and 10 percent for Asians.  Modest portions of the gaps are due to measurement error in the recording of education in the Census.  For Hispanic and Asian men, the entire remaining gap is attributable to pre-market factors.  For black men, only about one-quarter of the wage gap is attributable to these same factors.  However, pre-market factors do account for the black-white wage gap if we restrict attention to a sub-sample: men born outside the South to parents with some college education.	Dan	 Black	Amelia	 Haviland	Seth	G. Sanders	Lowell	 Taylor
2004	143	Disability Measurement Issues	Coping or Caring for Functional Limitations: Does It Change the Risk of Severe Restriction in Personal Care Activities?	Women over age 55 have more severe restrictions for personal care activities than men but, when controlling for functional status, gender differences fade away after age 70 and even turn to women's advantage below this age. This study shows that women and men have different compensatory strategies facing functional problems ; men more often use assistive devises while women more often benefit from someone's help. Functional status being equal, the risk of severe restriction is higher when human assistance is reported rather than technical assistance only. While no gender differences appear in the risk of severe restriction among those who do not use any help or among those who cop with technical equipment only, women have lower risk than men in the case of using someone's help. The study discusses different ways to interpret these findings.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois
2004	143	Disability Measurement Issues	The Effect of Assistive Technology Measurement on Late Life Disability Rates	Although there is a lack of agreement about optimal measures of disability, most measurement approaches are influenced by the use of assistive technology, an increasingly import source of care for older Americans. In the past, demographic and health surveys have given little attention to measuring the use of assistive technology in the older population. Hence, a variety of approaches to measuring AT use have emerged, but no systematic analysis of the various approaches has been conducted. In this paper we examine six national health and demographic surveys to 1) identify salient features in the measurement of assistive technology; 2) compare estimates of the use of assistive technology; 3) examine how measurement differences affect estimates of AT use; and 4) demonstrate the implications of the various measurement approaches for estimates of late-life disability rates.  Recommendations for AT use measurement and implications for potential bias in disability rates will be discussed.	Jennifer	C. Cornman	Vicki	A. Freedman	Emily	M. Agree
2004	143	Disability Measurement Issues	Measuring Disability	Disability rolls vary greatly across countries. Most likely, differences in definition, incentives, and eligibility rules play a role in explaining the very different incidence of disability benefits across countries. A fundamental problem with explaining differences in DI benefit take up is the measurement of disability itself. Whether one considers a particular health problem as limiting one's disability for work is colored by cultural and institutional differences as well as personal experiences and differences in tastes and opinions. We conduct so-called vignette experiments where we normalize respondents' evaluation of their own health related work limitations by their rating of a number of stylized hypothetical cases. The experiments are being done in The Netherlands and the U.S. The literature on health related work limitations has suggested several biases that may influence respondents' evaluation of their own health related work limitations. Our preliminary findings suggest a relatively minor role for such biases.	Arie	 Kapteyn
2004	143	Disability Measurement Issues	Alternative Definitions of Disability: Implications of Increasing Inclusiveness	Estimates of the disabled U.S. population vary greatly depending on the criteria used to define disability.  In addition, the characteristics of the disabled population encompassed by different definitions are not well understood. This paper presents estimates of the U.S. adult population identified as disabled as the definition of health-related activity limitation becomes more inclusive.  Data are derived from the National Health Interview Survey. We describe the changing demographic and health characteristics of the disabled population that accompanies an expansion of the definition of disability from being limited in ADLs to being limited in any way because of a chronic physical, mental or emotional problem.  Age, sex, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and conditions causing the limitations are the main variables of interest.	Ellen	A. Kramarow	Elsie	 Pamuk
2004	144	Microsimulation and Intensive Computational Methods in Demography	The Structure of an Epidemic: A Model of AIDS Transmission in Sub-Saharan Africa	Agent-based models can address some of the shortcomings of present macro bio-behavioral models of the HIV epidemic that segregate the population into behavior-based risk groups. Modeling social network allows these models to assess individual risk heterogeneity within risk groups, that is, why the risk associated with a given behavior varies, while modeling the social processes that contribute to such behaviors allows them to represent how such groups are formed, maintained and dispersed. This paper describes the development of an interactive computational model based upon relatively simple assumptions. The model begins by representing an individual's history of employment, migration, birth, death, courtship, marriage, as well as her family, affinity, and sexual networks. Data underlying the relevant rates and assumptions are drawn from a variety of sources, and are parameterized to allow an assessment of the impact of diverse assumptions as well as to illustrate interaction effects.	Patrick	 Heuveline	David	 Sallach	Thomas	 Howe
2004	144	Microsimulation and Intensive Computational Methods in Demography	A Dynamic Programming Approach to Educational Choice: Theory, Econometrics, and Practice	Dynamic choice models, and in particular discrete choice dynamic programming (DDP) models, have become an increasingly popular way for social scientists to model individual behavior such as educational investment over the life cycle taking into account resource limitations, future consequences of current decisions and uncertainty about the future. But DDP models are difficult to estimate due to their substantial computational requirements and their seemingly extreme data requirements. In this paper we use simulated data as well as the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to identify aspects of the DDP that can be relaxed in practice. We also examine how much information across time per individual is ``enough'' to estimate DDP parameters. Finally, we present an application of an extensive DDP model of educational investment using data from the NLSY and simulate several policy changes and their welfare implications.	Moshe	 Buchinsky	Douglas	M. McKee
2004	144	Microsimulation and Intensive Computational Methods in Demography	Projecting Family Formation and Dissolution in a Dynamic Microsimulation Model	Dynamic microsimulation models create long-run population projections based on annual micro-level transitions into and out of various demographic and economic states.  Within most microsimulation models, a module (or set of modules) exists to create new families and to dissolve existing families.  This paper details the set of modules created for the Congressional Budget Office's Long-Term (CBOLT) Model to simulate family formation and dissolution over a 75-year time horizon.  The process includes three steps: 1) the selection of individuals, among those at risk of marriage, to become married, 2) given an annual marriage market, the creation of unions with realistic joint-distributions of spousal characteristics via a computationally efficient mate-matching algorithm, and 3) given the characteristics of a married couple and the duration of marriage, the dissolution of marriages through divorce.  The estimation techniques, model applications, and results are presented in detail.	Kevin	 Perese	Josh	 O'Harra
2004	144	Microsimulation and Intensive Computational Methods in Demography	Both Nature and Nurture: Incorporating Genetic, Developmental, Directed Environments, and Social Learning within a Demographic Micro-Simulation Model	Socio-demographic characteristics, such as educational status or fertility history are determined in part by inherited and acquired factors. Acquired characteristics depend on parental characteristics, including their patterns of assortative mating. Earlier work has shown that population sizes are very sensitive to intergenerational continuities in fertility. Individuals also shape their own environments according to their acquired characteristics and previous experiences, suggesting that the role of covariability between these variables is important. I implement a micro-simulation model of a Western developed society with intergenerational transmission of characteristics, based on plausible patterns of assortative mating, in which individuals then modify their own environments.  The model is a modified version of the Berkeley SOCSIM kinship micro-simulation model originally developed by Professors Wachter and Hammel. I discuss how these findings relate to statistical models that partition variance into genetic and environmental components, and to the increasing similarity of identical twins with age.	Michael	 Murphy
2004	145	Men's Reproductive Behavior	Social Construction of Condom Non-Use: Implications for Condom Promotion Interventions in Bangladesh	A qualitative study was conducted to explore Bangladeshi men's emic views on condom non-use. Fifty men of 18 to 56 years from diverse socio-demographic backgrounds and five HIV/AIDS professionals as key-informants were interviewed. Findings suggest refusal to use condoms is not a personal choice, rather a social decision deeply embedded in the relational context. The notion of reduced physical pleasure has social and masculine realities attached to men's lives and emotions. Pornographic movies are referred to as learning media for sex without condoms as 'real' men's sexual skill. AIDS educational materials symbolize condoms as choices for promiscuous men, which discourage men from using condoms to preserve the image of a good man. The size of condoms interferes with men's phallic concerns of masculine sexuality, a social construct. Individually focused condom interventions are less effective because they do not address social and masculine dimensions of male sexuality.	Sharful	 Khan	Nancy	 Hudson-Rodd	Sherry	 Saggers	Abbas	 Bhuiya
2004	145	Men's Reproductive Behavior	Risky Sexual Behaviour, Marital Relationship, and Gupt Rog ('Secret Illnesses' in Hindi) in the Slums of Mumbai City, India	This paper examines the nature of male premarital and extra-marital sexual behavior and its impact on sexual health in slum communities in Mumbai, India.  Data for this paper was obtained from in-depth interviews (52), and a baseline survey (2408) with married men (21-40 years) as part of five year NIMH study.  The results show a relatively higher degree of premarital (38%) and extramarital (23%) sex than has been found in surveys in other parts of India.  Fifty three percent have reported at least one sexual health problem in the last three months.  There was significant relationship between both pre-marital and extra-marital sexual relationship and the presence of sexual problems. Men's self perceptions, life-style and marital relationships are shown to be closely associated with involvement in risky sex. These results point to the need for interventions that go beyond community awareness and condom promotion for better men's sexual and reproductive health.	Garimella	 Rama Rao	Niranjan	 Saggurti	Ravi	K. Verma	Rajendra	 Singh	Stephen	L. Schensul
2004	145	Men's Reproductive Behavior	Sexual Behaviour and Perceptions of Risk: Male Rural-Urban Migrants in Tanzania	Rural-urban migration in sub-Saharan Africa has been associated with changing exposure to risk of HIV infection, not least because urban areas are perceived to encourage a loosening of familial and community control on sexual behaviour.  Located in Tanzania, this study uses three research methodologies: an individual questionnaire for tracing sexual networks; follow-up in-depth interviews with selected questionnaire respondents; and, focus group discussions.  The questionnaire combines detailed migration histories with sexual and condom behaviour data (both spousal and non-spousal) and HIV knowledge and personal risk perceptions.  Data are collected from both urban and rural men in order to address 2 key research questions.  Firstly, do the sexual experience and behaviour of migrants differ from non-migrants?  Secondly, do migrants have higher levels of HIV and contraceptive  knowledge and use (including condom use) than non-migrants?  This study also assesses whether a polygynous setting affects male perceptions of HIV risk and reproductive behaviour.	Ernestina	E. Coast
2004	145	Men's Reproductive Behavior	Addressing Men's Concerns about Reproductive Health Services in a Rural Community Mobilization Program	In patriarchal African settings, addressing the contraceptive needs of women can precipitate anxiety and worry among men because marriage and customs are grounded in traditions that portray women as the property of male-dominated lineages. The Navrongo Community Health and Family Planning Project (CHFP) addresses the profoundly complex gender problems of a societal setting that exemplifies these customs. Beginning with careful outreach and dialogue with chiefs, elders, and lineage heads, the project established a program of community durbars for legitimizing reproductive health services. Community leaders were involved in explaining the program to men; male networks, social groups, and leadership systems were utilized to convey the message that family planning was appropriate for families. This paper reports on qualitative research that compares the views of men exposed and unexposed to the program. Results suggest that the CHFP has dissipated discord and empowered women, increasing contraceptive use and reducing fertility as a result.	Philip	B. Adongo	Rofina	 Asuru	Abraham	 Hodgson	Ellie	 Feinglass
2004	146	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries II	The Standard Days Method and the Two Day Method: How Can Users and Programs Benefit	We examine two new fertility-awareness based methods of family planning and explore similarities and differences that make each method more appropriate for some users to use successfully and for some providers to offer.  Fertility awareness-based methods of family planning help women identify the days each cycle when they are most likely to conceive.  If they wish to avoid pregnancy they do not have unprotected sex on these days.  The Standard Days Method and the Two Day method are new fertility awareness-based methods of family planning that use very different approaches to identify the fertile days.  Clinical studies have shown that both methods are very effective when used correctly.  We examine the implications of these findings for programs offering the methods, and conclude that the methods complement each other.	Marcos	 Arevalo	Victoria	 Jennings
2004	146	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries II	Premarital Pregnancy and Its Influences on First Marriage for Chinese Women	Premarital pregnancy has enormous impacts on individual woman's life course trajectory. Many studies have reported increasing changes in premarital sexual behaviors in China. However, no systematic study has been done with regard to premarital pregnancy and its consequences on Chinese women. Using the 2001 China National Family Planning and Reproductive Health Survey data, this study focuses on self-reported premarital pregnancies among Chinese women and their consequences. We found that the likelihood of premarital pregnancy is close related to women's residence, education, and the macro socioeconomic environment. We also examine women's transition to first marriage after their premarital pregnancies. We found that the average age at first marriage for women with premarital pregnancies is significant higher than that of all other women. The timing of first marriage to a large extent depends not only on women's ages at pregnancy but also on the outcomes of pregnancies.	Xingshan	 Cao
2004	146	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries II	Induced Abortion in China: Levels, Trends and Its Role in Fertility Decline	Using published and unpublished statistics in China this paper addresses some of the basic issues surrounding abortion in China: abortion levels and trends, its association with the development of the family planning program, and its role in China's fertility decline. The birth control policy in the framework of the economic reform resulted in substantial increases in abortion in China, in addition to other family planning methods. The early 1980s and early 1990s witnessed the peak abortion levels associated with the abortion campaigns occurred at that time. With the attainment of low fertility and transition in China's family planning work, abortion level has fallen since the mid 1990s. However, the abortion contribution to fertility decline in China is only moderate both compared to the other two major components (marriage and contraception) and compared to that in many countries, unlike what many have envisioned.	Wei	 Chen
2004	146	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries II	Political Involvement and Contraceptive Behaviour among Women in Nigeria	Few studies have examined empirically the influence of women's political participation on contraceptive behaviour. Using data from a multi-stage probability survey of ever-married women aged 15-49 conducted in Plateau State, Nigeria, in 2002/3, this paper explores the association between exposure to civic and electoral activities,  women's empowerment and contraceptive behaviour. The results indicate that the likelihood of modern contraceptive use is significantly greater among women who exercise high political activism, holding sociodemographic variables constant. Women of the Church of Christ in Nigeria (COCIN) religious denomination are significantly more likely than non-COCIN members to be currently using modern contraceptives. Logistic regression analysis reveals that group affiliation has the strongest independent influence, while political participation may operate through SES and exposure to governance activities. The results suggest that political exposure and an empowering affiliation in solidarity groups affect women's self-confidence in influencing husband's approval--goals central to population and reproductive health policy.	Kola	A. Oyediran	Charles	H. Teller
2004	147	Migration, Urbanization, and Health	Urbanization, Poverty, and Child Mortality in Africa	The study reviews the relationships between urbanisation, poverty and child survival in sub-Saharan Africa using DHS data. Under-five mortality appears higher or equal in rural areas compared to urban areas. However the relationship between urban and rural mortality is not stable, and cases of changing trends were documented, usually with convergence of urban and rural mortality, either by rising mortality in urban areas, or by faster decline in rural areas. The case of the urban poor is investigated using an innovative approach comparing wealthier and poorer households in urban and rural areas. Cases where the urban poor have a higher under-five mortality than rural areas, or higher than expected compared to other countries are investigated. Possible reasons for divergent patterns are explored, in particular patterns of migration and health policies. Special attention is devoted to the role of emerging diseases, in particular to HIV/AIDS, and increasing urban poverty.	Michel	 Garenne
2004	147	Migration, Urbanization, and Health	A Longitudinal Analysis of Health and Mortality in a Migrant-Sending Region of Bangladesh	Recent theoretical and methodological advances have facilitated analysis of migration's impact on the health and well-being of family members left behind by migrants. This paper addresses the impact of children's migration on health and survival among older respondents to the Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey. These data, collected in a migration-prone region of rural Bangladesh in 1996, are linked to mortality events through an ongoing Demographic Surveillance System.  Results show that children's internal and international migration have positive effects on health and survival, yet the effects operate entirely through son's migration in this traditionally patrilineal society.  While migrant schooling can explain for the internal migrant effect, international migration effects cannot be explained by education or by transfer/remittance measures in the survey year.  The failure to find any relationship between transfers and survival raises questions about the relevance of cross-sectional remittance measures as indicators of support from migrants.	Randall	 Kuhn
2004	147	Migration, Urbanization, and Health	Temporary Migration and HIV Risk Behaviors: A Case Study in Southwestern China	The link between migration and HIV/AIDS is well documented. But theoretical work to understand the social and behavioral mechanisms underlying migrants' HIV risk behaviors is limited. Most studies view migration primarily as a virus carrier and population mixer. This paper presents a framework conceptualizing the link between temporary migration and migrants' HIV risk behaviors. It argues that temporary migration breeds social and behavioral changes that render migrants vulnerable to risky sexual and drug use behaviors. The combination of post-migration social isolation, economic marginalization, and lax social control experienced by migrants is the key to understanding their heightened HIV risk-taking behaviors. The proposed framework is then tested empirically with data from a large population-based survey conducted in 2002 in southwestern China. The results are expected to shed new light on migration and HIV dynamics and provide invaluable inputs for future prevention intervention efforts to reduce HIV/STD risk among temporary migrant workers.	Xiushi	 Yang
2004	147	Migration, Urbanization, and Health	Junk Food Nation: The Effect of U.S. Exposure on Cardiovascular Mortality Risk among Older Mexicans	While many theories attempt to explicate the epidemiological paradox, little empirical research exists to substantiate one theory over the other. This paper examines the prevalence of risk factors for cardiovascular disease among older Mexicans in the U.S. and Mexico using the Health and Retirement Survey and the Mexican Health and Aging Survey.  Preliminary results demonstrate that the U.S. and Mexican samples differ significantly on health behaviors and cardiac risk indicators.  U.S. born Mexicans and Mexicans who migrated to the U.S. and live there have higher proportions of those currently smoking, currently drinking, and those who are obese, as well as high proportions who suffered diabetes, heart attacks, and strokes, than those living in Mexico.  However, health behaviors and health conditions apparently do not vary by exposure to the US in either the US or Mexican sample.  The implications of these findings for existing theoretical explanations of the epidemiological paradox are discussed.	Jennifer	J. Tovar	Maren	Andrea  Jimenez
2004	148	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Education and the Formation of New Families: A Comparative Study of Cohabitation and Nonmarital Fertility in Western Nations	This paper explores the relationship between education and two important, and related, shifts in family formation in the US and Western Europe: rising rates of cohabitation and increased fertility outside of traditional marital unions.  Specifically, for a set of countries in North America and Western Europe, I examine educational differences in the likelihood of ever cohabiting, of having a cohabiting relationship ending in marriage, and in the relative likelihood of having either a birth within a cohabiting union or nonunion birth. I also examine whether educational differentials have changed over time.  By examining patterns family change both within- and across- countries, this paper should help assess the relative importance of similar economic change across countries or of long-standing cultural or policy differences between countries.	Sheela	 Kennedy
2004	148	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Same Sex Partnership and the Northern Europe Pattern of Family Formation	Since the 1960s an original pattern of family formation has emerged in the Northern part of Europe. To parallel the demographic aspects we introduce legal consequences attached to marriage and informal cohabitation. We check if diversity in legal systems could explain (or result from) the present contrasts in family formation in Europe and be an obstacle to a future standardisation. In the 1990s the Nordic countries enacted laws legalising same-sex unions. So are now doing some non-Nordic countries. Dispersion in registration and separation frequencies is much wider than among heterosexuals in Northern Europe. Out of it, registration rates in the Netherlands are higher than anywhere else. A parallel analysis is conducted on legal consequences attached to different-sex versus same-sex registration. There seems to be much less of a Northern behavioural pattern on same-sex unions, despite a larger uniformity in legislation. Reasons are to be searched out of the legal sphere.	Patrick	 Festy	Marie	 Digoix	Kees	 Waaldijk
2004	148	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Marriage -- Facts and Opinions Compared	The empirical investigation 'Turning points of the life course' in 2001/2002 (16364 respondents) aims to understand the emerging new demographic behaviour after the collapse of the communist system. The paper describes the evolving new type of partnership-form cohabitation. As a starting point we compare some features of marriage, 'old' and 'new' type of cohabitation, than try to capture differences behavioural features (values, rationality, quality of partnership). Using partnership history data we define the historical time of the emergence of cohabitation and conclude that the process started before the societal transition. Using educational achievement we could define the social-structural setting of cohabitation. The life course perspective enables us to investigate the inter-relationship of cohabitation and marriage, and discuss how far is cohabitation a pre-marital relationship. The stated change in partnership behaviour influenced profoundly the fertility behaviour, and resulted in overall fertility decline.	Zsolt	 Speder	Marietta	 Pongrácz
2004	148	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Innovative Behavior in Italy: Parents' Influence in the Choice of Type of First Union	Since the early 1970s cohabitation started to spread among younger generations in Western and Northern European countries, but not in Italy and other Mediterranean countries.  Our hypothesis is that the diffusion of cohabitations in Italy is influenced by one of the deepest specificity of the Italian family, the so called strong ties between parents and children. Following this approach, in the weak ties area, the generation that is open to a new behavior is the same that can freely adopt it, while in the strong ties area before the new behavior is adopted by young people, it is necessary that their parents accept it. We will analyze the process of leaving parental home to start an informal union in Italy, using data stemming form the 1998 Italian Multipurpose Survey, explicitly modeling the relationship between cultural values of the parents generation and adoption of innovations between the younger generations.	Paola	 Di Giulio	Alessandro	 Rosina
2004	149	Gender and Patriarchy in India and Bangladesh	Refining the Measurement of Women's Autonomy: The Case of Rural India	Women's autonomy has been extensively investigated in social demography for decades.  Little research, however, has studied the measurement of autonomy.  Most scholars have focused on theoretical arguments regarding its measurement and cross-national applicability.  Others have indexed items thought to reflect autonomy into summary scales with little regard for measurement error.  In this study, we use the Survey on the Status of Women and Fertility to examine 62 items thought to reflect autonomy.  We use confirmatory factor analyses to a) determine which model, among a set of alternatives, offers the strongest approach to measuring autonomy; and b) determine whether a factor analytic approach offers a better fit to the data than the summed index that is commonly used among researchers.  To evaluate the usefulness of the autonomy concept in a comparative approach, this study uses data from women in rural India and then replicates the models using comparable data from rural Pakistan.	Rina	 Agarwala
2004	149	Gender and Patriarchy in India and Bangladesh	The Process of Integration: From Traditional to Non-Traditional Family and Reproductive Behaviours. The Case of India	The aim of this paper is the analysis of the transition from traditional to non-traditional family and reproductive behaviours. The data we used are the second Indian National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2) 1998-99. The methodology we applied is the Boolean Analysis for the definition of the main paths of the behavioural transition. We are interested in proving one of the following two hypotheses: i) the transition is due to the individual decision in changing behaviours, or ii) the transition is due to the social decision to determine behavioural changes. From the path followed by each States depends a higher or lower individual sensitivity to belong new behaviours. Results show that considering individual information about the use of contraception, educational level, age at marriage, communication between partners, and use of health facilities, the social component is the main actor in starting the process of integration towards non-traditional family and reproductive behaviours.	Mariachiara	 Di Cesare
2004	149	Gender and Patriarchy in India and Bangladesh	Are Children from Smaller Families Healthier? Examining the Causal Effects of Family Size on Child Welfare	The method of Instrument Variables is used to estimate the causal effect of family size on child health status (measured by height, weight and the weight to height ratio) and immunization. The method overcomes problems caused by the fact that child welfare and family sizes are possibly endogenous. Utilizing data from the two rounds of the National Family Health Survey conducted in India, the instruments I use are the sex composition of the first two children born in the family and that of the 'ideal' number of children. The results suggest that the causal effects of family size on child health and immunization in India are worse than those implied by a simple linear regression. Moreover, the negative effect of family size is found to be larger for girls than that for boys, highlighting the need for intervention by policy makers on behalf of girls in large families.	Ankur	 Sarin
2004	149	Gender and Patriarchy in India and Bangladesh	Cross-Generational Effects of Women's Empowerment in Rural Bangladesh	The South Asian mother-in-law has been vilified in literature and oral traditions from the health and family planning fields as a promoter of pronatalism, son preference, harmful traditional health practices, failure to seek reproductive health care, and domestic violence against young daughters-in-law. This paper examines the hypothesis that when mothers and mother-in-law are empowered socially and economically there will be tangible benefits for the health and well-being of the next generation. Recent data from interviews with married men and women and their mothers and mothers-in-law are used to investigate the effects of women's empowerment on a range of next-generation outcomes including: age at marriage and first birth, educational attainment, empowerment and gender attitudes, experiences of domestic violence, and reproductive health outcomes and behavior. Case studies are used to explore the strategies women employ to try to influence the behavior of their sons, daughters and daughters-in-law and to ensure their welfare.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Farzana	 Islam	Md.	Khairul  Islam	Lisa	M. Bates
2004	150	Family Time Allocation: Parents and Children, Costs and Benefits	Child Labor and Forest Resource Collection: Variation in Individual Fertility Preferences in Nepal	We investigate the effect of child labor use in forest resources (firewood and fodder) collection in shaping individual fertility preferences.  We hypothesize that the use of child labor in forest resource collection positively shapes individual family size preferences. Using the data from Chitwan Valley of Nepal, we find that individuals living in households that use child labor in forest resources collection prefer larger family size than those living in households that do not. In aggregate, results show no difference in the family size preferences by gender.  However, a disaggregated analysis shows that males living in households that use child labor for firewood collection prefer significantly larger family size than males living in households that do not use child labor. On the other hand, among females, those living in households that use child labor for fodder collection prefer significantly larger family size than females living in households that do not.	Prem	Bahadur  Bhandari	Sundar	S. Shrestha	Nalini	 Chhetri
2004	150	Family Time Allocation: Parents and Children, Costs and Benefits	Care Work, Gender Inequality, and the State: Women's Employment and Children with Disabilities	Despite the deinstitutionalization of people with disabilities in the U.S.A., much of the care for children with disabilities is performed at home, where care work is largely women's work. Thus, the gender division of labor in the care for children with disabilities, in the absence of greater institutional or state support, is one mechanism for the reproduction of gender inequality more broadly. Using new data on disabilities from the 2000 Decennial Census, we test for an association between the presence of children with disabilities and the division of paid work between husbands and wives. The results are consistent with other evidence that when care work is to be done within families, it falls disproportionately to women--undermining women's career mobility and contributing to gender inequality in the labor market as well as within families.	Philip	N. Cohen	Miruna	 Petrescu-Prahova
2004	150	Family Time Allocation: Parents and Children, Costs and Benefits	Time, Gender, and Distrust: Why Parents Argue about Leisure	This study uses a relatively large qualitative sample of new parents, both married and unmarried, to describe couple conflict about leisure time.  Leisure is a common source of conflict that taps into fundamental and universal issues that parents face in reconciling their different responsibilities, priorities, and beliefs about parenthood.  For some parents, conflict of this type is also heightened by deep-seated distrust and fear of infidelity, a largely unexplored topic in the literature.  The findings provide insight into relationship issues facing unmarried and married parents and the services that will best support successful relationships and parenting practices.	Heather	D. Hill
2004	150	Family Time Allocation: Parents and Children, Costs and Benefits	Quality Time Hypothesis: Family Time Use and Children's Well-Being	Recent research shows that mothers who have a large share of family income spend less time in play/companionship activities with their children and utilize more out-of-home care during the week, but spend more time with children on weekends, particularly in activities that enhance children's human capital (Yeung and Stafford,  2003). This family investment approach is sometimes thought of as the quality time strategy as the total quantity of time a child spends with these parents over a week is still lower than that for a child with a non-working mother. The impact of this time use strategy on children's well-being, however, remains unclear. This paper relates family time use patterns to children's cognitive and behavior well-being. Analysis is based on children's time diary data collected in the 1997 Child Development Supplement to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung
2004	151	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality II	Community Effects on Disaster-Related Mortality: The Case of the 1995 Chicago Heatwave	The 1995 Chicago heatwave killed hundreds of older urban residents.  We combine 1990 census, 1995 mortality, and 1995 Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods data to explore the social etiology of differential community-level heatwave vulnerability.  Using multilevel count models we (1) estimate excess heatwave death across neighborhoods for four race-sex groupings of residents over age 59; (2) explore neighborhood structure effects on excess death; and (3) examine whether neighborhood social organization (collective efficacy; social networks; and disorder) independently explain excess death variation and account for neighborhood structural effects on this outcome.  Results indicate that poverty predicts excess death rates across neighborhoods for all groups except black women.  Residential stability predicts excess death for whites.  Social disorder explains half of the poverty effects and 20% of residential stability effects on white excess death.  Disorder is associated with excess death for black women but not men.	Christopher	 Browning	Danielle	 Wallace	Seth	L. Feinberg	Kathleen	A. Cagney
2004	151	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality II	Learning from Neighbors: Social Learning about Child Feeding during Diarrheal Episodes	Population-level behavior change requires broad-based information sharing. Using Demographic and Health Surveys from Bolivia and Madagascar, we examine mothers' knowledge about child's fluid intake during diarrhea. Controlling for sociodemographic covariates, we find the fraction of a woman's neighbors that answers correctly substantially raises the likelihood that the woman herself will also respond correctly. In Madagascar, if the fraction of other women responding correctly increases by 10%, the probability that a woman living in that cluster also answers correctly is 3% higher, an effect equivalent to the impact of nearly 3 years of schooling. Two pieces of evidence strongly suggest direct social learning. First, in urban areas, the impact is much smaller (and insignificant in Bolivia). Second, the cluster knowledge term remains significant after adjusting for all other cluster average characteristics. Population-level improvements in health practices should be based on explicit efforts to encourage social learning and the diffusion of information.	Kirk	 Dearden	Lant	 Pritchett	Jeff	 Brown
2004	151	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality II	Assimilation and Its Discontents: The Case of Low Birth-Weight in Los Angeles	We adapt the segmented assimilation theory to a model of population health, which posits that assimilation is actually harmful to migrants' health.  We also extend models of independent individual- and contextual- factors to more directly test the theory of segmented assimilation--a theory that relies heavily upon interactions between individual and residential circumstances.  Using year 2000 vital statistics data (140,472 birth certificates) merged with 2000 US census data from Los Angeles County, we model the probability of being born low birth-weight among the native- and foreign- born.  Results confirm a migrant advantage at the individual level and protective effects of immigrant enclaves at the neighborhood (census tract) level.  On the other hand, although living in disadvantaged neighborhoods is generally deleterious, this relationship is less severe among immigrants, less educated labor-migrants in particular.  In addition, while residence in an enclave (less acculturated neighborhood) is universally salutary, highly acculturated neighborhoods are most harmful to professional migrants.	Brian	K. Finch
2004	151	Community and Contextual Effects on Health and Mortality II	A Dynamic Model of Neighborhood SES and Racial Segregation on Health Disparities	Literature by Massey and colleagues (1987, 1993) demonstrated that racial and class segregation can have serious implications for racial disparities in  crime, education, and employment. The goal of this paper is to assess the relationship between health outcomes and both community racial and class segregation. We use latent class analysis to characterize communities in terms of racial and economic characteristics dynamically over time (between 1970 and 1980). Then we examine how individual health outcomes (e.g., self-rated health, functional status, chronic conditions) are associated with: 1. stable vs. transitional race classified communities, 2. stable vs. transitional economically classified communities, and 3. stable vs. transitional communities classified by the interaction of racial and economic characteristics.  Individual-level data for health measures and demographic controls are from the 1986 Americans Changing Lives Survey (ACL, n=3,617 U.S. adults).  Community-level data at the census tract level are matched with each ACL respondent for 1980.	Erin	 Ruel	Stephanie	A. Robert
2004	152	Health Care Policy and Access	The Effect of User Fees on the Use of Prescription Drugs: Variation in Magnitude and Distribution of Effects by Neighborhood Income and Level of Drug Use	Using prescription claims data linked to neighborhood income data by postal code, this study examined the effects of the introduction of and changes in copayment policies on the use of prescription drugs, and how these effects differed by neighborhood income level. The study found that copayment policies were associated with a decrease in the quantity of prescription drug use, and that the policy effects did not directly differ by income.    The study also found that increasing the copayment per prescription while retaining the same maximum annual copayment had offsetting effects.  On one hand, it is associated with a reduction in the quantity of use for patients who are unlikely to reach the annual maximum.  On the other, it increases the proportion of patients who can expect to reach the annual maximum.	George	 Kephart	Chris	 Skedgel	Ingrid	 Sketris	John	 Hoar	Paul	 Grootendorst
2004	152	Health Care Policy and Access	Neighborhood Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Access to Healthcare	Most research on access to healthcare focuses on individual-level characteristics such as income and insurance coverage.  The role of community-level factors in helping or hindering individuals in obtaining needed care, however, has not received much attention.  We address this gap in the literature by examining how neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage is associated with access to healthcare.  We find that living in disadvantaged neighborhoods reduces the likelihood of having a usual source of care and obtaining recommended preventive care services, while it increases the likelihood of having unmet medical need.  These associations are not explained by the supply of healthcare in neighborhoods.  Furthermore, though controlling for individual-level characteristics reduces the association between neighborhood disadvantage and access to healthcare, a significant association remains.  These findings suggest that focusing exclusively on barriers to care at the individual-level may miss important community-level factors that prevent individuals from obtaining the care they need.	James	B. Kirby	Toshiko	 Kaneda
2004	152	Health Care Policy and Access	Welfare Reform and Health Insurance of Immigrants	This paper investigates the effect of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) on the health insurance coverage of foreign- and US-born families.  We find that PRWORA increased the proportion of uninsured among low-educated, foreign-born unmarried women by 9.9 to 10.7 percentage points.  In contrast, the effect of PRWORA on the health insurance coverage of similar US-born women is negligible.  We also find that PRWORA increased the proportion of uninsured among foreign-born children living with low-educated, single mothers by 13.5 percentage points.  Again, the policy had little effect on the health insurance coverage of the children of US-born, low-educated single mothers.  Finally, our investigation finds some evidence that the fear and uncertainty engendered by the law had real effects on immigrant health insurance coverage.	Neeraj	 Kaushal	Robert	 Kaestner
2004	152	Health Care Policy and Access	Measuring Health Care Needs and Coverage on a Probabilistic Scale in Population Surveys	Health system coverage is defined as the likelihood that an individual receives an appropriate intervention given that he/she has a need for it. It is usually not easy to estimate health care needs in survey settings, making it difficult to compute coverage estimates. This paper proposes a method to estimate disease prevalence--and an individual's likelihood of having a given disease or condition--based on their responses to a series of categorical-response symptomatic questions. We build on earlier work on this area by incorporating information on the sensitivity and specifity of symptomatic questions derived from a separate sample of respondents with clinical diagnosed conditions (matched with those that did not have the condition). We are able to demonstrate that this method outperforms standard algorithms that are used to classify respondents as diseased or not. Plus it provides an easy way to compute coverage estimates from population surveys.	Ajay	 Tandon	Christopher	J.L. Murray	Bakuti	 Shenghelia
2004	153	Contraceptive Practices: Insights from the DHS	Uptake of Contraception following Childbirth or Pregnancy Termination: Implications for Quality of Care in Developing Countries	The analysis will make use of DHS calendar data on dates of birth and pregnancy terminations and durations of postpartum amenorrhoea, abstinence, breastfeeding and contraceptive uptake in 19 countries.  The main emphasis of the paper will be on behavior following live births, in terms of contraceptive uptake, discontinuation and switching, but post-pregnancy termination events will also be examined.  The mean duration of postpartum infecundability ranged from 3.9 to 10.1 months and breast-feeding from 7.1 to 18.8 months.  More than two in five episodes have started during the period of postpartum infecundability (with mean overlap duration ranging from 4.3 month in Turkey to 8.7 months in Zimbabwe).  The overall 12-month discontinuation rates ranged from 19 in Zimbabwe to 58 in Dominican Republic.  A similar range was observed for injectables.  Condom discontinuation tended to be higher than for hormonal methods but IUD discontinuation was much lower.	Mohamed	M. Ali	Iqbal	H. Shah
2004	153	Contraceptive Practices: Insights from the DHS	Influences of Selected Programmatic Factors on Modern Contraceptive Discontinuation in Vietnam	The study examines influences of selected programmatic factors on the discontinuation of oral pills, IUDs and condoms in Vietnam. Data came from the 1997 DHS. The sample for the analysis consisted of 1,226 women who adopted any of the above-mentioned methods within the three years preceding the survey with 1,358 episodes of use. Forty percent of pill users, 30 percent of condom users and 10 percent of IUDs users stopped using the methods in the first year of use. Method-related problems were the most common reasons for drop-out for all three methods. More frequent visits by family planning field workers to communities were associated with lower failure rates, and surprisingly, also with higher discontinuation due to method-related reasons among pills users. Condom users in communities with a health center that was with more medical equipment experienced significantly lower risks of failures. The results are generalizable to all modern contraceptive users in Vietnam.	Mai	 Do	Shahina	 Begum	Kumiko	 Yoshida	Sirinan	 Kittisuksathit	Ashfa	 Hashmi
2004	153	Contraceptive Practices: Insights from the DHS	Mistimed and Unwanted Pregnancies in Jordan: The Influence of Wealth, Decisionmaking Power, and Access to Contraception	The total fertility rate in Jordan has declined steadily since 1990, from 5.6 children per woman to 3.7 in 2002.  Concomitantly, current use of contraception has risen from 27 percent in 1990 to 39 percent in 2002.  Despite evidence that Jordanian women largely approve of and use contraception, the 2002 Jordan Population and Family Health Survey indicates that one-third of Jordanian women continue to report mistimed or unwanted pregnancies.  The purpose of this analysis is to investigate the characteristics of women who report mistimed or unwanted pregnancies.  These characteristics will be examined with regard to their relationship with current contraceptive use, continuity of contraceptive use, and unmet need status.  A multivariate analysis of the factors associated with mistimed or unwanted fertility will include innovative explanatory variables such as household wealth status (using an asset-based wealth index), distance to health facility (using GIS data), and women's decisionmaking power in the household.	Kiersten	 Johnson
2004	153	Contraceptive Practices: Insights from the DHS	Contraceptive Discontinuation and Switching in Brazil	The Brazilian fertility rate is as low as that of many developed countries (2.5 in 1996), although important variations persist across social groups and regions. This paper examines the impact of contraceptive discontinuation and switching on Brazil's fertility transition, using  data from the calendar module of the Demographic and Health Survey. Multilevel discrete-time competing risks hazard models are used to estimate the random- and fixed-effects on the probability of a woman making a specific transition at a given duration of use. Individual-level predictors include time-varying variables captured from the calendar. Municipal-level data are merged to assess the influence of the health service environment. Female sterilisation and the pill are the most commonly used contraceptive methods. Identifying the influences on discontinuation and switching across temporary methods versus switching to a permanent method, with particular attention to condom use/disuse in light of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, could help targeting of reproductive health services.	Iuri	da Costa  Leite	Neeru	 Gupta
2004	154	Gender and Fertility Decision-Making	Two Say More than One? The Couple as Unit of Analysis of Fertility Decisions	Two main goals lead this work: first, to establish the couple's characteristics that play a significant role in some fertility decisions like timing of births and use of contraception in Mexico; and second, to evaluate the goodness of the couple approach, in terms of what it adds --and what it misses -- comparing to an individual perspective. The data comes from the Mexican National Survey on Reproductive Health 1998; 1,604 couples with both members surveyed constitute the sub-sample used. Preliminary logistic regression results suggest that it is disagreement more than agreement between wife and husband on reproductive goals and desires what promotes the adoption of contraceptive use among these couples. Additionally, disagreement on a last child birth and its timing is decreased by husband-wife communication, a larger schooling of husbands (relative to wives), and a larger knowledge on contraception of wives (compared to husbands), but enlarged by cohabitation and large differences in age between spouses.	Irene	 Casique
2004	154	Gender and Fertility Decision-Making	Fertility Decisions among Couples: A Study of Three Selected Districts from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh	It is increasingly evident that the complex dynamics of the reproductive process cannot be properly understood as long as researchers continue to base their studies on data collected exclusively from women. It would be desirable to examine how family size desire as well as motivation to use contraception varies between husbands and wives. This study is undertaken in a region where level of fertility is still substantially high and women tend to have less autonomy. We analyse the responses to desired family size and desire for an additional child reported by husband and wife. The desired family size as reported by husband is higher than the wife.  Overall, in 11 per cent cases there is disagreement between spouses on desire for additional child. The agreement between husband and wife on having a son in the family is quite obvious. However, the study points out towards a stronger desire for sons among women than men.	Sayeed	 Unisa	Tarun	K. Roy	Chander	 Shekhar
2004	154	Gender and Fertility Decision-Making	Italian Parents: Implications of Childbearing for the Family Role-Set and Vice Versa	In Italy the endurance of the traditional role-set within couples has resulted in an extreme dual-burden for working women and, as recently suggested, this can be a factor in explaining lowest-low fertility. Through quantitative and qualitative data on Italian (working and urban) parents, we analyse the family role-set before and after children and verify the hypothesis that low gender equity can lower the rates of having one more child. Results confirm that not much change has taken place in housework and childcare gender sharing; implications of a birth are still negative in term of gender equality; fatherhood increases time devoted to work, motherhood time spent on childcare or housekeeping. A progressive adaptation towards gender equity is only evident among a small proportion of dual-earning couples, where childbearing implies a more similar revolution of fathers' and mothers' time and activities, influencing positively the probability to have another child.	Letizia	 Mencarini	Maria	Letizia  Tanturri
2004	154	Gender and Fertility Decision-Making	Where Qualitative Research Meets Demography: Interdisciplinary Explorations of Conceptions on Fatherhood in an Extremely Low Fertility Context	Recent demands to include psychological theories of decision-making and intention-formation in research on family formation coincide with calls for improving research on male fertility and fatherhood. In this paper, we address these notions and present findings from in-depth interviews with 30-year-old childless men from Eastern Germany on their desire for children. Our research is embedded in the societal situation of contemporary Eastern Germany, where birth rates have faced a historical low--the lowest in more than 10 years. Our innovative analytical paradigm draws on the contemporary social cognitive theory of intention-formation. We examine male attitudes, values, motives, interests, goals, action beliefs, and self-concepts, and their connection to intentions for parenthood. We compare our results with explanations that the Theory of Symbolic Self-Completion and the Theory of Reasoned Action give. We argue for the need to account for fundamentally different psychological mechanisms that may determine men's transition to fatherhood.	Holger	R. von der Lippe	Urs	 Fuhrer
2004	155	Comparative Perspectives on Couples' Paid and Unpaid Work	Gender, Employment, and Housework in Japan	This study examines employment and housework among Japanese wives and husbands in midlife, using data from two recent national surveys on the family. My preliminary analysis found as follows. First, family factors such as the presence and age of children and coresidence with parents strongly affect wives' employment patterns but have little effect on husbands' employment patterns. Second, although wives shoulder most of housework, spouses' total workload becomes equal when employment and housework hours are considered jointly. However, wives' total workload increases dramatically as their employment hours increases, indicating the second shift of unpaid housework for employed wives. Third, couples' housework hours and husbands' share in housework are influenced by couples' employment hours and family situations such as the presence of children and coresidence with parents. Fourth, husbands' hours and share in housework are notably higher among highly educated wives and husbands aged 20-29 in 2000 (but not in 1994).	Noriko	 Tsuya
2004	155	Comparative Perspectives on Couples' Paid and Unpaid Work	Is Women's Work Never Done? Gender Differences in Total Work Time in Australia and the United States	Empirical analyses of gender differences in total work time appear to debunk conventional wisdom that women work more than men. Studies report, however, that gender differences in work time vary cross-nationally. It is plausible that macrosociological differences in gendered expectations about work and family are associated with variation in total work time. The contribution of our analysis is its comparative examination of whether total work time varies by couple employment status and parental status and whether the processes that alter the second shift and total work time vary cross-nationally. In preliminary analyses we find that women's full-time employment is associated with longer work hours more so in the U.S. than Australia. In both countries, having young children carries a time penalty in that they increase total work load. Additionally, men's unpaid work time responds more to the presence of children than it does to changes in levels of women's employment.	Liana	C. Sayer	Michael	 Bittman	Suzanne	M. Bianchi
2004	155	Comparative Perspectives on Couples' Paid and Unpaid Work	Social Welfare Regimes and the Division of Household Labor	This study examines the effect of women's employment on the division of housework in countries with different types of social welfare regimes. Using Chang's (2000) social welfare regime typology, we test whether regimes mediate the impact of women's employment on the division of housework between husbands and wives, using data from the 1994 International Social Survey Programme from 11 industrialized countries. Consistent with our hypotheses, we find that the substantive-egalitarian social welfare regimes (e.g., Sweden) have the most egalitarian overall divisions of household labor within married couples, but the effect of women's employment is not as strong there as it is in the formal-egalitarian regimes (e.g., U.S.A.). The traditional family-centered countries (e.g., Japan) show the least egalitarian household division of labor and very weak effects of wives' employment on that division of labor. Wives' housework responsibilities in those countries are relatively insensitive to their employment status.	Makiko	 Fuwa
2004	155	Comparative Perspectives on Couples' Paid and Unpaid Work	Extra Domestic Work and Gender Family Relations in Mexico: A Theme Revisited	The analysis of the effect of women's non domestic work on gender family relations does not always lead to consistent positive findings. At least in the case of Mexico it has been often argued that this is due to the complexity and multidimensional character of this relationship, as well as to insufficient data availability, especially for population-based studies. In this paper we pursue to respond to these different issues by analyzing recent data recollected for 2 532 women in metropolitan areas of Mexico. We take into consideration various aspects of women's labor force participation and different dimensions of gender relations in the family (such as husband's participation in domestic tasks and child care). Regression results demonstrate that women's work experience (number of years worked after marriage) is the only variable that significantly predicts the presence of more egalitarian gender relations controlling by an important number of socioeconomic and demographic characteristics.	Brígida	 García	Orlandina	 de Oliveira
2004	156	Urbanization and Socio-Economic Consequences	Urbanization and Socio-Economic Consequences -- A Case Study for Delhi	Increasing share of services sector in GDP of an economy is a sufficient indicator of development.  It is largely accomplished through growing urbanization. There are two issues that this study attempts to focus on.  The one being unchecked expansion and growth of an urban area beyond the capacity it can bear with in terms of its infrastructure facilities and geographical limitations.  The other is the centralized growth of a few pockets within the town. This give rise to multiple problems with several dimensions as is visible in the metros of India such as Delhi, which is the most, urbanized.  To highlight on the socio-economic consequences of the above in terms of certain parameters by using the secondary data on Delhi.  The idea is to generate public opinion and awareness and caution and restrain the town planners from allowing both over-growth and centralized growth of a town.	Samir	K. Mondal	Nandini	 Acharya
2004	156	Urbanization and Socio-Economic Consequences	Living Condition of Floating Population in Urban China	Slum and squatter is not widespread in most Chinese towns and cities, although China has been experiencing rapid urbanization. Moreover, statistics from the 2000 national  census, which for the first time provides information on housing, reveals that migrants do not necessary live in poorer housing condition than their counterparts of non-migrants; some housing facilities of floating population, who move without changes of household registration, are even better than non-migrants.  Using 0.95% of household sample of 2000 census dataset, we study the living condition and its determinants of floating population, and answer questions, such as: (1) How do floating population live in urban China? (2) Which type of floating population live in which type of housing? (3)  Why do some floating population live better than native urban residents? (4) What should be done and what would be the most efficient, to improve housing conditions of floating population, and other urban residents?	Leiwen	 Jiang	Lihua	 Pang	Qiang	 Ren
2004	156	Urbanization and Socio-Economic Consequences	India's Decelerating Urbanization and Its Consequences for Country's Socio-Economic Development	Urbanization is closely linked with socio-economic development and cities play an important role in the national development. The 2001 Census of India shows that over the last two decades there has been considerable deceleration in the growth rate of urban population and rate of urbanization in India. This deceleration of urbanization should be seen as a matter of serious concern keeping the fact in mind that in 2001 only a little more than one fourth (28 percent) of country's population was living in urban areas. This paper discusses some of the implications of this deceleration of urbanization for country's socio-economic development like, increasing pressure of population on already crowded land resources and further immiserisation of the rural poor who have used migration to cities as a potential medium to improve upon their socio-economic conditions, particularly in states which leg behind in socio-economic development but continue to experience high natural increase.	Kamla	 Gupta
2004	156	Urbanization and Socio-Economic Consequences	New Town Development in Jakarta Metropolitan Region: A Perspective of Spatial Segregation	The extent to which land and new town development has reinforced spatial segregation in Jakarta Metropolitan Region (JMR) is discussed. The demand for new towns has been essentially generated by the need for security and fulfilling an exclusive life style, which because it is innovative, has been able to sell an image of the 'new town' as a symbol of modernism'. New town development has reinforced spatial segregation in three ways: First, it has polarized the middle and upper income groups, resulting in scattered pockets of exclusive residential areas. Second, within the new towns themselves, the upper middle and high class occupied exclusively designed areas with the highest security possible. Third, in several new towns, urban development management is carried out by the developers instead of by the city hall. The spatial segregation in JMR can be classified as 'self segregation' or 'voluntary segregation'. It will continue and is inevitable.	Tommy	 Firman
2004	157	Demography of Retirement	Effects of Early Life Family Events on Women's Late Life Labour Market Behaviour: An Analysis of the Relationship between Childbearing and Retirement in Western Germany	The relationship between a woman's reproductive history and her entry into retirement is not well-investigated yet. Will mothers exit the workforce earlier than childless women (as they have a weaker labour market orientation; as they are more likely to have a 'male breadwinner' in the household), or will they work longer to make-up for employment interruptions during their reproductive phase? We exploit data from the German Socio-Economic Panel to estimate discrete-time logit models for women's transition to retirement, using detailed information on the individual's fertility biography as main explanatory variables. Our primary finding is that having children delays a woman's exit from the labour force. This effect tends to be stronger for mothers who experienced their first birth relatively late. Postponing both fertility and retirement might be driven by a relatively strong work orientation. However, we do not find any influence of maternal employment during a child's preschool years on the decision to retire.	Karsten	 Hank
2004	157	Demography of Retirement	Obesity, Work, and Economic Security in Later Life	Obesity rates are rising dramatically in the U.S.  Past research demonstrates that obesity negatively affects health, often leading to lessened mobility, increased chronic disease, and early aging. Besides health effects, obesity is linked to lower wages and lower accumulations of wealth in later life. In this paper we explore the impact of obesity on middle and old age work status and work histories. Using data from the HRS we analyze the impact of obesity on labor force participation, number of hours worked, spells of unemployment, and retirement age. We find that obesity is more significant for women than men. Obese women are more likely to report they are work disabled and to use more sick days while working. Men who are obese are only slightly more likely than non-obese men to report being disabled and do not show a difference in the use of sick days among those who are employed.	Christine	 Himes	Madonna	 Harrington Meyer
2004	157	Demography of Retirement	Dynamics of Individual Information about Social Security	Several studies have raised concern about an apparent widespread lack of knowledge about pensions and Social Security, even among people close to retirement.  These findings largely rely on cross-sectional analyses, and therefore are likely to overstate the negative consequences of lack of knowledge: they only allow limited inference on whether lack of knowledge is a permanent state or whether knowledge improves over time as an individual approaches retirement.  It is of great importance to understand how big a problem lack of knowledge in this area really is to assess to what extent it is responsible for people making sub-optimal choices and suffer bad outcomes in retirement.  Understanding these patterns is also essential to find whether additional financial education could avert such bad outcomes. This paper adopts a dynamic approach and studies the evolution of individuals' expectations about their Social Security and pension benefits and subsequent receipt observed in the HRS.	Susann	 Rohwedder	Kristin	J. Kleinjans
2004	157	Demography of Retirement	Is Phased Retirement a State of Mind? The Role of Individual Preferences in Retirement Outcomes	This paper examines the phenomena of phased retirement among older workers and whether the choice or desire for phased retirement consistently reflects the worker's values and goals on work and leisure.  Using the Health and Retirement Study and alternative constructions of retirement status, this paper finds that phased retirement is not a path experienced by many workers.  Moreover, phased retirement is more likely for those who value work as an activity that is important in and of itself or who have positive views of their occupations.  However, other factors, such as education, were also significantly associated with phased retirement, but the associations varied according to how work-retirement status was defined.  Moreover, phased retirees appeared to reach full retirement later than workers who did not take part in phased retirement.  There are also substantial differences in results between wage-and-salary workers and the self-employed.	John	C. Scott
2004	158	Economic Inequality	Income Inequality within and between Family Structure Types	This paper describes the trends in income inequality by family structure for families with children using data from twenty-four years of March CPS surveys.  Since 1976, income inequality has increased among families with children and family structure types are increasingly stratified by income.  Income inequality within family structure types is greatest among single female-headed families and smallest among married couple families.  Standardization results confirm that demographic change in American family structure patterns has led to increased income inequality.	Molly	A. Martin
2004	158	Economic Inequality	Gender Inequality in East and West: Attitudes to Women's Participation in the Labour Market	The analysis of economic factors usually applied for examining gender inequality in the labour market suggests that former post communist countries have reached equally high standards of gender equality compared to Western industrialised countries. This paper aims at comparing attitudes to women's work between transition and OECD countries highlighting the explanatory power of societal norms. The analysis of attitudes, their determinants and their change in regions and countries is based on micro-data of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP) from 1994 and 1998 waves. These data reveal that a strikingly higher share of people in the East than in the West agrees with traditional values on women's work. The large homogeneity in patriarchal values of Eastern people with differing socio-economic background explains these regional differences. The East-West gap in traditional value orientations is likely to widen given that liberal values spread faster in OECD countries than transition countries.	Sylke	V. Schnepf
2004	158	Economic Inequality	Mortality and Economic Fluctuations in Sweden, 1800-1998	Spectral analysis and other techniques applied to economic indicators and mortality rates in Sweden in the period 1800-1998 show an intense direct association between death rates and the harvest yield the preceding year until the 1880s. From the 1890s death rates start to fluctuate with the industrial economy in a procyclical oscillation that persists until the present, though considerably reduced in the latter half of the 20th century. These results confirm the procyclical fluctuation of mortality rates--found by other authors in the US and other countries--but they don't provide any evidence in favor of the hypothesis that attributes the increase of mortality during economic expansions to lagged effects of an economic slowdown 10 to 15 years before.	José	A. Tapia
2004	159	Comparative Mortality Analyses	Regional Mortality Differences in Germany and Italy -- A Macro and Micro Level Analysis of Similarities and Differences regarding Developments and Responsible Factors	Regional mortality differences are known for a lot of countries but are usually examined solely at the national level. This study compares regional differences in Germany and Italy. In Germany as well as in Italy mortality is decreasing from the north to the south. This similar north-south gradient in mortality exists despite complete different north-south diversities in economic and industrial conditions between the two countries. During the second half of the 20th century these regional mortality differences underwent different developments in the two countries. While in Italy they diminished, in Germany they remained at a remarkable level. The main goal of this study is to determine the decisive macro and micro level factors that are responsible for the cause and changes in regional mortality differences to find out if they are caused by country specific factors, or if regional mortality differences are due to factors that work irrespective the specific economic and societal background.	Graziella	 Caselli	Marc	A. Luy
2004	159	Comparative Mortality Analyses	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality in Finland and the United States: The Role of Income and Education	We investigate educational and income inequality in mortality by age and sex in Finland and the United States in the 1980s, and assess whether associations exhibit similar patterns in the two countries. The results will advance our understanding of mortality differentials by socioeconomic status in two settings with different social welfare and health care systems.	Irma	T. Elo	Pekka	 Martikainen	Kirsten	 Smith
2004	159	Comparative Mortality Analyses	The Trend in Between-Nation Health Inequality	Global inequality is the sum of inequality between nations plus the average level of inequality within nations.  Recent research on global health inequality has focused primarily on the second component, health inequality within nations.  This study is about the first component, health inequality between nations.  Estimates of average life expectancy for 169 nations are used to compute the trend in between-nation health inequality from 1980 to 2000.  Results show that inequality in the distribution of life expectancy across nations declined in the 1980s, but then increased through the 1990s.  The recent turnaround in between-nation health inequality is significant because it reverses a long-term trend of declining inequality across nations that began in the early twentieth century.  The primary cause of rising inequality across nations is declining life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa likely due to HIV/AIDS, and life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa holds the key to the future between-nation inequality trend.	Brian	 Goesling	Glenn	 Firebaugh
2004	159	Comparative Mortality Analyses	Cross-National Comparability of Health and Mortality Measures -- Evidence from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS)	The goal of our paper is twofold: first, we present the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) as a unique source for a developing country to address the aging processes, health dynamics and mortality outcomes simultaneously with transitions in other life domains, including changes in economic well-being, marital and family status, migration histories, socioeconomic transfers. We discuss how measures of health such as symptoms, functional status, anthropometric and cognitive measures can be incorporated in research on health and mortality of the elderly and old population, and we present examples for Mexico. Second, we address the issue of comparability and equivalence of health measures and how these may bias conclusions about the determinants of health, morbidity and mortality in a cross-cultural comparison. Our analyses are based on a comparison between MHAS and the HRS which are nearly identical in design, contents and coverage because HRS served as a template for MHAS.	Iliana	V. Kohler	Beth	 Soldo
2004	160	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement	Points of Departure: Emigration from the United States	The answer to the simple question of the number of U.S. residents having left in the 1990s to live abroad actually involves multiple answers that varied by source and date.  The tasks of measuring quantities of emigration or return migration and number of U.S. born persons or former U.S. residents living abroad, whether temporarily or long-term, remain dependent on a crude science of scrutinizing various data sources to indirectly address the problem.  Drawing from several studies about emigration and return migration, this review covers definitional issues, analytic universe, study populations, period influences, heterogeneity of at-risk populations, constituencies of emigration estimates, and alternative findings.  Although similar reviews are available for another hard-to-estimate population, unauthorized populations, a similar review has not existed for emigrants.  To augment U.S. population statistics for this decade, a number of strategies are possible that meet criteria of understandability, credibility, and feasibility.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield	Ellen	 Kraly
2004	160	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement	Design of Samples for International Migration Surveys: Methodological Considerations, Practical Constraints, and Lessons Learned from a Multi-Country Study in Africa and Europe	The paper begins with a review of shortcomings of standard data sources to investigate the causes, consequences and mechanisms of international migration. It then argues that specialised household sample surveys are a powerful alternative. Specific sample design issues for the study of international migration in countries of origin and destination are then discussed, including the rare elements problem and approaches for dealing with it, and the tendency of migrant households to cluster in particular areas in countries of origin and destination. The paper then presents a model sample design approach permitting obtaining statistically representative results, and discusses its application in five migrant-sending countries (Egypt, Ghana, Morocco, Senegal, Turkey) and two migrant-receiving countries (Italy, Spain), covered by the NIDI/Eurostat study, Push and Pull Factors of International Migration. Main design features, implementation constraints, and final approaches used are discussed, leading to a number of methodological recommendations.	George	 Groenewold	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2004	160	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement	Some New Demographic Equations in Survival Analysis under Generalized Population Model: Applications to Swedish and Indian Census Age-Data for Estimating Adult Mortality	This paper presents development of some new formulas in estimating 10-year conventional and cumulative life table survival ratios, defined by the following ratios--L(x+10, x+15)/L(x, x+5) and T(x+10)/T(x) in life table terminology respectively, from two enumerations (not necessarily multiple of 5 years apart) of any closed population that  follows a generalized population model. Furthermore, it is assumed that the age-specific growth curve should resemble closely to a second-degree polynomial. Attempts have also been made to establish algebraic relationships between census survival ratios (conventional and cumulative) and the corresponding life table survival ratios under GPM. The formulas, developed here, have been applied to sufficiently accurate age-data of Sweden and that of India subject to response biases in age reporting. The proposed technique, which works quit well in assessing adult mortality even when the age-data are distorted due to age misreporting, may be extended for population projection and other demographic estimations.	Subrata	 Lahiri
2004	160	New Strategies in Demographic Measurement	New Approaches to Measuring Emergent U.S. Demographic Trends	In recent years, a number of emergent demographic trends have challenged the traditional methods of taking censuses, asking surveys,  and estimating demographic change in the United States.  As these trends have emerged and grown in importance, the U. S. statistical system has developed new methods and approaches to measure the new phenomena.  Growing mobility and family instability have led to increasing ambiguity in residency and a re-examination of the definition and measurement of place of residence. Increasing international migration  (both documented and undocumented) has led to new approaches to measuring or estimating international migration.  Increased racial and ethnic diversity and intermarriage has led to new methods of measuring the variety of single and multiple racial and ethnic identifications of the population.  The paper outlines these and other trends and points out the importance of a flexible statistical system that can react to rapid social and demographic changes.	John	F. Long
2004	161	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries III	One-Year Impacts of a Quality-of-Care Intervention on Contraceptive Use and Reproductive Goal Attainment	This randomized study tested whether significant improvements of the quality of care, achieved earlier by introducing the Balanced Counseling Strategy at Peru Ministry of Health clinics, are followed by improved long-term outcomes. 24 health directorates were the study units; 12 of them received the intervention. New-event family planning clients were recruited as they exited counseling sessions and interviewed with the calendar module of the DHS to tap their subsequent 12-month contraceptive history (N = 215). Mean monthly contraceptive use rates per health directorate were calculated for each cohort. The treated cohort showed greater use (.81 versus .78, p       	Federico	R. León	Alex	 Ríos	Adriana	 Zumarán	Santiago	 Roca	Ana	R. Feijoo
2004	161	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries III	The Impact of a Community-Based Health Programme on Health-Seeking Behaviour, Knowledge, and Health Outcomes in Rural Ghana	As the first district in Ghana to replicate the Navrongo Experiment, Nkwanta has been a leader in establishing a programme of scaling-up known as the Community-based Health Planning and Services (CHPS) initiative.  Since 2002, Nkwanta has been involved in developing a CHPS impact assessment tool. The survey aimed to evaluate covariance of CHPS exposure and change in health-seeking behavior, knowledge, and outcomes. Sixty clusters were selected by probability proportionate to size, with enumeration areas acting as the unit of analysis.  Results indicate that exposure to CHPS is associated with a significantly positive effect on family planning, safe motherhood, and immunization, controlling for relevant demographic variables. Experience has proven that mobilizing traditional social institutions provides a powerful basis for fostering behavioral change. However, exposure to the initiative has had no significant impact on HIV/AIDS knowledge.  Future efforts will therefore focus on introducing an explicit HIV prevention component to the programme.	John	K. Awoonor-Williams	Ellie	 Feinglass	Rachel	 Tobey
2004	161	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries III	Do the Better Family Planning Services Offered by the MCH-FP Project in Matlab, Bangladesh Affect the Method of Abortion Used?	In Bangladesh, early-gestation pregnancy terminations by manual vacuum aspiration provided at public health facilities are legal, but less safe, illegal abortions are available from village practitioners.  We use longitudinal data from the Matlab Demographic Surveillance System to analyze both types of abortion in comparable areas typical of much of Bangladesh -- a comparison area that receives standard government family planning services and a treatment area that receives better family planning services.  We find that contraceptive availability and quality affect both the rates and methods of abortion during our study period, 1989 to 2000.  In both areas, most abortions before 1993 were done by illegal methods, but since then most have been done by legal means.  Similar changes have occurred among women of all age groups in both areas.  Highly educated women are the most likely to terminate their pregnancies, but they are also the most likely to use legal, safer methods to do so.	Julie	 DaVanzo	Mizanur	 Rahman	Abdur	 Razzaque	Clifford	 Grammich
2004	161	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries III	A Quasi-Experimental Study to Assess the Performance of a Reproductive Health Franchise in Nepal	Objective: To assess the performance of a nurse and paramedic franchise that was established to increase client satisfaction and utilization of reproductive health services. Methods:  A quasi-experimental study design, with baseline and follow-up measurements on nonequivalent control groups, was used. Client exit interviews, provider interviews and household interviews were administered.  Multi-level random effect models were used to estimate clinic/cluster level variances. Results: Client satisfaction and loyalty increased at intervention but not at control clinics.  The increase in client loyalty was, in part, explained by the increase in client satisfaction.  At the population level, we did not find consistent increases in utilization of various reproductive health services, possibly because a) providers were not proactive in informing clients about the reproductive health services being offered b) mass media activities had limited impact c) the intervention was implemented for too short a period of time to have had a measurable impact.	Sohail	 Agha	Ali	M. Karim	Asma	 Balal	Steve	 Sosler
2004	162	New Findings on Segregation	Change in Racial and Ethnic Residential Inequality in American Cities, 1970 to 2000	Scholars interested in racial and ethnic residential inequality frequently focus on intercensal change in levels of segregation. However, prior scholarship has not estimated effects of theoretically important variables on changes in segregation over a relatively long period of time. In this paper I use hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) techniques to estimate segregation growth trajectories for a sample of U.S. cities from 1970 to 2000. In these models, repeated observations of urban areas, comprising metropolitan areas, central cities, and suburban rings, are nested within those areas. The results will provide estimates of four indicators of segregation in 2000 and the city-level predictors of those indicators. In addition, HLM enables the estimation of 1970 to 2000 change in segregation, as well as the predictors of that change. In the process, I test hypotheses about the causes of static and dynamic variation in racial and ethnic residential inequality.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake
2004	162	New Findings on Segregation	Residential Integration in U.S. Cities: A Study of Stability and Change	Conventional wisdom views racial integration as a temporary phenomenon.  Racially integrated neighborhoods ultimately transition to become dominated by a single racial group.  According to the Classic Succession Model, the in-migration of African Americans into a neighborhood is accompanied by the out-migration of whites for whom the number of African American neighbors exceeds their tolerance level.  While this model was historically accurate, recent research suggests that this process may now be less inevitable than presumed.  This project uses census data to investigate the factors that influenced change in the racial configuration of African American communities over the last decade of the 20th century. This study found that the number of stable communities in which African Americans and whites co-reside increased during this period.  It addresses the question of why some racially integrated neighborhoods maintain their ethnic diversity while others transition to become racially homogeneous.	Jane	 Cover
2004	162	New Findings on Segregation	Racial Preferences and Racial Residential Segregation: Findings from Analyses Using Minimum Segregation Models	I use minimum segregation measures--model-based measures that register the minimum level of segregation that can be achieved without violating the ethnic preferences of the populations residing in the city--to explore the implications of preferences for segregation.  I develop formulations that take account of group's preferences separately and jointly.  I develop methods yielding minimum segregation outcomes on multiple dimensions of segregation simultaneously both when preferences are homogeneous and when preferences are heterogeneous.  I find that the implications of a group's preferences for segregation are complicated and vary with the racial composition of the city, the preferences held by other groups, and the shape of the preference distributions involved.  I also find that model-based assessments suggest preferences may have important implications for racial segregation in urban areas including the surprising result that seemingly tolerant preferences held by minority populations can give rise to high levels of residential segregation.	Mark	 Fossett
2004	162	New Findings on Segregation	Competition versus Equity: The Impact of Charter Schools on Segregation in Michigan Public Schools	Abstract: When President Bush signed No Child Left Behind into law on January 8, 2002, an already highly charged debate over school choice got an extra boost. While opponents argue that choice will lead to increased segregation, it is possible that increased choice may lead to greater integration by easing the historically tight link between residence and school attendance.  This study aims to determine whether school choice, in the form of charter schools, is leading to greater segregation in Michigan public schools.  Using data spanning from 1990 to 2000, I document changes in the racial composition and levels of segregation in schools while taking into account levels of residential segregation in school districts.  The results indicate that while charter schools appear to be racially distinct; this is a result of their location in districts that are already highly segregated by residence.  Once this fact is taken into account, charter schools are not furthering segregation in public schools.	Karen	E. Ross
2004	163	Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Empirical Bayes Estimation of Small Area Adult Mortality Risk in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia	In Sub-Saharan Africa, small area analyses of health differentials have been inhibited by the paucity of data as well as quality concerns. This paper takes advantage of near-complete mortality data collected in Addis Ababa via ongoing burial surveillance in order to explore the relationship between AIDS mortality and selected district attributes. We make use of Bayes' Theorem to generate smoothed age- and sex-specific probabilities of death by district between the ages of 15 and 60, distinguishing between AIDS and non-AIDS mortality using estimates based on lay diagnosis. Results show the degree of unexplained variance in AIDS-attributable mortality to be significantly higher than for mortality due to other causes after taking certain socioeconomic determinants into account. Since death due to AIDS in Addis Ababa has been highly correlated with HIV illness due to the lack of available treatment, the results provide useful insight into the spatial characteristics of urban HIV transmission.	Brodie	D. Ferguson	Georges	 Reniers	Tekebash	 Araya	James	H. Jones	Eduard	 Sanders
2004	163	Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS Deaths on Households in India and Coping Strategies: A Study of Well Being of Children	This study has been carried in Sangli, the most HIV affected district in India. Data for this study were collected from AIDS and non-AIDS death households .A significant negative impact on the economy of households where an adult had died due to AIDS is clearly evident. On the social front, they had experienced discriminations and a few of them sent their children away to distant relatives and withdraw children from school. Adult deaths due to AIDS have impacted negatively on children's access to health care. Elevated discrimination levels against children in schools and in the community were clearly articulated. While the members of the extended family provide orphans with shelter, it is obvious that several of these children did not receive continued education and health care when needed. The impact on both households and children is much more negative in case of those households which are socially and economically disadvantaged.	Shrikant	 Singh	Jean	J Schensul
2004	163	Consequences of HIV/AIDS	AIDS Mortality and the Mobility of Children in Rural Kwazulu-Natal, South Africa	South Africa is experiencing a very severe AIDS epidemic.  As a consequence of this, an estimated 4 million children, or about 10% of the entire population will be orphaned by the year 2015 (Whiteside and Sunter, 2000).  The objective of this study is to examine the impact of maternal AIDS deaths on the mobility and living arrangements of children.  Data will be drawn from the Demographic Surveillance System of 11,000 households of the Africa Centre in Matubatuba, South Africa.  Initial analyses of these data showed that there was no evidence of an increasing number of child headed households.  Hazard models for children who were living with their mothers when they died identified a number of household factors related to leaving the household including the socioeconomic status of the household, the presence of adult males and females, the age of the child, and the presence of other children.	Kathy	 Ford	Victoria	 Hosegood
2004	163	Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Does Biological Relatedness Determine Household Resource Allocation?	The well-being of African orphans in the era of HIV/AIDS is becoming a global concern. The primary aim of this study is to examine whether adults allocate resources to children based on their degree of biological relatedness. In this study we use a panel data collected from 800 households in the Kagera district of Tanzania (one of the most HIV/AIDS affected areas in Africa) during the period 1991 to 1994. The analysis focuses on examining the resources available to an adult and the adult's degree of biological relatedness to a child, and their resulting impact on expenditure on child's clothing, child's nutritional status, child's education, and child's demand for health care. Our analysis show that a reduction in a child's biological relatedness to adults with disposable income reduces the number of years of schooling, expenditure on clothing for a child, and the demand for health care.	El	Daw  Suliman	Mead	 Over
2004	164	Abortion II	Abortion Seeking Behavior among Nigerian Women	Abortion is illegal in Nigeria, but the behavior is not uncommon among women. It is estimated that about 610,000 abortions occur annually. Unfortunately, most of these abortions occur under unsafe conditions and constitute a major source of maternal morbidity and mortality. Given that abortion is illegal in Nigeria, it is of policy and program relevance to know how women seek to stop an unwanted pregnancy in this context. To explore this new area, a sample survey of 3,200 women aged 15-49 was conducted in late 2002 to mid 2003 in 8 states across the nation, covering the 4 health zones. Using data from this new survey, this paper examines the steps that women take and the things that they do in order to obtain abortion in Nigeria. The findings will highlight important differences in abortion seeking behavior among different sub-groups and offer new information for policy and program interventions.	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Boniface	 Oye-Adeniran	Rubina	 Hussain	Gilda	 Sedgh
2004	164	Abortion II	Determinants of Knowledge and Opinions about Abortion Law among Men and Women in Rajasthan, India	The Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Act of 1971 entitled women in India to legal abortion services.  However, a majority of women continue to seek abortion services from unlicensed or illegal providers. Public knowledge and opinions about the legal status of abortion may affect women's access to safe abortion services.  Data from a community-based survey of 3266 married women and 606 married men in Rajasthan, India were analyzed to explore knowledge and opinions about abortion law.  Logistic regression was used to identify factors associated with participants' knowledge and opinions of the legal status of abortion.  Preliminary results suggest that higher literacy and awareness of the practice of sex selective abortion are associated with men's and women's knowledge of the legal status of abortion.  The odds of having correct knowledge about the legal status of abortion were also increased for women with more liberal opinions about abortion.	Hillary	 Bracken	Batya	 Elul	Sandhya	V. Barge	Shalini	 Verma	Meagan	 Cavanaugh
2004	164	Abortion II	Estimating Clandestine Abortion with the Confidants' Method. Results from Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso	Data on illegal abortion in sub-Saharan Africa are rare and non-representative. This study presents a new method to collect quantitative data on clandestine abortion, the confidants' method, applied in 2001 in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. According to our estimates, there is 40 induced abortions per 1000 women aged 15 to 49 in Ouagadougou annually, and even more among adolescents (60 per 1000 women 15-19); adverse health consequences affect 60% of women who had an abortion, and 14% enter the city's hospitals, which receive an estimated 1100 abortion complications a year. Hospital data indicate that these centers admit about 1000 induced abortions annually; the age distribution of patients admitted for induced abortion also corresponds to the confidants' method's projections. These two results argue in favor of the reliability of the method. A comparison with similar data collected in rural Burkina indicate that abortion rates increase with the entry into the fertility transition.	Clementine	 Rossier	Georges	 Guiella	Abdoulaye	 Ouedraogo	Blandine	 Thieba
2004	164	Abortion II	Abortion and Contraception in 12 Countries	Based on data from CDC and DHS surveys, this is a documentation of the replacement of abortion by modern methods of contraception in 12 countries of Central Asia and eastern Europe.  In most of these countries, the recent trend is an increase in modern contraceptive prevalence accompanied by a decline in abortion rates.  In several countries where little change in contraception has occurred, abortion rates have risen.  The paper will also describe a model in which the contributions to abortion by contraceptive failure and be unmet need are quantified.  Various simulations will by shown to indicate the extent of future reductions in abortion from various combinations of shifts in method mix and reductions in unmet need.  The research indicates a very strong negative correlation across 18 countries between the use of modern methods and abortion and a strong positive correlation with traditional method use.  Covariates of abortion and of contraceptive practice will also be analyzed in multivariate analyses comparable across countries.	Charles	 Westoff
2004	165	Child Health in Developing Countries	Maternal Literacy and Numeracy Skills and Child Health in Ghana	This paper examines the impact of maternal literacy, numeracy and schooling on the production of children's health in Ghana.  The analysis considers intermediate outcomes including pre- and post-natal care and vaccinations, and final outcomes, including illnesses and mortality.  Previous studies of the determinants of child health have mostly been limited to investigating the impact of maternal schooling only and, as a consequence, largely have not considered skills and also have ignored alternative routes to acquiring skills, such as adult literacy programs.  Analyzing a recent household survey for Ghana, this paper addresses both of these issues.  To address endogeneity, the skills, schooling and child health demand equations are estimated jointly using the Mroz-Guilkey correction (Mroz and Guilkey, 1992).  Preliminary results indicate statistically significant effects from literacy and numeracy skills on final and intermediate child health outcomes independent of the effects from schooling.	Niels-Hugo	 Blunch
2004	165	Child Health in Developing Countries	Education, Health Knowledge, and Child Health in Ghana: What Do People Know and How Do They Know It?	This paper is concerned with child health in Ghana.  Specifically, what do people know about the causes of three serious child illnesses--malaria, diarrheal disease, and respiratory infection--and what determines biomedical knowledge?  I rely on primary survey data (N=2500) collected in Ghana's Central Region in 2002.  In descriptive and bivariate analysis I found, first, that knowledge of etiology of these three illnesses is low.  For example, only half of respondents can identify the cause of malaria.  Second, I found that men are consistently more knowledgeable about disease etiology than women.  In multivariate analysis, however, this differential reverses; when controls are added, men are less likely than women to attribute these three illnesses to contagion or hygiene.  As expected, education and literacy are strongly associated with health knowledge.  In addition, other individual, household, and community characteristics are influential, particularly media exposure, household SES, and urban residence.	Catherine	N. Stiff
2004	165	Child Health in Developing Countries	Explaining Racial Differences in Child Mortality in South Africa	Child health and survival in South Africa were deeply influenced by the imposition of the apartheid state in 1948, a system of institutionalized discrimination against Nonwhites in all areas of life that remained in place until 1994. Using household-level data from 1998 linked to community-level indicators, we estimate piecewise exponential regression models with shared frailty to show how specific aspects of apartheid, including racial inequality in opportunities for socioeconomic advancement, racial residential segregation into different geographic areas, and migrant labor have created or exacerbated existing racial disparities in children's survival chances in the aftermath of apartheid. We conclude that differences in the kinds of communities in which black children and other children are raised are important determinants of child survival, but are best reflected in the supply of infrastructure that directly affects household environmental conditions, in this case, the supply of water and sanitation.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Donald	J. Treiman
2004	165	Child Health in Developing Countries	Child Mortality Attributable to Multiple Risk Factors	The contributions of risk factors (e.g. undernutrition and poor water, sanitation, and hygiene) to child mortality have been extensively documented. Because of paucity of data on multiple risk factor correlations, estimates have assumed that risks are uniformly distributed in a  population and the distribution of the health effects of risk factors has not been studied. In this paper, we estimate total and equity effects of exposure to multiple childhood mortality risk factors,  accounting for correlation between multiple risks and mortality using the Demographic and Health Surveys. This analysis takes an important step to answering questions on: i) reductions in child mortality if exposure to multiple childhood risks were reduced; ii) effects of risk factor reduction on child mortality inequalities within and between countries; and iii) expected reductions in child mortality following partial (50%) reduction in exposure which fail to reach the poorest and highest-risk sectors of the society.	Majid	 Ezzati	Angelica	 Sousa	Cecilia	 Vidal	Margaret	 Hogan
2004	166	Gender and Demographic Processes	Gender Preference and India's Missing Girls: Evidence from Some Selected States of India	In the last few decades, India has developed both economic and social sector, but the evidence shows that the prevailing gender discrimination is one the major problem in the Indian society. The preference of male child and discrimination against the female child causing the rapid disappearance of female child in India. According to Census 2001, there are 35 million female are missing compared to male population, which was 32 million during 1991, where the sex ratio (0-6 age group) has decline from 940 in 1992-93 to 925 in 1998-99 female per thousand male. So this study is an attempt to shows the effect of gender preference causing the missing of total number of female in Indian society, which has considered as a fact of intolerance and violence against the women. For the present study, data has been taken from the Census of India and National Family Health Survey-I&II.	Arunkumar	 Acharya
2004	166	Gender and Demographic Processes	Gender Differences in Young People's Livelihood Strategies in Vietnam	Vietnam's economic liberalization policies and greater global integration have far-reaching implications for the society as a whole. Although the impact of globalization on the economy is well-documented, the social impact and implications of these changes on the lives of young people is not well-known. This paper explores data from an in-depth study of four communities in rural Vietnam conducted in 2003. Time use and a number of other quantitative and qualitative survey instruments are used to provide multiple perspectives on gender differences in work patterns. Vietnamese households appear to have reacted to growing opportunities in more dynamic and complex ways in term of gender-based division of labor than many observers would assume. For certain types of work at certain life cycle periods men tend to have more participation in the traditionally female works now than before and vice versa for women's participation in traditionally male work.	Sajeda	 Amin	Vu	Manh  Loi	Sara	 Peracca
2004	166	Gender and Demographic Processes	Shortage of Girls in China Today	China has the most severe shortage of girls compared to boys of any country, as documented by China's surveys and censuses through the 2000 census.  This paper evaluates data on sex ratios in China since before the founding of the PRC, and shows that the shortage of girls has gotten more extreme during the last two decades, and the problem is real, not merely undercounting of girls.  The author analyzes the several demographic processes that bring about China's dearth of girls, as well as the demographic outcomes of discrimination against female fetuses and children.  The paper focuses on the missing girl situation in rural and urban areas, by birth order, and by province from 1982 to 2000, and compares China to other countries and regions.  The author analyzes what is and is not causing these losses of daughters in China today, and explores how to prevent future shortages of females.	Judith	 Banister
2004	166	Gender and Demographic Processes	'Self-Indulgence' versus 'Altruism': Two Notions of Female Empowerment as a Determinant of Reproductive Health	The growing literature on 'female empowerment' and reproductive health continues to grapple with the meanings of words like autonomy and empowerment. Measures like the ability to take child health-care decisions and have a voice in household expenditures are useful empirically but do not all automatically imply empowerment. This paper tries to distinguish between empowerment which is instrumental and put to the service of better child outcomes, and that which is 'self-indulgent' in that it helps women to invest in themselves for their own sakes, not because this makes them better wives and mothers. The former is non-contested and comes from factors such as education and employment; the later has to be looked for in measures of the ability to be unproductively free. Indian NFHS data are used to illustrate how these conceptions of empowerment have differing implications for reproductive health.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu	Gayatri	Brij  Koolwal
2004	167	The Family in Historical Perspective	Demographic Rates and Household Change in the United States, 1900-2000	Over the twentieth century, fewer people in the United States resided with kin and more lived alone, with a spouse, or with only their own children.  Over the same period, mortality decreased, fertility fell, rose and fell again, and more marriages were postponed, forgone, or ended by divorce.  This paper combines techniques of decomposition and microsimulation to determine how much household change in the United States over the twentieth century was caused by fertility, mortality, or marriage and divorce changes.  The analysis indicates that most of the household change in the first half of the century was demographic in nature, stemming from decreasing fertility.  After 1950, mortality change played a large role in the rise of the married couple household, as years that either were not afforded to the elderly of the past, or were spent in widowhood, became an extended second honeymoon for many couples.	Gretchen	 Stockmayer
2004	167	The Family in Historical Perspective	The Changing Marriage Gradient -- Trends in Currently Married Men and Women: 1940-2000	Using IPUMS data for 1940 through 2000, this paper examines the changing marriage patterns of men and women.  Small changes in the distribution of men and women aged 18 to 39 by marital status over the past sixty years have been accompanied by larger changes in education and income. This analysis examines the changing effects of education and income on the marital status of men and women.  In addition to providing a descriptive portrait of young adults by marital status, this analysis examines the evidence for the marriage gradient and independence hypotheses of marriage. Preliminary results indicate that the relationship between education and marital status has become more similar over time for men and women. The most educated men and women are now most likely to be married, while the opposite was true for women in the earlier part of the analysis period. Income remains a important determinant of marital status for men but not for women.	Berna	S. Miller
2004	167	The Family in Historical Perspective	Marriage Squeeze and Changes in Family Formation: Historical Comparative Evidence from Spain, France, and United States during the Twentieth Century	The effects of cohort sizes on family formation have been thoroughly studied, since Easterlin, using labor market as explanatory link. The present paper backs a different but converging hypothesis: with universal female lower age at marriage, women of the decreasing birth-cohorts would marry younger and more, marriage market being the explanatory instance. This kind of marriage squeeze should have rapid stimulating effects on nuptiality, contrary to small effects of female excess. In two former works, authors have developed the mechanisms of adjustment and tested them successfully in 20th Century Spain, predicting from findings a reversal of fertility trends performed by the cohorts born after 1980. Using recent comparable census microdata, through IPUMS-i, the study is extended now to France and United States, seeking the generalization of the proof in cases which differ by their chronologies and by the imbalances of sexes at sensible moments, like post World War II.	Anna	 Cabré	Albert	 Esteve
2004	167	The Family in Historical Perspective	Creating an 'American' Marriage Pattern: Ethnic, Generational, and Cohort Variation in Union Formation in the Mid-Twentieth Century	In the early 1900s, white ethnic Americans exhibited disparate marriage patterns that greatly concerned social commentators.   Yet by the end the twentieth century, patterns of union formation among whites ethnics had apparently converged.  This paper examines whether white ethnics assumed the nuptiality tempo of the native-stock population, focusing on generational and period effects.  We use data from the 1960 Census IPUMS to obtain information on cohorts born between 1901 and 1930.  Event history analysis enables us to explore ethnic and generational patterns of entrance into first marriage.  We next assess period effects on marriage timing.  Results indicate that among white ethnics marriage timing shifted across generations to more closely approximate the union formation patterns of native-stock whites; nonetheless, significant ethnic differences remained.  Furthermore, period effects counteract any observable ethnic convergence.  Results are discussed in light of their meaning for assimilation and theories of union formation.	Sharon	 Sassler	Michael	 Cardella
2004	168	Population, Water Resources, Health, and Development	Water Resources, Land Exploration, and Population Health in the Arid Area -- the Case of Tarim River Basin in Xinjiang of China	Water source is at the root of any lives and development in the arid areas like Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China. As one of the driest place in the world, melting glaciers is the exclusive water source of Tarim Basin in Xinjiang. Population growth--in particular in-migration--greatly changes the ecological conditions of Tarim River Basin in the past 2500 years. Our research aims at studying the population growth, land cultivation, and its interactions with water volume, quality, and length of Tarim River in Tarim Basin for the period of 1950 to 2000. Time series data on population changes and economic development, water volume and quality (from water stations), land use and land cover changes (aero-photographic data, remote sensing data), prevalence of morbidity relevant to water quality, death rate, are collected to study the relationship between these factors, by constructing a system dynamic model.	Leiwen	 Jiang	Yufen	 Tong	Zhijie	 Zhao	Tianhong	 Li
2004	168	Population, Water Resources, Health, and Development	Impact of an Irrigation Project on Demographic Behaviour of Rural Maharashtra	The present paper is an attempt to study the effects of an irrigation project on demographic behaviour of rural Maharashtra. The data has been used from IIPS Research Project entitled Impact of an Irrigation Project on Demographic Behaviour of Rural Maharashtra. The complete enumeration of the populations of two irrigated and two non irrigated villages was conducted. The research is a combination of a matched perspective and case control studies. Anthropological approach was used for collection of extensive information on population change and development. It is revealed from analysis that the irrigation project has change demographic behaviour and health of the population in irrigated area. The paper concludes with some population policy reflections and emphasizes the potential importance of rural development related irrigation project on demographic behaviour in irrigated area. Population Policy aimed to change demographic behaviour should certainly include efforts to co-ordinate development projects with demographic behaviour.	Dewaram	A. Nagdeve
2004	168	Population, Water Resources, Health, and Development	Household Composition, Water Acquisition, and Perceived Development Priorities in Ghana	Little social science work has explored development priorities as perceived by residents within the context of developing nations.  This project is designed to explore these perceptions, particularly as they are shaped by both the demographic and natural resource contexts.  More specifically, making use of recently collected survey data from a coastal region of Ghana, we model the association between household factors (e.g., size, composition, economic background) and strategies for water acquisition.  We then link these household level associations to individual perception of the most important development needs (e.g., electricity, drinking water, toilet facilities) within the local area.  It is argued that a more nuanced understanding of the ways in which local population-environment dynamics shape environmental perceptions will aid in the design of regionally-appropriate and stakeholder-validated development efforts.	Lori	M. Hunter
2004	169	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developed Countries	Mexican-American Fertility Patterns: A Racial Stratification Perspective	Recent evidence has demonstrated that dramatic decreases in the fertility rates of Mexican women in Mexico have been matched by continuous increases in the fertility rates of Mexican-Americans in the U.S., particularly at younger ages.  These changes necessitate a reexamination of the ubiquitous theory that Mexican pronatalist values are responsible for the high fertility rates found within the Mexican Origin population in the U.S.  Instead, they point to the increasing relevance of framing the fertility behavior of the Mexican Origin population within a stratification perspective that stresses the influence of U.S. social context on fertility behavior.  As a step in this direction, this presentation will use the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (L.A.FANS) to evaluate the extent to which community context influences Mexican American fertility levels in Los Angeles neighborhoods and to identify which aspects of neighborhood differentiation contribute to this relationship.	Reanne	 Frank
2004	169	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developed Countries	Is the Classic Indicator of Unintended Pregnancy Applicable in All Socio-Cultural Settings?  Evidence from New Orleans	This presentation introduces one approach to measuring locally developed constructs of pregnancy intentionality; and to relating them to the classical National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) indicator of unintended pregnancy.  Data from in-depth interviews with 77 women, 14 to 38 years of age, recruited at public family planning and prenatal clinics in New Orleans were used to develop a series of 8 questions to measure a construct called valorization of motherhood.  The questions were then tested on a different sample of 783 African-American women 13-24 years of age from the same clinic populations.  Factor analyses of the 8 questions used to capture valorization of motherhood suggest the presence of two latent constructs (Eigenvalues: 2.92 & 1.31; percent variance explained: 48.7 & 65.4).  ANOVA analyses suggest a strong statistical association between the constructs and pregnancy experience (P      	Aimee	 Afable-Munsuz	Jeanette	 Magnus	Carl	 Kendall
2004	169	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developed Countries	Social Capital and Fertility Intentions: The Case of Poland	The material situation of the household is one basic determinant of fertility decisions. Within demographic research, this situation is primarily expressed in terms of monetary income and wealth. However, beside economic capital also social capital may be an important factor for fertility-related decision making and behavior, especially in societies that face economic uncertainty. The paper explores the impact of the availability of social capital on individual fertility intentions in Poland in 2001. Social capital is measured with the help of individual embeddedness in networks of giving and receiving support. Results based on 328 married respondents that are at risk to get a second child show a positive influence of the size of these networks on fertility intentions. This influence is on the hand caused by the number of parents in these networks, but on the other hand also by the number of supportive friends and colleagues.	Christoph	 Buehler	Ewa	 Fratczak
2004	169	Fertility and Social Inequality in Developed Countries	Education and Timing of First Birth among Women in Norway	In this paper we study how education affects the timing of first birth among women in Norway. We use longitudinal information from administrative registers to analyze the relationship between the timing of first birth and current education--level as well as activity--from beginning of the 1970s till today. The rich educational information in our dataset enable us to examine differences between various types of educational activity and various fields of education (among those not in education). By using a hazard rate model we find differences in fertility behavior (i) between those being in education and those not in education, and (ii) between women with different levels and fields of education. The differences probably reflect that some postpone motherhood longer than others and that women have different preferences at the outset (selection), but also that some occupations may be easier to combine with childbearing than others.	Trude	 Lappegård	Marit	 Rønsen
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon the Actual Analysis of ACS Micro Data Files		Albert	F. Anderson
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon the Bureau’s Development and Distribution of User-Friendly Data Products		Robert	 Kominski
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon the Opportunities and Challenges of Using ACS Data as a Substitute for the Long-Form Census Data Many Consumers Expect		John	F. Long
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon the Actual Use of Data from the ACS		Joseph	 Salvo
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon the Link to the Decennial Census Enumeration		Preston	J. Waite
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon How the ACS is Viewed on Capitol Hill and Opportunities for Continued Support from Congress		David	 McMillen
2005	1	The American Community Survey:  Stupendous Opportunities, Substantial Challenges	Focusing upon How the ACS is Viewed on Capitol Hill		Jim	 Moore
2005	2	The AIDS Pandemic	Evidence from National Population-Based Surveys on Bias in Antenatal Clinic-Based Estimates of HIV Prevalence	National HIV estimates in most developing countries with generalized epidemics (defined as a prevalence of at least 1% in the general population) are based on data generated by surveillance systems that focus on pregnant women attending a selected number of antenatal clinics (ANC). However, an increasing number of community-based studies have revealed the limitations inherent in antenatal clinic-based surveillance data for correctly estimating adult female and male HIV prevalence in the general population. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive assessment of the bias in national estimates of adult HIV prevalence from ANC-based surveillance, by using data from recent nationally representative, population-based surveys in Mali, Zambia, Dominican Republic, Burundi, Niger, South Africa, Kenya, Burkina Faso, and Ghana. We assess and adjust for non-response bias in the survey data, and then compare HIV prevalence in urban and rural areas between the survey and the appropriate ANC data.	Simona	 Bignami	Joshua	A. Salomon	Christopher	J.L. Murray
2005	2	The AIDS Pandemic	Do the HIV/AIDS Models Reproduce the Level and Shape of Mortality Being Experienced in Sub-Saharan Countries?	Most models of the demographic impact of HIV/AIDS in most sub-Saharan countries rely on data drawn from an often unrepresentative sample of antenatal clinics to indicate the extent and trend of the epidemic in these countries. Where countries have undertaken household prevalence surveys these have often been interpreted to be contradicting the estimates from models based solely on antenatal clinic data. By and large macro modelers have not inspected the output from their models to see if they are consistent with the level of mortality being estimated by demographers for these countries. This paper examines the performance of a few models in this regard and finds that for a number of countries the international agencies exaggerate the impact on mortality but in others the reverse is the case, and concludes that the performance of these models could be improved if they were calibrated to be consistent with the observed mortality.	Rob	 Dorrington
2005	2	The AIDS Pandemic	Changes in Headship Patterns and Household Organization in South Africa in the 1990s in a Time of HIV/AIDS and Other Macro-Social Transformations	The rapid spread of HIV during the 1990s in South Africa has coincided with the collapse of the apartheid system. In addition to these two landmark events, forces of modernization have continued to erode traditional family relations, institutions and ideologies. Any of these macrosocial phenomena must have had some visible influence on family structure and household headship patterns. This paper contributes to our knowledge of the changing landscape of South African families and the causal connections between observable patterns of family structure and social transformations by providing a description of changes in household organization and headship patterns in the 1990s and by identifying the mechanisms responsible for observed changes in gender and age patterns of headship. These goals will be accomplished with the analysis of three consecutive censuses spanning from 1991 to 2001: the last census of apartheid South Africa conducted in 1991, the 1996 and 2001 censuses.	Giovanna	 Merli	Nompumelelo	B. Nzimande	Erika	Barth  Cottrell
2005	2	The AIDS Pandemic	Comprehension of Survey Questions in an AIDS Indicator Survey in Tanzania	This paper describes a rapid method for evaluating the comprehension by respondents of survey questions on sexual practices and HIV/AIDS used in an AIDS Indicator Survey conducted in Swahili in Tanzania in 2004. Through a combination of observation of survey teams at work, a workshop conducted with interviewers to assess their interviewing experience after survey completion, and a pilot test of revised questions, the research identified questions that proved problematic in the field, elucidated the origin of the problems, and suggested ways to repair the problematic questions. Working from repairs made to questions in the field, the final report made recommendations for how to revise specific questions for better comprehension and described ways to identify questions likely to pose problems in the field. The pilot test with the repaired questions showed that the new questions made for easier and more efficient interviewing.	P.	Stanley  Yoder	Laura	 Nyblade
2005	3	The Measurement of Race and Ethnic Origin	Measuring Race in the United States	Over the past 30 years there has been growing concern about measuring the increasing racial and ethnic diversity in the United States. Beginning in 1950, the Census Bureau began using the “Other race” category to allow respondents of mixed racial parentage to racially identify. Since 1950, both the number and percent of people in this category has grown. This response category is not used in household surveys conducted by the Census Bureau, in making population projections and estimates, or by other federal agencies, resulting in problems of comparability of race data. In this paper, the author examines the racial distribution from the 2003 National Content Test (NCT) where two different formats of the question on race were used – one with a Some Other Race category and one without a Some Other Race category. The goal is to identify alternative ways for assigning race(s) when no information is reported.	Claudette	E. Bennett
2005	3	The Measurement of Race and Ethnic Origin	The Racial and Ethnic Identity of Latin American Immigrants in Census 2000	Census 2000 marks the first time that respondents were asked to report more than one race if they chose to do so. The sample data from Census 2000 offers the opportunity to look at how respondents not born in the United States classified themselves by race and Hispanic origin. Our hypothesis is that a very high proportion of the responses to the race question by Latin American Immigrants are countries of origin and general Hispanic terms, rather than indicators of racial mixture. If so, that does not mean that the respondents are not in fact “racially mixed,” but rather current instruments fail to capture that mixture. Similarly, our hypothesis is that a high proportion of immigrants from Spanish speaking countries in Latin American identify themselves as Hispanic or Latino, and a small proportion of immigrants from non-Spanish speaking countries do so as well.	Jorge	 del Pinal	Sharon	 Ennis
2005	3	The Measurement of Race and Ethnic Origin	Multiracial Today, but What Tomorrow? The Malleability of Racial Identification over Time	We use the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to examine the change in racial identification among Multiracial Adolescents and Monoracial Adolescents as they make the transition from adolescence to adulthood. In general, we find that Multiracial youth exhibit more volatile racial identities than Monoracial youth. Youth who reported Native-American & White in Wave I were the least likely to maintain this identity (22%), while about 50% of Asian-white and black-white youth maintained their identities. In empirical analyzes, we find that youth with more highly educated mothers have more stable racial identities between two waves of the survey. Physical appearance, as described by the interviewer at Wave I, is an important predictor of change between Wave I and Wave III responses. Our results suggest that while racial identity is malleable, it is still conditioned on variation in physical appearances.	Jamie	Mihoko  Doyle	Grace	 Kao
2005	3	The Measurement of Race and Ethnic Origin	Modeling the Structure of Multi-Racial Identity: A Latent Class Approach	New data on race and Hispanic origin provide a vast array of information about the racial and ethnic composition of the United States. While data collection is well-advanced, theoretical and methodological developments are only beginning. This paper articulates and applies latent class analytic techniques to data from Census 2000. Specifically, we analyze the underlying structure of racial identity based on multiple racial indicators. The first aspect of our work maps out the latent structure of racial identity in the country as a whole, while the second aspect makes systematic comparisons across regions. We use these analyzes as a springboard for theorizing the social structuring of racial identity in the United States and as a foundation for consideration of social, economic, political and demographic factors that shape the structure of racial identity.	Ross	 Macmillan	Carolyn	A. Liebler
2005	4	Early Life Experiences and Later Life Outcomes	SES and the Longer-Term Effects of Child Abuse	We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health to identify the effects of past neglect and/or physical and sexual abuse on the incidence of risky behaviors among young adults. We address several limitations of the existing literature by using a large-scale national data set; comparing the effects of different types of maltreatment and how those effects vary with SES; considering a range of outcomes; and paying careful attention to the identification of causal effects. To do the latter, we will utilize a range of statistical procedures including controlling for a wide variety of individual and family characteristics; estimating twin and sibling fixed effects models; and using state-level policy variables as instrumental variables. Our work will help to determine the extent to which SES is a protective factor, a question that has important implications for the optimal targeting of treatment and prevention.	Janet	 Currie	Erdal	 Tekin
2005	4	Early Life Experiences and Later Life Outcomes	Family Socioeconomic Status, Stature, and Adult Earnings	We employ the 1959-2002 National Health Examination Survey (NHES) and National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data to estimate the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and health in the United States by ethno-racial and income group. Specifically, we first estimate the influence of parents' income on child height controlling for parental health and childhood nutrition and illness; and then whether height influences adult earnings controlling for adult educational attainment, health, and other human capital characteristics. Having estimated the proportion of height that is explained by parental SES, we accomplish two things. First, we estimate whether a SES-height gradient exists in the United States. And second, we estimate the relative contributions of childhood environment, adult educational attainment, current health, and other human capital on adult earnings.	Enrico	 Marcelli	Christopher	 Jencks
2005	4	Early Life Experiences and Later Life Outcomes	Why Your Siblings Cost You Grades, Income, and Savings, Especially if You're Female	This paper examines differences between males and females in the effects of the number a siblings a person had when growing up on their educational attainment, income, bank balance and superannuation in later life. The data used are from Waves 1 and 2 of the Household, Income and labor Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) Survey, a large-scale nationwide survey conducted by Australian Commonwealth Government Department of Family and Community Services between 2001 and 2003. The results show that the number of siblings a person had generally had negative effects on their educational attainment, income, bank balance and superannuation, with the effects tending to be larger for females than for males. Differences in the outcomes by parental socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and the type of schooling a person had are also examined. The effects of family formation and attitudinal variables as factors mediating the effects of numbers of siblings are discussed.	Nick	 Parr
2005	4	Early Life Experiences and Later Life Outcomes	The Impact of SES on Health over the Life-Course	Health events very early in life including the early childhood years may have important repercussions for later life adult SES outcomes. In this paper, I explore some of these same issues using some quite unique aspects of the PSID sample structure. As part of its panel structure, the PSID follows all family members of the 1967 panel of respondents as well as any new family members who arrive subsequently. For these PSID panel children and their siblings, the full array of SES measures potentially exist each year not only for both themselves and their parental households from which they came but also for their siblings when they become independent households. Using this data, I estimate the impact of childhood health on several salient SES outcomes during adulthood- completed years of schooling, family income, and individual earnings, all measured in 1999.	James	P. Smith
2005	5	Public Policy and the Family	Welfare Reform and Children’s Living Arrangements	This paper uses data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to examine how the pre- and post-1996 welfare reforms influenced the family structures in which children live. This paper advances our understanding of the influence of welfare policies on children by focusing on children’s living arrangements, rather than those of single mothers; by examining a wide range of living arrangements, including cohabitation and living with a grandparent; and by measuring specific state policies adopted throughout the 1990’s, rather than just indicators for the implementation of any waivers or TANF in a given state. The results can shed light on how policy choices adopted by states can influence the living arrangements of children.	Rachel	 Dunifon	Kathryn	 Hynes
2005	5	Public Policy and the Family	Child Support Enforcement and Bargaining among Married and Cohabiting Couples	Child support enforcement policies enjoy widespread support from legislators because most people believe that fathers should support their children, even when they live in separate households. Less often emphasized is the potentially far-reaching impact of these policies on increasing the bargaining power of women. This paper examines the relationship between child support enforcement and bargaining power among married and cohabiting couples. Using state and city level measures constructed using administrative data and the Census matched onto individual level data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we find that living in a state with stricter child support enforcement is associated with a significantly higher probability that the father pays the bills for the household. There is also some evidence that the father is more likely to be supportive of the mother if they are married, but less likely to be supportive if they are cohabiting in strict enforcement states.	Angela	R. Fertig	Sara	 McLanahan
2005	5	Public Policy and the Family	Do Private Safety Nets Increase Employment and Reduce Welfare Receipt among Single Mothers?	In this paper, I examine the relationship between social network support and employment and welfare receipt among low-income single mothers in three U.S. counties. Departing from prior research in this area, I measure private safety nets as the potential to draw upon family and friends for child care, transportation, or financial assistance in the event that these supports are needed. I find that private safety nets facilitate employment and reduce reliance on welfare. My findings suggest that social network disadvantages compound individual-level disadvantages and that social networks should be taken into account when designing and targeting welfare policies.	Kristen	 Harknett
2005	5	Public Policy and the Family	Economic Incentives and Family Formation	We identify the importance of a broad set of economic factors in driving individuals’ decisions to marry, cohabit and divorce. Most studies of union formation consider such factors as schooling attainment, employment status, and wages. We broaden the focus to economic costs and benefits conferred by law on married couples. Upon marrying, couples typically incur changes in their income taxes, face lower costs if one partner dies, incur changes in their welfare benefits, and secure property rights in the event of divorce. We wish to learn whether individuals are more likely to choose marriage over the alternatives when the benefits associated with civil marriage are large. We use data from the NLSY79 to estimate a sequential choice model of cohabitation, marriage and divorce decisions, and exploit exogenous variation arising from cross-state and cross-year differences in the relevant laws and institutions to identify the effects of “legal factors” on union-forming decisions.	Audrey	 Light	Yoshiaki	 Omori
2005	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Intergenerational Residential Mobility among Young Adults of Mexican Origin in Greater Los Angeles	We examine residential mobility of the Mexican-origin population in the Los Angeles area across three immigrant generations. This paper draws on data from a new survey on intergenerational immigrant mobility in metropolitan Los Angeles, geocoded with census-tract data from 1980-2000. The survey covered more than 4,000 adults, ages 20-39, of whom 1,200 were of Mexican origin. We examine the ethnic and economic composition of neighborhoods in which these young adults of Mexican origin are living and the extent to which their neighborhood attainment varies by immigrant generation. We also examine how the neighborhoods where respondents live now differ from the neighborhoods in which they grew up. More particularly, we ask for those in the 1.5 and second generations whether their residential outcomes are affected by whether their parents came as legal or unauthorized migrants.	Susan	K. Brown	Shila	 Patel
2005	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Ethnic Revival among Labor Migrants in Germany? Political Statements, Theoretical Arguments, and First Empirical Evidence	My presentation scrutinizes the thesis that the assimilation process of immigrants in Germany has come to a standstill in the early 90s. With regard to the last decade, many authors state an increasing withdrawal into ethnic groups; a growing distance of even second generation migrants to the majority; and a growing ethnic self-confidence especially among Turkish immigrants.  I present the scholarly debate about an ethnic revival“ among immigrants in Germany, assess the arguments and findings on this topic from the US literature, and discuss whether it is plausible to expect an ethnic revival“ among Germany’s immigrants. Based on this, I present my own analytical scheme and describe my data and measurements. Finally, I present trend analyzes for the last twenty years for different indicators in order to assess whether migrants’ identificational, cognitive, and social assimilation processes have slowed down or even reversed by using data from the German Socio-economic Panel.	Claudia	 Diehl
2005	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Beyond Washington Heights: Identities, Language and Economic Outcomes of Dominicans in a New Destination	Immigration scholars have shown increasing interest in the geographic redistribution of the immigrant population away from traditional destinations and toward new gateway communities, thus raising old and new questions about assimilation and context of reception. This paper focuses on this issue through a case study of Dominican immigrants, a group worthy of study for several reasons. Dominicans have a sizable and growing population, are often phenotypically black yet Spanish speaking, have relatively high poverty rates, and are flocking to new places. One such new destination is Reading, Pennsylvania, an economically struggling industrial city with a sizable Hispanic population embedded within an otherwise white region. Through analysis of primary data gathered via in-depth key-informant interviews, and a structured survey of Dominican households, we assess the nature and interplay between race-ethnic identity, linguistic abilities and preferences, perceptions of local context, and economic circumstances and trajectories of Dominicans in Reading.	Leif	 Jensen	Sal	 Oropesa	Jeffrey	H. Cohen	Jacqueline	 Toribio
2005	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Testing Segmented Assimilation Theory: Evidence from the Add Health Study	Segmented assimilation theory is based on the recognition that American society is now extremely diverse and segmented, with an underclass residing in central cities where a large portion of new immigrant families first settles upon arrival. Thus, it is argued that there exist divergent assimilation paths for new immigrants. These paths include conventional upward, or “straight-line,” assimilation, downward assimilation, and “selective acculturation.” Proponents of segmented assimilation theory argue that for immigrant youth in low-SES communities, retaining the culture of origin has a protective effect. In this paper, we develop empirical tests of segmented assimilation theory as it relates to the well-being of immigrant and second-generation adolescents. We begin with an observation that segmented assimilation theory in essence is a theory about interactions between micro-level assimilation processes and macro-level community contexts. We therefore test whether the effects of varying degrees of assimilation differ across more and less privileged community contexts.	Yu	 Xie	Emily	 Greenman
2005	7	Inequality in U.S. Labor Markets	Racial Discrimination and Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market: Evidence from Census 2000	Utilizing both the ancestry and race responses in Census 2000, evidence will be presented on discrimination and intergroup disparity for 50 ethnic/racial groups in the USA. Comparisons will be made with results from the 1980 and 1990 censuses -- where similar group classifications can be identified -- to determine the trajectory of racial/ethnic inequality in the United States over the past 20 years. In addition, by making use of the Integrated Public Use Micro-Sample (IPUMS) the paper will report on group differences in labor market outcomes across 120 years, from 1880 to 2000. Finally, updating a study the authors published in 2001 in the American Journal of Economics and Sociology, the paper will report on evidence of the effects of group based disadvantages in labor markets in the interval 1880-1910 on occupational status outcomes for descendants of the same group a century later.	William	 Darity, Jr.	Jason	 Dietrich	Darrick	 Hamilton
2005	7	Inequality in U.S. Labor Markets	The Misshapen Playing Field: Labor Force Participation and Mobility among Black and White Immigrants in the Post-Civil Rights Era	The Post-Civil Rights Era in America has been marked by increasingly egalitarian legal structures and increasingly Black immigration flows. While overshadowed by the much larger Asian and Latino immigrant groups, those from Africa, the Caribbean and Europe are important because they provide for a unique test of our Civil Rights advances. This paper uses Current Population Survey data to compare the labor force experiences of Black and White immigrants as well as their American-born children with their Native-born (third generation+) counterparts. Findings suggest that despite a great deal of socioeconomic similarity in the first generation, second generation Black and White men differ substantially in terms of labor force participation and employment—to the detriment of the Black men. It is argued that this finding is reflective of a twenty-first century occupational queue that places Black immigrant men ahead of other Black American men but well behind White immigrant and White American men.	Amon	 Emeka
2005	7	Inequality in U.S. Labor Markets	Trends in Occupational Differentiation in the United States by Race/Ethnicity, Sex, and Region, 1980-2000	Using United States Census PUMS for 1980, 1990, and 2000, we utilize three measures that have been used to assess differentiation and/or inequality among occupational categories: the index of dissimilarity, the index of net difference, and the redistribution index. We examine occupational differentiation between men and women, and various racial and ethnic categories as well, including non-Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, Hispanics, and Asians. The rapid growth of Hispanic and Asian populations and their differential regional impacts is noted and discussed. The continuing “decline” of the dominance of white male “occupational status superiority” is increasingly evident from these data. Also, the relationships between the rapid growth of both the Asian and Hispanic populations in the various regional labor forces suggests rather different trajectories for these two groups within the labor force dynamic. The linkages to interregional migration, as described by Frey and others, is discussed in this context.	Omer	R. Galle	George	J. Lara
2005	7	Inequality in U.S. Labor Markets	Discrimination in Low Wage Labor Markets: Findings from an Experimental Audit Study in New York City	Little is known about the extent of employment discrimination against minorities and criminal offenders. Vast disparities can be observed in employment rates by race, ethnicity, and incarceration status, but the causes of these disparities remain controversial. Unobserved skill differences and the self-selection of workers into segregated labor markets prevent us from directly comparing the outcomes of various groups using standard data sources. Our paper reports new results from a novel study of employers. Using an experimental audit methodology, we sent teams of male testers with equivalent resumes to apply for entry-level jobs in New York City. Our results indicate that employers do treat job seekers differently on the basis of race and criminal record, even relative to otherwise equally qualified applicants. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that employer discrimination along the lines of race, ethnicity, and criminal conviction status remains a salient source of inequality in contemporary urban labor markets.	Devah	 Pager	Bruce	P. Western
2005	8	Union Formation	The Wedding-Ring: An Agent-Based Marriage Model Based on Social Influence	In this paper we study the emergence of the age-at-marriage curve  from the bottom-up, building an agent-based model of marriage  based on social influence. More specifically, we build a  population of agents whose willingness to marry depends on the  share of relevant others who are already married and on the  availability of partners. Agents live on a circular space. Our  simulations show that age-at-marriage curves of realistic shape  can emerge from micro-level hypotheses and social interaction.	Thomas	 Fent	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Belinda	 Aparicio Diaz
2005	8	Union Formation	Spatial Homogamy: Geographical Dimensions of the Partner Market in the Netherlands	We aim to identify the importance of spatial dimensions of the partner market in the Netherlands. Most research on homogamy has focused on educational and occupational characteristics of partners. We focus on spatial homogamy, which suggests that people live together with a partner who shares their geographical origin. The paper gives an overview of research that takes the spatial dimension of the partner market into account. We argue that a national partner market does not exist, but instead a mosaic of local and regional partner markets, as a result of the geographical distribution of people and regional differentiated phenomena such as denomination or dialect. We study the effect of meeting places on partner choice, based on the Dutch Family Fertility Survey 2003. A spatial model of the partner market, based on population register data, will indicate the role of spatial factors in patterns of partner selection.	Karen	 Haandrikman	Leo	 van Wissen	Peter	 Groote
2005	8	Union Formation	Adolescent Romantic Relationships and Young Adult Union Formation	Life course sociologists and developmental psychologists assert that adolescent romantic relationships provide “practice” for romantic relationships in adulthood. Yet, too much practice or practice in poor quality relationships may negatively impact young adult unions. Using the first two waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I identify adolescent romantic relationship profiles as single (no relationships in waves 1 and 2), solo (one short relationship), steady (one long relationship), serial (several non-overlapping relationships), or concurrent (several overlapping relationships). Predicting wave 3 young adult union formation, those who are single in adolescence are less likely to have formed a residential union net of age, race, and family background. Among those with adolescent relationship experience, women who had concurrent profiles are less likely to be married, and men who had serial or concurrent profiles are more likely to cohabit. Further analysis explores the role of adolescent and young adult relationship quality.	Ann	 Meier
2005	8	Union Formation	Rating and Dating Revisited: How Social and Formal Organizational Attributes Shape the Formation of Adolescent Romantic Relationships	Understanding patterns of mate selection can provide insight in the social forces contributing to delayed marriage. Using data from the Add Health, we examine mate selection patterns in high school. The Add Health design dictated the collection of longitudinal data from all students in 16 schools, two of which had large enrollments. We employ network modeling approaches to explore the influence of social, family background, and academic characteristics on mate choice. Data from the transcript supplement allow us to examine the degree to which course-taking patterns shape patterns of mate selection by providing opportunities to meet. Preliminary analysis suggests that course taking patterns are important factors shaping mate selections. However, family background characteristics continue to exert an independent influence once we control for this organizational influence.	Kelly	 Raley	Ken	 Frank
2005	9	The Multiethnic Metropolis	Re-Thinking Our Understanding of Racial/Ethnic Spatial Patterning in US Cities: Columbus Ohio Msa, 1990-2000	This paper undertakes critical examination of frameworks generally accepted as explanations of residential clustering/segregation along racial/ethnic lines -- Assimilation, Stratification, Resurgent Ethnicity -- and articulates a new framework -- “Market-Led Pluralism” -- that better fits today’s realities. Each framework is described in its own right and in broad social science context. Empirical analyzes seek to understand how these frameworks work together to form the mosaic of a contemporary urban area, and the relative importance of each -- focusing on a single, mid-sized MSA, Columbus Ohio. analyzes completed thus far examine the spatial patterning of racial/ethnic clustering/segregation, using spatial statistics such as Local Moran’s I, location quotient, and finer-grain analyzes that highlight variance falling below the radar of these established statistics. Support for Assimilation and Stratification is weak; support for Resurgent Ethnicity and Market-Led Pluralization is very strong; and a distinct difference between Resurgent Ethnicity and Market-Led Pluralism is apparent.	Lawrence	A. Brown	Su-Yeul	 Chung
2005	9	The Multiethnic Metropolis	Panethnicity, Ethnicity, and Nativity in Residential Choice	This paper furthers the understanding of panethnic versus ethnic boundary-making, via residential choices. I study how people respond to local panethnic versus ethnic composition when making residential choices, where mobility is a measure of racial tolerance and interracial relations. This paper investigates whether or not ingroup preferences and outgroup avoidance behaviors operate in residential mobility, especially comparing the differences when group concentration is defined by panethnicity versus ethnicity. I find that people respond less to local size of the same panethnic group and more to concentration of people of the same ethnicity. In addition, groups with very large immigrant populations are substantially more likely to respond positively to ethnic composition rather than panethnic composition. I examine these issues for four panethnic groups- whites, blacks, Latinos, and Asians, at the labor market area level, using restricted data from the 1990 U.S. Census. I employ nested discrete choice models to test hypotheses.	Melissa	 Chiu
2005	9	The Multiethnic Metropolis	Understanding Residential Patterns in Multiethnic Cities and Suburbs in the US and Canada	Studies document that more immigrants have chosen to settle in suburbs within a short period of time after arrival, and minority groups increasingly reside in suburban neighborhoods. Subsequently, suburbs have transformed to greater diversity. In this paper, we address this emerging multiethnic suburban residential pattern in New York, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and San Francisco in the United States, and Toronto, Vancouver, Montreal, and Calgary in Canada. The study is based on the entropy index and the Theil’s information theory index H suggested by Reardon and Firebaugh (2002) to capture the multiethnic context. Our analysis first compares residential patterns with different levels of group compositions. We then compare the current residential patterns in suburbs and cities with patterns ten years ago. Finally, we compare the urban-suburban patterns in the U.S. with those in Canada. We hope to deepen our understanding of residential patterns in multi ethno-racial cities and suburbs.	Lingxin	 Hao	Eric	 Fong
2005	9	The Multiethnic Metropolis	Neighborhood Racial Integration and Perceived Discrimination	Although racial residential integration has been shown to benefit minorities by providing safer and economically advantaged environments, little previous research has examined the potential challenges that integration could pose for minority residents. This study explores how neighborhood integration influences one such challenge: the experience of discrimination. Through analysis of recent survey data from Chicago neighborhoods, I investigate whether 1) perceived discrimination differs across neighborhood racial compositions, 2) the relationship between integration and discrimination can be attributed to differences in the structural characteristics of integrated and non-integrated neighborhoods, and 3) this relationship differs for African Americans and Latinos. Initial results suggest that there are significant differences in two forms of perceived discrimination across neighborhoods, where African Americans and Latinos report higher levels of discrimination in integrated neighborhoods than in more segregated contexts. Future analysis will estimate multilevel models to assess both individual- and neighborhood-level effects on perceived discrimination.	Sapna	 Swaroop
2005	10	Gender and Education in Developing Countries	Intrahousehold Bargaining, Birth Order and the Gender Gap in Schooling: Evidence from India	While considerable empirical attention has been paid in the economic literature to gender bias in allocation of household resources between sons and daughters, limited research has been done on how the relative bargaining strength of the mother and father might influence this bias. This paper studies the impact of quantitative and qualitative determinants of mother's bargaining strength on intra-household investment in education in India, by the gender and order of birth of a child. I use an indicator for the mother’s status in the household and her level of education as determinants of her bargaining power. The results suggest that an increase in mother’s education and autonomy reduces the bias against a female child’s educational attainment. Last-born girls have greater probability of attaining a higher grade relative to early born girls. These conclusions persist even when I control for unobservable family heterogeneity and regional differences in returns to female education.	Farzana	 Afridi
2005	10	Gender and Education in Developing Countries	Gender Turmoil in Educational Attainment: Exploring and Reconciling Conflicting Evidence	Debates about the gender gap in education in developing countries have lead to redoubled efforts to understand education patterns. We examine longitudinal survey data from two different parts of Thailand and show shifting patterns of secondary and tertiary school attainment across cohorts of young men and women in a context of rapid social change. Attainment rates vary in unexpected ways across social contexts whether comparing villages or rural-urban differences. We explore whether the novelty of schools and resources for schooling beyond the primary level provides one explanation. We also examine qualitative evidence collected from youth, parents and community leaders in Kanchanaburi Province. We find inertia among youth and parents concerning the importance and feasibility of schooling for all youth, especially for girls. We propose that “cultural” inertia provides one explanation for the variability in outcomes and must be overcome to quickly realize equitable education opportunities for all youth in Thailand.	Sara	 Curran	Sarah	 Martin	Sureeporn	 Punpuing	Amara	 Soonthorndhada	Sirinan	 Kittisuksathit
2005	10	Gender and Education in Developing Countries	Sexual Violence and Girls’ Education in South Africa	Sexual violence is reported to be a large problem in South Africa. Such encounters bring psychological trauma, social stigma, and the risk of pregnancy, HIV, and STIs. Qualitative interviews indicate that rape survivors find it harder to concentrate on school-work after the assault; many lose interest in school and some leave school altogether. The effects of such experiences on girls’ progression through school and educational attainment have not been well quantified in South Africa. These relationships are explored for young women age 14-24 using data from KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Findings indicate that girls enrolled in school have much lower reported rates of sexual debut, pregnancy, and forced sexual encounters. Examining school attendance and educational attainment by history of sexual experience, young women who have been forced to have sex are significantly less likely to be attending school, and have lower educational attainment and more school delays.	Kelly	 Hallman
2005	10	Gender and Education in Developing Countries	The Educational Trajectories of Pregnant Adolescents in South Africa	South Africa has one of the highest rates of adolescent pregnancy in the world. More than 35 percent of South African adolescents became pregnant before the age of 20 and more than 30 percent have given birth at least once. Because of particular cultural features in South Africa, including the widespread acceptance of adolescent pregnancy and the willingness of family members to provide childcare, adolescent pregnancy may not confer the same negative consequences in South Africa as it may elsewhere. Using 2002 data, this study examines associations between adolescent pregnancy and educational attainment among South African adolescents to determine whether adolescent mothers are at a disadvantage compared to other adolescents, with particular attention to year-by-year educational activity. It will also investigate which girls return to school after giving birth to learn more about what structural barriers might exist for girls wanting to return to school after a birth.	Susan	M. Lee-Rife
2005	11	Acculturation and Health	Food Security and Child Hunger among Refugees Recently Resettled in the USA	The United States will accept thousands of new African refugees for resettlement this year. How these refugees cope in this new environment is an understudied area, yet one that has important implications for both policy and population health. Ethnographic and survey methods were used to address this issue among a sample of African refugees living in the USA. Results show a high prevalence of food insecurity and child hunger among this sample of African refugees, much higher than national or state figures or the prevalence identified in similar studies among low-income immigrants. Further, child hunger was more likely to be indicated among mothers who experienced language and shopping difficulties in the new environment and who reported low levels of income. Measures of social support however were not related to child hunger. Conclusions are that poverty combined with cultural food preferences may predispose to high levels of child hunger.	Craig	A. Hadley	Daniel	 Sellen
2005	11	Acculturation and Health	The Effect of Hispanic Ethnicity and Acculturation on Health Care Utilization	The objective of this study is to use the behavioral model of health care utilization developed by Andersen and colleagues to identify the correlates and predictors of health care utilization for Hispanics in the United States. This study strives to make three important contributions to the study of health care access and utilization. First, I dedicate my attention to the understudied population of Hispanics in the United States and focus on health differences among the Hispanic populations. Second, I better inform the behavioral model of health care utilization by including often omitted components of the model. Finally, I test the modified behavioral model as the original model was designed to be tested, as a true path model, and examine the direct, indirect, and interactive effects of the model components.	Kellie	J. Hagewen
2005	11	Acculturation and Health	Intergenerational Differences in Smoking Behavior for Mexican-Americans: The Role of Culture and Cohesion	Cigarette smoking and its deleterious effects on health are well-known, as are the racial/ethnic disparities in smoking rates. This paper investigates differences in smoking behavior between first- and second-generation Mexican-Americans, and finds that for adults, first-generation Mexican-Americans have lower odds of smoking than U.S.-born adults, but for adolescents, the relationship is reversed. The difference in smoking prevalence between adult first- and second-generation Mexicans is alleviated somewhat by church attendance and level of disapproval of unhealthy behaviors, indicating that these could be important components of any measure of acculturation, however, holding traditional values, an oft-cited aspect of low acculturation, has no effect. In addition, immigrant parents with low acculturation had teenagers who smoked more than those who had more acculturated parents. The findings suggest that Mexican immigrant teens may have the most trouble adjusting to the U.S. if their parents do not acculturate quickly and this may lead to unhealthy behaviors.	Rachel	T. Kimbro
2005	11	Acculturation and Health	The Healthy Migrant Effect on Depression: Variation Over Time?	Growing international evidence supports the epidemiological paradox that immigrants have better overall health than non-immigrants, including lower levels of depression. But whether length of residence in the host population modifies this effect on depression is not well understood. We examine a large, heterogeneous sample of Canadians to investigate three possible trajectories of depression within the immigrant population. We present hypotheses testing if the depression rate among immigrants improves, deteriorates, or undergoes non-linear change over time. Our results confirm the so-called “healthy migrant effect” and show that visible minority immigrants are especially healthy. However, soon after arrival in Canada, depression among immigrants increases for several decades. Policy implications of the findings are discussed.	Zheng	 Wu	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2005	12	Demography of Domestic Violence	Is Domestic Violence Related to Early Child Mortality? Evidence from North India	This study examined the effects of domestic violence during pregnancy on fetal deaths and neonatal mortality, as well as long-term effects on child survival in Uttar Pradesh, India, a setting characterized by very low women’s autonomy and high levels of violence within marriage. The study is unique from several perspectives: the study is based on representative samples of general population; used the responses on wife beating and abuses from the husbands; used statistical adjustments with propensity scores for selectivity bias reduction. The results shows that women who experienced domestic violence that continued through pregnancy period or initiated during the index pregnancy were significantly more likely to have higher perinatal (OR:2.59; 95% CI: 1.48-4.51) ) and neonatal mortality deaths (OR: 2.37; 95% CI: 1.36-4.15). The differentials, however, attenuated during the postneonatal period. After the first year of life, essentially there is no difference in the risk of child mortality by mother’s violence status.	Saifuddin	 Ahmed	Michael	 Koenig	Rob	 Stephenson
2005	12	Demography of Domestic Violence	Factors Associated with Repeat Incidents of Intimate Partner Violence: A Longitudinal Analysis	We examine the factors associated with an intimate partner violence victim’s risk of subsequent assault. In addition to considering her victimization history, we consider a woman’s own responses to previous intimate violence, including whether or not she acted in self-defense or sought police or medical help. We also address how marital and employment changes following previous assault influence the likelihood of later assault by an intimate. Recognizing exposure reduction and retaliation effects as competing predictions, we assess whether women who attempt to reduce their exposure to violence are more or less likely than other victims of partner violence to be re-victimized. We use the 1996-1999 longitudinally linked files of the National Crime Victimization Survey. Our results suggest that self-defense increases the risk of repeat assault while exiting the labor force is protective against repeat assault.	Marybeth	J. Mattingly	Laura	 Dugan
2005	12	Demography of Domestic Violence	Physical Domestic Violence and Subsequent Contraceptive Adoption in Uttar Pradesh, India	This study examines the impact of experiencing physical domestic violence on the subsequent adoption of contraception among married women of reproductive age (15-45) in Uttar Pradesh, India. The data set for this analysis is the 1995-96 PERFORM System of Indicators Survey (PSIS), using matched data from married couples. A Cox regression model is fitted to the data, with the adoption of a modern method of contraception during the 36 month exposure period representing the failure event. The key individual variable of interest is whether the husband reports physical domestic violence towards his wife (data on domestic violence as collected only from the husband). The study finds evidence of a negative relationship between the experiencing of physical domestic violence and a woman’s subsequent contraceptive adoption. The study also finds evidence for a relationship between community attitudes towards gender roles and contraceptive adoption.	Rob	 Stephenson
2005	12	Demography of Domestic Violence	Resources, Family Organization, and Domestic Violence Against Married Women in Minya, Egypt	I evaluate the influence of household wealth, women’s socioeconomic dependency, status inconsistency, and family organization on physical abuse in the prior year and attitudes about wife abuse and divorce among 2,522 married women in Minya, Egypt. Household wealth is negatively associated with physical abuse. Women who are dependent on marriage because they have sons and less schooling than their husband are more likely to have experienced physical abuse and to report marginally more tolerance for such abuse. Women who are isolated from natal or biological kin and are living with marital relatives are more likely to have experienced physical abuse. Findings underscore the role of women’s dependency and social isolation in enabling physical abuse among women of all economic classes.	Kathryn	M. Yount
2005	13	The Onset of Fertility Decline in Africa	The Impact of Freedom on Fertility Transition: Revisiting the Theoretical Framework	This paper suggests that the number and height of the barriers that separate people from the fertility regulation technologies and information they need to limit family size provides a plausible and comprehensive explanation for the timing of fertility decline to (or beyond) replacement level. Drawing on demographers’ wide ranging research, our systematic review of the many types of barriers, and of examples of past fertility decline without exogenous change, provides compelling evidence that the amount of freedom that women have to decide whether and when to have a child provides a more satisfactory explanation for the timing of fertility decline than all major theoretical explanations offered over the past six decades. We suggest a latent demand for having control over one’s own reproduction is present among women in all societies and all centuries, activated when women see the costs (defined broadly) of family planning use are lower than the benefits.	Martha	M. Campbell	Nuriye	Nalan  Sahin-Hodoglugil	Malcolm	 Potts
2005	13	The Onset of Fertility Decline in Africa	Accounting for the Disparity in the Fertility Transition in Ethiopia: A Multilevel and Decomposition Approach	Until recently, only sub-Saharan Africa was lagging behind in the path towards fertility transition. However, recent data for some of the countries in the region indicate that fertility has begun to decline. One of such countries is Ethiopia. According to the ETDHS 2000, fertility transition is taking place in Ethiopia at a faster pace than that predicted by the UN, experiencing a reduction in total fertility rate of on average 0.8 children per woman per decade between 1984 and 2000. Yet, a woman in the capital city - Addis Ababa, has approached below replacement fertility level (TFR=1.94, while a woman in the rest of Ethiopia expects about a three times higher number of children). This paper, using multilevel spatial modeling and decomposition techniques, attempts to look at some of the possible explanations for the disparity in the fertility level and transition between the capital city and the rest of Ethiopia.	Muluye	 Desta
2005	13	The Onset of Fertility Decline in Africa	Why is Fertility Transition Slowest in Yemen among the Arab States? Some Clues from the Analysis of Proximate Determinants of Fertility	Among 22 members of the League of Arab states, Yemen has the highest fertility and slowest transition that began in the early 1990s. It was slow initially but recorded slight increase during the later part of the decade. Using 1991-92 and 1997 YDMCH Surveys data the present study attempts to answer “why is fertility transition slowest in Yemen?”. The role of proximate determinants on fertility decline has been studied using Bongaarts (1982) model. The contributory factors to fertility decline have been identified by decomposition of the change in Yemen’s total fertility rate (TFR). Contraceptive prevalence and postpartum infecundability emerged as the most important factors accounting for the reduction of TFR from 7.7 in 1991-92 to 6.5 in 1997. Index of marriage had negligible impact whereas the role of induced abortion was completely absent. Females’ age at marriage has still to play a great role in accelerating fertility transition in Yemen.	Prem	C. Saxena
2005	13	The Onset of Fertility Decline in Africa	The Impact of Land Availability on Fertility Behavior in Nyeri District, Kenya	Numerous historical and quantitative studies have examined the relationship between land availability and number of children. The current study examines not only quantitative data on farm size and fertility trends, but also focus group discussions and individual interviews to show how rural Kenyans perceive the role of land scarcity on the number of children they had. The recency of the Kenyan demographic transition provides a unique opportunity to examine the transition from the perspectives of those who actually induced the decline. The advantage of utilizing these narratives is that we are able for the first time to understand the reasoning and experiences of those who took part in the fertility decline.	Karina	M. Shreffler	Gloria	 Chepngeno	F.	Nii-Amoo  Dodoo
2005	14	Accessibility of Family Planning in Developing Countries	The Influence of Family Planning Logistics Systems on Contraceptive Use	This paper studies the influence of family planning logistics systems’ performance on contraceptive use. The performance of logistics systems of 24 countries is measured during 1995 and 1999 using an index constructed from 17 items. Family planning and socio-economic indicators for the same periods are obtained from DHS and other published sources. An areal analysis using a country-level fixed-effects regression model accounting for measurement error of the independent variables shows that the increase in logistics systems' performance score over the period is associated with increase in contraceptive use, net of the secular trend and the changes in other family planning program efforts, fertility desire, external population assistance, female education, female labor force participation, and per capita gross national product. The study supports the notion that an effective supply chain is essential for the success of family planning programs; about one-fifth of the contraceptive prevalence rate in the sampled countries is attributable towards the logistics systems.	Ali	M. Karim
2005	14	Accessibility of Family Planning in Developing Countries	Political Management in the Indonesian Family Planning Program	The literature on family planning program administration has devoted considerably more attention to the management of technical issues than to the management of political challenges. Examining how family planning agencies manage their political environments is critical to understanding the sources of their effectiveness. Based on in-depth interviews in Indonesia with 51 civil servants and donor officials involved with the country’s family planning program, this paper shows how a culture of political orchestration developed inside the Indonesian family planning agency during the Suharto-era from the 1970s to the 1990s. This factor likely underpinned the program’s effectiveness. Civil servants deliberately and successfully lobbied the president of the country, governors, national women’s groups and religious leaders in order to cultivate priority for the program. The case illustrates how family planning administrators may be able to increase the level of priority for their programs if they orchestrate their political environments strategically.	Jeremy	 Shiffman
2005	14	Accessibility of Family Planning in Developing Countries	Effects of the Family Planning Program on Modern Contraceptive Adoption and Continuation in Vietnam	The study examines the effects of the family planning programmatic factors related to service access and quality upon modern contraceptive method adoption and continuation in Vietnam. Data come from the 1997 Vietnam Demographic and Health Survey. Cox proportional hazard models were applied in the analysis of contraceptive adoption, while discrete-time complementary log-log models were used in the analysis of first and all method continuation. Service access and quality in the outreach program was not found to be significantly related to either adoption or continuation. In contrast, commune health center service quality emerged as significantly and positively associated with modern contraceptive adoption, while both commune health center service quality and access were important determinants of both first and all-method discontinuation. The study indicates a need for a formal evaluation of the outreach program and highlights importance of commune health center services in influencing client contraceptive behavior.	Mai	 Do
2005	15	Welfare and Poverty	The Use of Child Care Subsidies in Wisconsin	An important component of welfare reform nationwide has been an increase in the funding available for child care subsidies for low-income families, with the goal of reducing the constraints on employment posed by the difficulty of arranging care for children while parents are working. Even with this increased availability, the take-up rate for child care benefits appear quite low with less than half of apparently-eligible parents receiving subsidies. This paper uses administrative records for 16000 single-mother TANF recipients in Wisconsin to estimate the effect of household socioeconomic and demographic characteristics on the likelihood of receipt and the effect of subsidy receipt on subsequent employment. A survey of 2500 of these TANF recipients will allow consideration of additional characteristics not provided in the administrative record, and will provide information on the nature and cost of the actual child care arrangements used.	Steven	 Cook
2005	15	Welfare and Poverty	The Rise in SSI Participation among Children: Assessing the Impact on Poverty and Maternal Labor Supply	From 1989 to 1996 the number of children receiving benefits from the federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program increased by 260 percent to 955,000. Recent work has documented a shift of children from welfare to SSI during this period. In this paper we explore the determinants of the rise in child SSI participation and empirically investigate the causal effects on family poverty and maternal labor supply. We utilize an Instrumental Variables approach that exploits the fact that boys were 85 percent more likely than girls and that children from female-headed families were five times more likely than other children to enroll in SSI during the 1990s. Our findings suggest that among female-headed families, the increase in SSI participation resulted in an approximately 2 percentage point decline in child poverty and a 2 percentage point increase in maternal labor supply.	Mark	G. Duggan	Melissa	S. Kearney
2005	15	Welfare and Poverty	Debt, Asset Accumulation, and Livelihoods among TANF Participants	A family’s ability to maintain a certain level of consumption depends on its total resource base, including a constellation of financial and non-financial resources. Thus, household wealth is central to family economic well-being and a critical determinant of life chances. This paper examines one factor that contributes to household net worth--debt--and attempts to determine the role debt plays in welfare recipients’ household resource management. Using the economic life cycle model as a framework and tobit models with decomposition, I assess the fit of the life cycle model as applied to welfare recipients' households and whether the inclusion or exclusion of attitudes and livelihood variables improves the fit for this population. Results suggest that higher levels of debt in this population are associated with greater access to credit and asset accumulation.	Marlene	A. Lee
2005	15	Welfare and Poverty	Employment and Marriage: Pathways off of Welfare?	Does the way women exit welfare affect their probability of returning to welfare? Using data drawn from the 1979 – 2000 National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth, we examine the effect of marital and employment transitions on recidivism rates. We find that women who combine employment and marriage after exiting welfare, in that order, have significantly lower risks of recidivism than other women. Women who marry but do not enter employment have higher recidivism rates than women who combine employment and marriage, but they are less likely to return to welfare than women who are only employed. The data suggest that simply encouraging marriage or women’s employment may not reduce welfare recidivism. The best policy strategy to reduce welfare dependence and encourage healthy marriages may be to strengthen work support programs and improve the circumstances of employment (and opportunities for strong marriages) for low-income men and women.	Tracy	 Roberts	Steven	P. Martin
2005	16	Marriage, Cohabitation, and Children	Demographic Determinants of Family Structure Dynamics Experienced by Children	We provide the first comprehensive demographic analysis of the family structure experiences of children. We jointly analyze childbearing behavior and transitions among co-residential union states defined by single, cohabiting, and married. The analysis uses data from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79). The estimated model is simulated to provide a rich analysis of the family structure experiences of children from birth through age 18. A novel contribution of the paper is to analyze the determinants of the identity of the man with whom a woman enters a co-residential union. A woman who has given birth to a child outside of a co-residential union is at risk of entering a union with the father of the child and with other men. This distinction is rarely made when analyzing relationship formation, but it is critical for understanding the family structure experiences of children.	David	 Blau	Wilbert	 van der Klaauw
2005	16	Marriage, Cohabitation, and Children	Does Marriage Matter for Kids? The Impact of Legal Marriage on Child Outcomes	Many studies have found a positive association between living with biological parents and child outcomes. This paper focuses on children who live with both biological parents and analyzes whether having married parents confers any educational advantages to children that cohabitation does not. Cohabitation is more common in Sweden than anywhere else in the industrialized world. Although it is more similar to legal marriage than in the U.S., it does not have the same legal implications. We use a natural experiment, namely the marriage boom in Sweden at the end of 1989, created by the change in the widow’s pension scheme in 1990, to identify the causal effect of marriage on child outcomes. We use a random sample of children born in Sweden in 1974-87. The data are combined with family and individual information from the censuses 1980, 1985 and 1990. Our outcome variable is grade point average at age 16.	Donna	K. Ginther	Anders	 Björklund	Marianne	 Sundström
2005	16	Marriage, Cohabitation, and Children	Parental Child Care in Single Parent, Cohabiting, and Married Couple Families: Time Diary Evidence from the United Kingdom	Research overwhelmingly indicates that developmental outcomes are better, on average, for children raised in two-parent families than other families. However, the exact mechanism underlying this association remains murky. Household production theory, which posits that married, and possibly cohabiting, parents enjoy more time resources and greater opportunities for specialization than single parents, offers a potential explanation. This study adopts a household production framework and investigates differences in the time that single, cohabiting, and married parents devote to raising their children. The study uses time-diary data from the 2000 United Kingdom Time Use Survey to estimate a system of censored regression models in which parents’ daily time spent in different caregiving activities and market work are dependent variables. A system approach is used to account for correlations among the unobserved determinants of time use. Differences by the gender of the parents are examined.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski	David	C. Ribar	Leslie	 Stratton
2005	16	Marriage, Cohabitation, and Children	Family Structure Transitions and Adolescent Well-Being	This study examines the short-term effects of family structure transitions on adolescent well-being, as measured by depression, delinquency, and grade point average. We use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and incorporate both a stress and life-course perspective. We first ask if the impact of family structure transitions affects adolescent well-being differently, depending on the number of parents in the household. Second, we ask, are adolescents transitioning into cohabiting family structures worse off than those transitioning into a married family structure? Finally, do adolescents transitioning into or out of single mother homes significantly differ from those transitioning into or out of single father homes? Do female or male adolescents fare better with respect to the impact of family structure transitions on adolescent well-being? Preliminary results suggest that family structure transitions do indeed differentially affect adolescent well-being, depending on the specific type of transition.	Crystal	M. Stephens	Lisa	 Nicholson	Chris	 Knoester
2005	18	Sexual Behavior in the U.S.	Forsaking All Others? The Effects of Gay Marriage on Risky Sex	The issue of whether marriage should be available to same-sex partners is one of the most controversial policy topics in the United States today. One of the hypothesized benefits of extending marriage to same-sex partners is that it would reduce the prevalence of risky sexual behavior.     In this study, I present empirical evidence on whether this has actually occurred by evaluating the recent European experience with gay marriage. Beginning with Denmark in 1989, several European nations have made marriage or quasi-marriage rights available to same-sex partners. This study presents evidence on whether these law changes have influenced the prevalence of gonorrhea, syphilis and new HIV infections. These evaluations are based on country-by-year panel data and two-way fixed effect specifications that control for the unobserved determinants specific to each country and year.	Thomas	S. Dee
2005	18	Sexual Behavior in the U.S.	Steppin' Out: Sexual Jealousy and Infidelity among Unmarried Parents	There is increasing interest in the relationships of unmarried parents, specifically the factors influencing whether they stay together and ever marry. Trust and sexual fidelity are key factors in gauging the quality and potential longevity of any relationship. This paper uses data from a longitudinal qualitative study of couple dynamics to describe infidelity and sexual mistrust in the relationships of unmarried parents. Interviews conducted over the course of four years offer insight into how couples view sexual fidelity, how the expectations of fidelity differ for men and women, and what course their relationship takes following an incidence of infidelity. Preliminary analysis suggests that these are highly salient issues for parents in this study and that when infidelity occurs it is often at the beginning of a couple’s relationship. This is consistent with an emerging picture of less than fully committed relationships being thrust into “warp speed” by pregnancy.	Heather	D. Hill
2005	18	Sexual Behavior in the U.S.	The Relationship Context for Risky Sex among HIV-Positive Adults in the United States	Most research on correlates of sexual risk behavior among HIV-positive people has focused on individual rather than relationship characteristics. In this paper, we use data from a national probability sample of adults receiving HIV care to examine how sexual relationship patterns are related to high-risk sexual behavior that could transmit HIV infection. In a sample of 1,421 respondents representing a population of 197,100 adults receiving HIV care, 932 (66%) reported having sex in the previous six months, representing 133,700 adults with a total of 522,400 recent sexual partners. Eighty-four percent of sexually active respondents reported having a primary relationship partner or spouse (PRP). Twenty-two percent of sexually active respondents reported any high-risk sex, defined as unprotected anal or vaginal sex with a partner whose serostatus was HIV-negative or unknown. More than half (52%) of all partnerships in which high-risk sex occurred involved a person with multiple partners including a PRP.	David	 Kanouse	Rebecca	 Collins	Frank	 Galvan	Daniela	 Golinelli	Philip	 Pantoja
2005	18	Sexual Behavior in the U.S.	Intercourse During Menses: Adjusting to the Use of Fertility Awareness-Based Methods of Family Planning	Many couples prefer to avoid intercourse during menses for religious or cultural reasons, or because they believe it is unhealthy. Yet menses is a time when users of fertility awareness-based methods of family planning know that they can have unprotected intercourse without fear of pregnancy. To explore patterns of intercourse during menses we examine coital logs provided by participants in efficacy studies of the Standard Days Method and the TwoDay Method, two simple fertility awareness-based methods of family planning. Couples who use these methods to prevent pregnancy avoid unprotected intercourse on the days their method identifies as fertile. Results suggest that more couples have intercourse during menses in the first few cycles of method use. As they become more confident in their ability to correctly identify their fertile days and communicate about when they may have unprotected intercourse to prevent pregnancy, they have less intercourse during menses.	Irit	 Sinai	Victoria	 Jennings
2005	18	Sexual Behavior in the U.S.	Using T-ACASI to Improve the Accuracy of Sexually Transmitted Disease Measurements	STD cases are well known to be underreported to the health department and in population surveys where survey interviewers ask respondents to report on their STD history. The 1999 2000 National STD and Behavior Measurement Experiment tested the impact of telephone audio computer administered self interviewing (T ACASI) versus standard telephone interview on the reporting of STD history, symptoms, treatment for symptoms, and discussions with sexual partners in probability samples of U.S. and Baltimore adults aged 18-45 (Ns = 1,509 and 729). T-ACASI, a completely private mode of telephone survey administration, increases the likelihood that respondents will acknowledge recent diagnosis of STDs and related symptoms, not seeking treatment, as well as other STD-risk behaviors. If higher estimates represent more accurate reporting, our findings suggest that prevalence estimates derived from interviewer-administered telephone surveys may understate the prevalence of STD history, symptoms, treatment, and partner characteristics by factors of 1.4 to 4.5.	Maria	A. Villarroel	Charles	F. Turner	Susan	M. Rogers	Elizabeth	 Eggleston
2005	19	Demography and Life Course Studies	The Life Course, Biology, and Health	Although a small but critical mass of studies now links social factors to a set of general biological markers of chronic stress, we know much less about the processes by which social life “gets under the skin” over time. In this paper, we consider these processes. Our general aim is to leverage the state of the art in both life course studies and social neuroscience to produce a more nuanced model of the links between social experience and long term health. We will begin by developing a conceptual framework linking the lifetime patterning of social and biological processes. We will then apply this model to the life course phenomenon of marital biography -- an individual’s history of marital states and transitions. Using data from the first year of the Chicago Health, Aging and Social Relations Study we will examine the links between marital biography and biomarkers of long term health.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes	Linda	 Waite	Louise	 Hawkley	John	T.  Cacioppo
2005	19	Demography and Life Course Studies	The Timing and Partnership Context of Becoming a Parent: Cohort and Gender Commonalities and Differences in Childhood Antecedents	We use the rich information available from two British birth cohort studies, of children born in 1958 (NCDS) and in 1970 (BCS70). There are substantial inter-cohort shifts in timing and context of becoming a parent and the gender differences in timing. We explore the extent to which a common model for childhood antecedents of parenthood, both across cohorts and across genders, suffices. We use carefully created common childhood measures for the two cohorts and then pool the two data sets and fit common models. We then ask whether explicit terms for gender or for cohort are supported by the data. These can take the form of an unexplained gender or cohort differential or can involve specific differential pathways through the measured childhood antecedents. Preliminary results give considerable support for elements of a common model, however plausible and interpretable gender and cohort terms are also necessary.	Kathleen	E. Kiernan	John	 Hobcraft
2005	19	Demography and Life Course Studies	Examining the Neighborhood and School Context of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Arrest	This study examines the role of social context in explaining racial and ethnic differences in arrest. In particular, this research examines just what it is about the distinct school and neighborhood contexts in which different racial and ethnic groups participate that explains differences in criminal outcomes. To do so, I use a multilevel, longitudinal research design that combines individual-level data on Chicago-area youth with contextual data from the U.S. census, the Chicago Public Schools, and the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods. Given that the developmental paths between different racial and ethnic groups are often distinct, it is critical to consider how the effects of different social contexts accumulate throughout childhood and adolescence to ultimately produce differentials in arrest.	David	 Kirk
2005	19	Demography and Life Course Studies	Transition to Adulthood in the New Economy: Economic Recessions and the Structure of the Life Course	This research examines the impact of economic recessions on the transition to adulthood in the United States. We begin by articulating a structural perspective on the life course and offer hypotheses about the potential impact of short-term economic dislocations for the transition to adulthood. Using data from the NLSY79, we compare the multi-dimensional structure of the life course for four birth cohorts who were differentially exposed to the economic recession of 1982-1983. Using a two-stage latent class approach, we formally model the interlocked trajectories of school, work, marriage, and parenthood across race-sex-cohort groups and examine the variable role that recessionary contexts have on the transition to adulthood. Findings indicate that structures of the life course are generally resilient to short-term economic shocks but also that economic fluctuations have variable effects on race and sex. Implications for theory and research are discussed.	Ross	 Macmillan
2005	20	Population and Environment	Households, Consumption, and Energy Use: Population Age Structure and Future Carbon Emissions for the United States	We investigate whether expected changes in the age composition of U.S. households over the next 25-100 years could have a substantial influence on total energy demand and emissions of carbon dioxide, the most important greenhouse gas. We use the ProFamy model to develop household projections for different age groups in the U.S. population. Benchmark demand for consumer goods, and supplies of labor and capital are determined using an analysis of Consumer Expenditure Survey data. We classify different household types by age in the U.S. region of the Population-Environment-Technology (PET) model, a dynamic multi-region computable general equilibrium model of energy and economic growth. The PET model translates consumption of various goods into demand for energy, other inputs, and carbon emissions. Our results demonstrate that demographic heterogeneity can substantially affect energy use and long-term carbon emissions.	Michael	 Dalton	Brian	C. O'Neill	Leiwen	 Jiang	John	 Pitkin
2005	20	Population and Environment	Multilevel Determinants of Indigenous Land Use in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon: A Cross-Cultural Study	Agricultural extensification is the world’s primary proximate cause of tropical deforestation, and population-environment research has addressed this issue through studies of land use by smallholder agriculturalists at tropical forest frontiers. In part due to their isolation, these methods have not been applied to populations of indigenous peoples who inhabit frontier forests, despite recognition of their important role in conservation efforts and ongoing transformations of their traditional livelihoods. We analyze data from a 2001 household survey of five indigenous populations in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon, with the goal of understanding processes of extensification and intensification affecting traditional swidden-fallow agriculture. Using multi-level models, we investigate the demographic, geographic, ecological and socio-economic determinants at household and community levels of the size and composition of agricultural plots, including the effect of ethnicity. The results should have important implications for conservation and development policy in indigenous territories throughout the Amazon basin.	Clark	L. Gray	Jason	 Bremner	Richard	 Bilsborrow	Flora	 Lu Holt
2005	20	Population and Environment	Population, Uncertainty, and Learning in Climate Change Decision Analysis	The question of whether to act now or wait to learn more is central to the climate change issue. Previous work has reached no firm conclusions on either the direction or the magnitude of the effect on optimal emissions reductions of incorporating the potential for learning in climate change decision analysis. Here we use a well known, simple integrated assessment model to investigate how learning about the outlook for future population growth could affect optimal climate policy. We draw on recent work showing that, because population growth is path dependent, we can learn about the long term outlook for population size by waiting to observe how population changes in the short term. We find that learning about population growth can affect optimal policy, and that the timing and scope for learning are key determinants of the magnitude of the effect.	Brian	C. O'Neill	Warren	C. Sanderson
2005	20	Population and Environment	The “Population Factor” and Deforestation in Brazilian Amazonia: Towards a Mediating Perspective	Although significant progress in our understanding of the dynamics of land-use and land-cover change (LUCC) has been made, human population pressure continues to be portrayed as the major factor affecting forest destruction. This paper assesses the importance of the “population factor” as a cause of deforestation in Brazilian Amazonia. The analysis draws from multiple data sources (i.e. demographic census, household survey, land-cover maps, and in-depth interviews) and different methodological approaches (i.e. fuzzy sets statistics, remote sensing/GIS analysis, and interpretivist qualitative approach). The paper contends that a full account of the complex web of drivers involved in tropical deforestation needs to go beyond demographics per se. The paper shows that social structure and mediating factors such as cultural aspects and human capital involving education, managerial skills, previous rural experience, and integration to the local and regional contexts mediate migrants’ relationships with the local environment.	John	 Sydenstricker-Neto
2005	21	Stratification Processes	Why Do Married Men Earn More? An Evaluation of the Marriage Premium	Married men receive higher wages than single men do. Many have tested whether or not this is due to selection and find that the so called marriage premium persists. Few, however, have explored the mechanisms. If the premium is related to the instrumental and emotional support provided by marriage, one might expect that the gains to marriage are weaker in unhappy relationships. This paper will focus on whether the premium is conditioned by marriage quality. We will estimate fixed and random effects natural log wage models for a sample of males from the National Survey of Families and Households. Husbands in marriages not characterized as happy have a lower predicted wage than those in happy and somewhat happy marriages. General happiness appears to account for only some of this difference. Very happily married men receive higher wages than never married and previously married men but lower wages than other husbands.	Tara	L. Becker	Aimée	R. Dechter
2005	21	Stratification Processes	Education, Ability, and Wealth: A Prospective Study	Much is known about the role of education and ability in determining occupational chances and earnings or income. Much less is known about the determinants of wealth, possibly excepting inherited wealth. In this study, we will investigate differentials in the accumulation of wealth at ages 53 to 54 and at ages 64 to 65 in a cohort of male and female high school graduates who have participated in the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) for nearly half a century. Key explanatory variables include gender, parents’ incomes, adolescent cognitive ability, educational attainment, career success, and inherited wealth.	Robert	M. Hauser
2005	21	Stratification Processes	Families, Schools, and National Contexts: The Effects of Institutions and Inequality on Educational Achievement across Industrialized Countries	This paper focuses on the direct and indirect effects of family background and school quality on the educational achievement scores of high school students in developed countries. The socioeconomic characteristics of one’s family has a direct impact on how well one does on achievement tests, and, if family background helps determine the schools children attend, it can also have an indirect effect through school quality. The quality of schools thus may serve both as a mediator of family background and an independent source of variation in student achievement scores. Therefore, the structure of a country’s educational system – particularly the variation in school quality and the process of student assignment – can impact the relationship between family background and achievement scores and serve as a source of inequality in educational achievement. This paper disentangles these family and school effects on achievement and compares these results across developed countries.	Troy	A. Powell
2005	21	Stratification Processes	High School Exit Examinations and Post-Secondary Labor Market Outcomes	Since the early 1980s, an increasing number of states have required students to pass statewide high school exit examinations (HSEEs) in order to graduate. States have generally adopted HSEEs in response to the perception that graduates typically lack skills required for success in the modern economy and that requiring students to pass a graduation test will make the diploma meaningful to employers. What do these education reforms mean for students’ post-secondary economic and labor market prospects? The central hypothesis of our research is that state HSEE policies have the effect of widening gaps in employment rates, earnings, poverty rates, and public assistance use between students who have high school diplomas and those without them. To test this hypothesis we will we will model the association between state HSEE policies and labor market outcomes using data from the 1984-2003 Current Population Surveys (CPS) and the 1980 through 2000 U.S. Censuses.	John	R. Warren	Eric	 Grodsky	Jennifer	C. Lee
2005	23	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Racial/Ethnic Variations in Causes of Mortality among 15-29 Year-Olds: Evidence from the 1993 National Mortality Followback Study	This study uses data from the 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey to examine racial/ethnic differences (African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, and non-Hispanic whites) in the relative likelihood of death from external causes --specifically suicide, accident, and homicide-- as compared with death from other (mainly endogenous) causes, among 15-29 year-olds in the United States. The purpose of this study is to examine the extent to which structural factors and lifestyle factors (e.g., religious involvement, mental health problems, alcohol and drug abuse, risk-taking behaviors, firearm access, antisocial behaviors, etc.) may help to account for the observed racial/ethnic differentials in relative risk of external causes of death. Findings thus far suggest that compared to white descendants aged 15-29, Blacks and Hispanics exhibit lower odds of death from suicide, and higher odds of homicide relative to natural causes. Life style factors seem to account for part of the observed findings. Other implications are also discussed.	Daisy	 Fan
2005	23	Race and Ethnic Inequality	How Housing Cost Burden and Poverty Status Relate to Economic Hardship among Black, Hispanic, and White Families with Children	To enhance our knowledge about the home economics of poverty, or specifically economic hardship among families with children, this study 1) examined the effectiveness of the housing affordability threshold versus the poverty thresholds in explaining economic hardship and 2) compared the effectiveness of the measures across low-income Black, Hispanic, and White families with children in the United States.     The findings from the multivariate analysis indicate that Black families with children suffer the highest degree of economic hardship, regardless of whether they are poor or near poor. In addition, the hardship scores of Black families are the highest when they have a housing cost burden. Therefore, the results of this study raise the issues of housing cost burden and economic hardship that the country's Black families disproportionately experience, compared to White and Hispanic families. The study also suggests that Hispanic families adjust to financially disadvantageous situations to deter economic hardship.	Yoko	 Mimura
2005	23	Race and Ethnic Inequality	The Actuation of College Plans: Explaining Why Some Seniors Make It and Others Don’t	Longitudinal data from the University of Washington Beyond High School study is used to determine the factors that influence high school seniors’ ability to actuate college plans. Special attention is devoted to racial and ethnic variation in the realization of college plans, and in the possible explanations for such variation. Multivariate analyzes reveal an enrollment advantage for Vietnamese students and an enrollment disadvantage for African American and Hispanic students. Also, racial and ethnic variation exists in type of school attended: two-year or four-year. A possible explanation for the African American and Hispanic students’ enrollment disadvantage is weaker academic performance and a contextual high school effect, respectively. Social integration and access to social capital within the Vietnamese community are acknowledged as a possible explanation for the Vietnamese students’ enrollment advantage.	Nikolas	D. Pharris-Ciurej	Stewart	E. Tolnay
2005	23	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Racial and Ethnic Inequality in the Duration of Children’s Exposure to Neighborhood Poverty and Affluence	Despite recent scholarly concern with “neighborhood effects” on children, no study to date has measured the cumulative exposure of children to neighborhood poverty. In this paper I construct multi-state period life tables to estimate racial and ethnic differences in the amount of time children can expect to live in poor and nonpoor neighborhoods throughout childhood. At early 1990s rates, Black children can expect to spend over 60 percent of childhood in neighborhoods with poverty rates in excess of 20 percent. The corresponding figures for White and Hispanic children are about 14 and 36 percent, respectively. I find that racial differences in childhood exposure to neighborhood poverty are due largely to differences in the probability of being born into a poor neighborhood. Finally, cross-period analyzes indicate that White children are spending an increasing share of childhood in the most affluent type, and Black children are spending more time in the poorest type.	Jeffrey	M. Timberlake
2005	24	Immigrants, Language, and Culture	Parents and Children Talk	This paper extends the analysis of the acquisition of destination language proficiency among immigrants by explicitly incorporating dynamics among family members—mother, father and children. Single equation, bivariate, and four-state (multivariate) probit analyzes are employed. Immigrant English language skills are greater the younger the age at migration, the longer the duration of residence, the higher the level of education, and for immigrants not from Asia. Large positive correlations in the unmeasured determinants of proficiency exist between spouses, between siblings, and between parents and children, although the latter relationship is stronger for the mother.	Barry	R. Chiswick	Paul	W. Miller	Yew	 Lee
2005	24	Immigrants, Language, and Culture	Remittance Behavior, Acculturation, and Socio-Cultural-Economic Factors: A Case Study of Latinos in the Chicago Metropolitan Area	This paper uses data from the Chicago Area Survey (CAS) recently finished by the Institute for Latino Studies at the University of Notre Dame. The CAS interviewed 1,500 Latino households in six county Chicago metropolitan areas. Compared to previous studies, the CAS contains rich information on Latinos’ remittance behavior, religiosity, and financial market participation, as well as other general demographic and socioeconomic variables—nativity, age, education, gender, income, immigration status, national origin, and language. The contribution of this paper is to emphasize the effects of acculturation on the probability of having remitted, and the value of remittances transferred to Latin America by individual migrants. This will be done by defining a broader measure of acculturation, such as length of time spent in the U.S., financial market participation, and church or community involvement, controlling for nativity, immigration demographic variables, and community context “proxied” by population density, homeownership rate, and poverty concentration.	Sung	 Chun	Wei	 Sun
2005	24	Immigrants, Language, and Culture	Hispanic Learning Trajectories: Country of Origin, Generational Status and English Ability in the Early School Years	The proposed study uses the ECLS-K database to examine Hispanic students’ math and reading learning trajectories between kindergarten and third grade. Specifically, this study describes differences in average learning trajectories among Hispanics of different country of origin and of distinct immigrant generations. In addition, I investigate how Hispanic students’ learning trajectories are shaped by their English ability. A piecewise linear growth model is used to estimate learning growth during kindergarten, in first grade, and between first and third grade. Hierarchical Linear Modeling is used to analyze three level models – assessments nested within students, students nested within classes or schools. Preliminary results show significant differences in learning trajectories among Hispanic subgroups and between Hispanic subgroups and Whites. Students’ English ability significantly reduces the score gaps at Kindergarten entry and the differences in growth rates between Hispanic subgroups and Whites.	Claudia	L. Galindo
2005	24	Immigrants, Language, and Culture	Migrant Domestic Workers: From Burma to Thailand		Sureeporn	 Punpuing
2005	25	Experimental Methods in Demographic Research	Effect of Water Supply on Child Survival. A Study of Qualitative and Quantitative Data from Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso)	This study uses longitudinal life-history data to examine factors affecting child survival in Ouagadougou, the capital city of Burkina Faso. It focuses especially on the controversial role of improvements in water supply on infant and child mortality. Qualitative data collected in 2003 is also employed to better understand domestic uses of water and its social representations. In event-history models, as expected, mother’s education is strongly associated with lower child mortality risk and captures the most of the effect of water supply. Qualitative findings explain why we failed to discover an effect of the availability of piped water on childhood mortality. In particular, hygienic knowledge as a product of formal education is discussed. Indeed, while education may be necessary to gain biomedical knowledge, it may nevertheless be insufficient to significantly alter daily hygienic water-use practices, which are more the result of an acculturation process to new ways of thinking and behaving.	Stéphanie	 Dos Santos	Thomas	 LeGrand
2005	25	Experimental Methods in Demographic Research	Impacts of Welfare Reform on Marriage, Cohabitation, Doubling up, and Births: Experimental Evidence from Four States	Evidence from a series of state-level experiments conducted in the mid- to late-1990s suggests that welfare reforms’ effects on demographic behavior have been small and inconsistent across states, subgroups, and family formation outcomes. The degree to which these effects are related to reforms' economic impacts has not been explored; nor have subgroup patterns been documented for impacts on demographic outcomes other than marriage and cohabitation. Using survey data on 7,389 women from state welfare experiments in Delaware, Florida, Indiana, and Minnesota, we document subgroup variability in impacts on marriage, cohabitation, doubling up, and births. We then create and analyze instruments for key economic impacts hypothesized to mediate the relationship between reforms and family formation. The paper represents the first attempt of which we are aware to discern underlying structure in subgroup variability in the demographic impacts that can be measured in welfare reform experiments.	David	J. Fein	Rebecca	A. London	Jane	 Mauldon
2005	25	Experimental Methods in Demographic Research	Hearsay Ethnography	In this paper we describe a method developed to augment data collected by demographers. Although this method was developed in response to problems we encountered during a research project in rural Malawi, we believe this method is generalizable. One problem is that the quality of interview data may be affected by interactions between interviewer and respondent. Classical ethnography circumvents this problem, but is quite demanding. We thus asked several residents of villages in our research sites to act as our eyes and ears. Because our focus was on informal conversations about AIDS, we asked these village ethnographers to write down, at the end of each day, what was said in conversations they overheard or participated in as they went about their normal activities. In the paper, we discuss the disadvantages as well as the advantages of hearsay ethnography, but conclude that it is a valuable addition to demographers' techniques.	Susan	 Watkins	Ann	 Swidler
2005	25	Experimental Methods in Demographic Research	Causal Effect of Health on Socio-Economic Prosperity: Experimental Evidence	Studies have demonstrated that health and socio-economic success are positively correlated. Identifying the causal effect of health on socio-economic success has proved to be extremely difficult. An on-going large scale random-assignment treatment-control experiment designed to pin down the extent to which one dimension of health – iron status – has a causal impact on an array of indicators of economic and social prosperity is described. The Work and Iron Status Evaluation follows 10,000 adults in Central Java, Indonesia. Half the respondents receive a weekly iron supplement for a year; the controls receive a placebo. Strategies to assure compliance with the protocols are described and compliance is also measured by monitoring blood iron levels during the study. Relative to controls, treated subjects who were iron deficient at baseline have elevated blood iron when supplementation ended. They also earned more (if they were self-employed), reported themselves as being in better physical and psycho-social health.	Duncan	 Thomas	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Jed	 Friedman	Christopher	 McKelvey	Bondan	 Sikoki	Wayan	 Suriastini
2005	26	Education Enrollment and Attainment	A Multiple-Spells Competing-Risks Model of Student Departure from College	ABSTRACT  Using data from three entering cohorts of undergraduates at a large Research Intensive university, we estimate a multiple-spells competing-risks model of student departure from college. Of particular interest is the impact of an initial stopout on the occurrence and length of future stopouts, and how stopouts, particularly multiple stopouts, affect the probability of graduation. We demonstrate that students who experience a stopout are more likely to experience a subsequent stopout, and that this pattern of enrollment behavior is very detrimental to one’s chances of graduating, especially in a timely fashion. We also find evidence of duration dependence in enrollment and stopout spells. That is, as the average time in enrollment (stopout) spells increases, the more (less) likely students are to graduate.       JEL classification: I21	Dennis	A. Ahlburg	Stephen	L. DesJardins	Brian	 McCall
2005	26	Education Enrollment and Attainment	College Access and the Shifting Meritocracy: Test Scores, Class Rank and Race-Sensitive Admission Criteria	Two controversies dominate the national policy debate about access to selective colleges and universities. One is about the weight assigned to standardized test scores and the second is about the use of color-sensitive practices in college admissions. Although usually discussed separately, both share a common root, namely the coming to college-age of the children of the affluent baby boomers, which increased demand for a relatively fixed number of slots at the most competitive universities. The fundamental challenge facing admission officers is deciding who is most deserving of admission. Stated as a question, on what achievement criteria is our educational meritocracy constructed? Both controversies about college access materialize directly from this question and in this study we aim to explore the link between them. Our empirical analyzes employ three datasets. The High School and Beyond (HS&B), the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS:88), and the College and Beyond (C&B) database.	Sigal	 Alon	Marta	 Tienda
2005	26	Education Enrollment and Attainment	Does School Performance Increase when Children Enter at Younger Ages?	Our paper investigates whether enrollment at earlier ages increases school performance. We use data from the Children of the NLSY79 to examine performance as a function of home inputs, school inputs and instability at home, school, and the neighborhood. We characterize school performance using test scores from standardized ability tests administered to these children at ages 3, 6, and 9. We focus on the age at which a child first enrolled in school, recognizing that parents have some choice over this age. To estimate age of enrollment we take advantage of differences across states and over time in compulsory schooling laws that determine the age by which a child must be enrolled. Under the assumption that parents do not choose a state of residence based on these laws, we identify the policy effect of earlier enrollment on performance. We will estimate family and state fixed effects models.	Dean	R. Lillard	Jennifer	 Gerner
2005	26	Education Enrollment and Attainment	Forecasting Human Capital: Using Demographic Multi-State Projection Methods to Show the Long-Term Effects of near-Term Investments in Education	This paper argues that forecasting human capital is important for several reasons and that the most appropriate methods for doing so are demographic multi-state population projections. Under this method the population of a country or region is cross-classified by age, sex and different categories (states) of educational attainment. The population is projected into the future based on assumed education-specific fertility, mortality and migration rates as well as age- and sex-specific transition rates from one educational status to another. This explicit consideration of such dynamic features makes this method more appropriate for the projections of human capital than other methods previously suggested. Such multi-state models can also apply to the detailed analysis of education flows, modeling intake and enrollment as well as completion rates. The paper demonstrates the feasibility of the method through three detailed education projection studies for Guinea, Zambia and Nicaragua.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Anne	 Goujon	Annababette	 Wils
2005	27	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Diverse Fortunes in Different Countries?: Earnings of White and Black Immigrant Generations in Canada and the United States	This paper presents earnings determination models for non-Hispanic Whites and Black men and women age 25-44 , disaggregated by generational status into second and third plus groups (Canada) and those arriving as children or as young adolescents and those arriving after age 15 (both countries). Data from the 1% public use file from the 2000 United States Census and the master database of the 2001 Canadian Census at Statistics Canada are used to show the relative advantages and disadvantages experienced by Black groups defined by source countries or regions and by generational status compared to the non-Hispanic White majority. Results for the 2nd and 1.5 generations are mixed, partly reflecting their young age compositions and their higher educational attainments. However, in both countries, Black immigrants arriving later in life earn less than either the White native born or White immigrants.	Monica	 Boyd
2005	27	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Ethnicity and the Social Context: The Residential Integration of Iranians, Jamaicans, the Vietnamese and the Chinese	This paper investigates ethnic residential integration in a comparative perspective. Contemporary patterns suggest that immigrant integration can follow different paths, expected to vary by ethnic group and by the local and national context of host societies. That is, the extent to which immigrant integration follows the assimilation, stratification or retention model, or some combination, depends upon both ethnic factors and the social context. To elucidate these processes, four groups are analyzed, Iranians, Jamaicans, the Chinese, and the Vietnamese, each in two metropolitan areas, in two countries, Canada and the US. The proximity of Canada and the US in geography and experience provides the opportunity for comparative work between the two places. Using tabular data from the 2000 US census and the 2001 Canadian census, this study examines whether there are systematic differences in the factors that lead to residential distinctiveness for each of the four groups.	Ann	H. Kim
2005	27	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	Diasporic Migrations: A Comparative Analysis of Guatemalans in Costa Rica, Belize, Mexico, and the United States	International migration flows are not limited to those from developing countries to the developed world. Recently, interest has sparked in the field to study flows between non-developed countries. Furthermore, sending regions often form part of different migration flows, as citizens of one country immigrate to two or more destinations, forming a diaspora. One such example is the case of Guatemalan immigrants. We will use data from the 2000 Censuses of Mexico, Costa Rica, Belize, and the United States to compare the Guatemalan communities in each of these receiving countries. Data available includes general demographic markers (age, sex, marital status), socioeconomic markers (educational level, employment), and community variables (place of residence, internal mobility, presence of critical mass). We hope to further our understanding of how migration flows are shaped, and the conditions faced by members of a diaspora in different host countries, by providing a comparative framework upon which further research can be conducted.	Leila	 Rodriguez	Mira	M. Hidajat
2005	27	Comparative Perspectives on Immigration	How Contexts of Reception Matter: Peruvian Migrants in Japan and the U.S.	This paper compares immigrants’ socio-economic mobility in Japan and the U.S., focusing on Peruvian migrants. Having migrated to both countries around the same time for similar economic reasons, Peruvians, over time, tend to fare better in the U.S. than in Japan. This is so despite the fact that they share similar socioeconomic backgrounds and start out in comparable low-rung occupations in both countries. Drawing upon a Peruvian household survey, Census data, and life history interviews conducted in the two countries, I comparatively examine obstacles and paths to immigrant upward socioeconomic mobility. While Japan provides immigrants with monetary rewards, it has not quite succeeded in offering means of upward occupational mobility because of its less diversified immigrant labor market and relatively limited opportunities for ethnic entrepreneurship.	Ayumi	 Takenaka
2005	28	Marriage Patterns in Developing Countries	Program Efforts to Delay Marriage through Improved Opportunities: Some Evidence from Rural Bangladesh	Programs geared toward adolescents are increasingly the focus of NGOs and other organizations working in developing countries. Yet little documentation concerning the challenges and effectiveness of such programs exists. Using longitudinal panel data from an adolescent study in rural Bangladesh, this paper analyzes the impact of an adolescent livelihoods program using the propensity-score matching method. The data suggest that, while such programs can achieve delayed marriage, these changes can be limited to a small subset of girls with relatively unusual characteristics. The results suggest that programs working with adolescents might benefit from targeting vulnerable populations rather than heterogeneous groups. For example, the targeting of younger adolescents in poor areas may lead to greater success.	Luciana	 Suran
2005	28	Marriage Patterns in Developing Countries	Demographic Responses to Economic Crisis: Determinants of Marriage and Fertility for Indonesian Youth 1993-2000	Modernization theories suggest that industrialization and urbanization promote marital and fertility delays for young adults through increased educational and employment opportunities. Our research analyzes shifts in age at marriage and time to first birth in Indonesia following the 1998 South-East Asian economic crisis. Evidence suggests that the crisis disrupted long-term marriage trends; this study assesses the extent to which young adults' changing employment and education patterns following the crisis fostered this trend disruption. Data are from four waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, a longitudinal survey spanning 1993 to 2000. Preliminary results indicate significantly increased odds of marriage in 1998 and 2000 relative to 1993, and increased employment and decreased school enrollment for young adults in 1998. Future work incorporates hazard models with lagged education and employment covariates and fixed-effects panel studies to compare how education and employment status differentially affected demographic behaviors before and since the crisis.	Jenna	 Nobles	Alison	M. Buttenheim
2005	28	Marriage Patterns in Developing Countries	Local Continuity and Change: Perspectives of Senegalese Marriage Dynamics	This paper uses qualitative data from three contrasting communities in Senegal to investigate the local forces transforming nuptiality. A gendered approach to the new marriage dynamics shows that both the perspectives of the reasons for change and the experienced reality of the transformations differ substantially between men and women. Even where nuptiality trends may appear to be nationally homogenous, we demonstrate that it is essential to consider local processes of change. The study communities exemplify the major evolution in expectations of marriage occurring in urban Senegal but also show how there may be simultaneous movements towards both conservative and innovative marital behavior. International migration, which might be expected to initiate rapid transformation of conjugal relations, is shown in one context to reinforce ‘traditional’ marriage patterns whereas in the capital the combination of higher education, new cosmopolitan values and aspirations, economic crisis and difficult living conditions have transformed conjugal relations.	Sara	 Randall	Nathalie	K. Mondain
2005	28	Marriage Patterns in Developing Countries	Impact of Wartime and Military Service on Family Formation in Vietnam	Vietnam experienced four decades of wars from the 1940s to the 1970s. Although major fighting was over by the end of the 1970s, the mobilization of young men into the military carried on until the late 1980s. In this paper, I use the life course approach to document how wartime and military service affect family formation in the Red River Delta, Vietnam. While it is believed that war and military service have profound impact on the Vietnamese marriage and family patterns, their effects have not yet been measured directly and systematically in prior works. Based on the Vietnam Longitudinal Survey, my study examines the extent to which wartime and military service affect cohort trends in first marriage and first birth. I explore three aspects of military service: whether serving in the military, timing of induction, and duration of service. I attempt to investigate whether the timing and sequencing of military service have long-term adverse effects on marital stability.	Puk	Bussarawan  Teerawichitchainan
2005	29	The Social and Demographic Effects of Housing	Emerging Cohort Trends in Housing Debt and Home Equity	Several roles that housing plays in the household economics of homeowners have begun to fundamentally change during the past decade. Cohorts approaching retirement now and in the future will typically carry substantial mortgage debt into old age, a trend in marked contrast to cohorts that preceded them in the age structure. While married couples have the higher housing debt, unmarried owners lag married couples in home equity accumulation. In the future, elderly cohorts facing a downturn in annual income will be more motivated to tap into their home equity, both by borrowing against equity for those who stay in their homes and by liquidating some equity and downsizing for those who choose to move. Unmarried owners will have fewer options to do either. Rising mortgage debt in old age will also likely reinforce the recent trend toward increasing labor force participation beyond the age of eligibility for social security.	George	S. Masnick	Zhu	Xiao  Di	Eric	S. Belsky
2005	29	The Social and Demographic Effects of Housing	Home-Ownership and Family Formation	Family formation and home-ownership are closely connected to each other in Western countries. From most research on the transition to home-ownership, one gets the impression that the connection between family formation and home-ownership is positive: Family formation seems to speed up the process of acquiring home-ownership in several countries. However, it has also been argued that there might be a negative association between home-ownership and family formation at the individual or household level, because the cost of home-ownership might compete with the cost of rearing children. And it has also been found that those countries in Europe with the highest levels of home-ownership are also those with the lowest fertility. The aim of this paper is to reconcile these seemingly contradicting findings on the association between home-ownership and family formation by developing a theoretical argumentation comprising both the micro level of individuals and households and the macro level of countries.	Clara	H. Mulder
2005	29	The Social and Demographic Effects of Housing	Severe Housing Cost Burden and Hardship in Working Families	This study examines severe housing cost burden, material hardships, and their socioeconomic and demographic correlates among working families, using descriptive and multivariate analyzes of the 2002 National Survey of American Families. Working families are those in which earnings exceed the full-time minimum wage equivalent and are below 120 percent of local area median. Severe housing cost burden occurs when mortgage or rent payments exceed half of a family’s total income. Working families facing such a burden are more likely than others to endure material hardships, largely due to low incomes. We find evidence that immigrant families may be particularly likely to use crowding to cope with severe housing cost burden. We discuss the policy implications of our findings, the tradeoffs that some families may make between housing quality and material hardships, and the implications for family and child well-being.	Sharon	 Vandivere	Megan	 Gallagher	Elizabeth	C. Hair	Richard	 Wertheimer
2005	29	The Social and Demographic Effects of Housing	Racial Differences in Intergenerational Wealth Transfers and Access to Homeownership	This paper examines the extent to which intergenerational wealth transfers, in the form of gifts or inheritance, enable households to enter home ownership. Home ownership is an ideal many families aim to achieve. It remains deeply entrenched within the national conception of success and social mobility and is a primary form of capital accumulation for many American families. However, households who are unable to obtain home ownership are not privy to the associated wealth. Using the PSID, we examine transitions from rental accommodation to homeownership and assess the extent to which intergenerational wealth transfers facilitate these transitions. We find that for first-time homebuyers, access to money transfers over $5,000 significantly increase the likelihood of being able to buy a home, and that these effects are stronger for minority households than for white households. Our findings indicate complex ways intergenerational wealth transfers reinforce long term social cleavages in American society.	Suzanne	 Withers	Carolina	 Reid
2005	30	Breastfeeding: Trends, Causes, and Consequences	Improved Estimates of the Benefits of Breastfeeding Using Sibling Comparisons to Reduce Selection Bias	We use sibling comparisons to reduce selection bias in measurement of the benefits of breastfeeding. Using data on 2,734 sibling pairs in the 1994 Add Health survey, we examine the relationship between breastfeeding history and fifteen indicators of physical health, emotional health, academic performance, and cognitive ability. For each indicator, we estimate a within-family model to see whether differences in siblings’ outcomes correlate with differences in the siblings’ breastfeeding histories. Nearly all of the correlations found in a between-family model become statistically insignificant in our within-family model. The notable exception is a persistent positive correlation between breastfeeding and cognitive ability. These findings hold whether breastfeeding is measured in months or a Yes/No variable. They offer persuasive evidence of a causal connection between breastfeeding and intelligence. However, they also suggest that non-experimental studies of breastfeeding overstate some of the other long-term benefits, even with the inclusion of controls for socioeconomic characteristics.	Eirik	 Evenhouse	Siobhan	 Reilly
2005	30	Breastfeeding: Trends, Causes, and Consequences	Breastfeeding Initiation and Continuation in California, 2000-2003	Half of births in California each year are to Latina mothers, so racial and ethnic disparities in breastfeeding rates have a large impact on breastfeeding rates and infant health statewide. This study analyzes data from 17,725 respondents to the 1999-2003 Maternal and Infant Health Assessment, California’s annual survey of a representative sample of postpartum women. Rates of ever breastfeeding were high over this period—between 75-92% for all race/ethnic groups. Rates of breastfeeding declined soon after birth and disparities grew larger. By 2 months postpartum in 2003, just over 50% of U.S.-born Hispanic and African-American mothers were still breastfeeding, compared to 72-74% of Asian/Pacific Islander, non-Hispanic White, and foreign-born Hispanic mothers. Disparities in exclusive breastfeeding at 2 months postpartum were also large. Rates of any breastfeeding at 2 months postpartum increased somewhat across racial/ethnic groups over 1999-2003, while rates of ever breastfeeding and breastfeeding exclusively at 2 months remained steady.	Amy	 Godecker	Mike	 Curtis	Eugene	R. Takahashi	Shabbir	 Ahmad
2005	30	Breastfeeding: Trends, Causes, and Consequences	Breastfeeding and Maternal Decency: A Qualitative Investigation of Infant Feeding Decisions among Low-Income Mothers	Despite evidence that breastfeeding confers benefits for infants, many mothers in the U.S. choose to formula feed, particularly low-income and minority women. While much is known about the correlates of breastfeeding behavior, few studies have examined how social networks and broader socio-cultural ideologies influence infant feeding decisions. Drawing from 29 semi-structured interviews and a focus group discussion among low-income, inner-city mothers in Philadelphia, I present mothers’ perspectives on their choice of infant feeding method. This paper describes the roles informal and formal social networks play in decision-making and illustrates how competing forms of knowledge and normative ideas shape mothers’ decisions, including their perceptions about the acceptability of breastfeeding in the public realm and in their private lives. The analysis focuses on the contradictions that breastfeeding embodies, where women must balance the demands of motherhood, medical advice that breastfeeding is “best,” and social taboos against public exposure of intimate body parts.	Helen	J. Lee
2005	30	Breastfeeding: Trends, Causes, and Consequences	Maternity Leave and Child Health: Evidence from the UK’s Millennium Cohort Study	Using data on 11,686, 8-12 month old babies from the Millennium Cohort Study in the UK, this paper examines the determinants of mother’s leave-taking, the effects of pre-birth leave-taking on prenatal care and low birth weight, and the effects of post-birth leave-taking on breast-feeding. The study found that mothers’ pre-birth leave has significant effects on increasing prenatal care receipt and reducing the occurrence of low birth weight. Mothers who took leave or ceased working at least three weeks prior to childbirth were more likely to receive prenatal care and less likely to have children born with low birth weight. Moreover, the results suggest that longer length of mothers’ post-birth leave increases their chances for and duration of breast-feeding. These results predict longer periods of both pre- and post-birth leave will improve children’s health.	Sakiko	 Tanaka
2005	31	Methodological Issues in Mortality Research	Age-Specific Contributions to Changes in the Period and Cohort Life Expectancy	The period life expectancy has lagged behind its cohort counterpart. To understand the disparity between the two measures we identify and compare the age-specific contributions to change in the two life expectancies. Using mortality models, we examine the effect of mortality changes over time. Finally, we apply our approach to historical data for Sweden. Preliminary results indicate a widening of the gap between the two life expectancies as a consequence of the dramatic mortality decline that occurred during the twentieth century. These first results also show that the divergence between the two measures is likely to become even greater in the future.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	Robert	 Schoen
2005	31	Methodological Issues in Mortality Research	Estimating Adult Mortality through Surveys: An Unbiased Method Using Data on Survival of Relatives	Complete vital registration systems are still far off for most low-income developing countries despite the fact that reliable baseline measures of adult mortality are needed for key programs on the adult health agenda. Estimates derived from sibling survival histories in household surveys have not been used widely. Currently available methods provide unbiased mortality rates under 2 assumptions: 1) that there is independence in probabilities of death within families; and 2) that probability of death is not related to family size. The bias introduced by violating these assumptions on true mortality rates has not been explored in the literature. This paper introduces a new method for the measurement of adult mortality through data on sibling survival. In a simulation environment we compare the two methods and explore the magnitude and direction of the bias in the estimates when the assumptions are violated.	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Gary	 King
2005	31	Methodological Issues in Mortality Research	Alternative Time-Series Approaches to Mortality Projection	In the field of mortality analysis and projection, the Lee-Carter methodology occupies a central position. This methodology combines the Singular Value Decomposition and modern time series analysis affords data reduction as well as forecasting components. Where data are noisy (e.g. raw death rates by single years of age) and time series are short, this methodology becomes difficult to apply.    The proposed paper presents an analysis of US mortality data in ethnic detail, by sex and single-year age, comparing results from the Lee-Carter Methodology to an alternative approach which employs a relational logit model for data reduction and affords similar time-series capabilities. The latter approach is in the vein of earlier work by McNown and Rogers (1989). The model-based approach yields more appealing results under the data availability constraints, while retaining stochastic forecasting capacity, and may be better suited to applications where data are more limited, or which require greater detail.	Ward	 Kingkade
2005	31	Methodological Issues in Mortality Research	A Methodology for Studying Child Mortality Differentials in Populations with Limited Death Registration	The paper presents an alternative to the Preston-Trussell method for analyzing child mortality differentials when the only available information is the number of children ever born and deceased and various characteristics of their environment. We apply the method to the 1993 Gambia census. Our model assumes a binomial dichotomous dependent variable recording failures (survivorships) and successes (deaths) following a number of trials (children ever born). It is based on a skewed logistic regression (scobit), an elaboration upon the standard logit model which relaxes the assumption that individuals with probability of experiencing a success equal to 0.5 are most sensitive to independent variable changes. We offer a second improvement by relying on Brass multipliers more carefully tailored to local mortality and fertility conditions. Using Monte Carlo simulations we compare the performance of the scobit model to more simple models in small samples (N=1,000 and N=5,000).	Claire	M. Noel-Miller	Douglas	 Ewbank
2005	32	Abortion	Unwanted Pregnancy and Factors Associated with it Among Nigerian Women	Data indicate that the incidence of unwanted pregnancy, which is associated with illegal abortion, is on the rise in Nigeria. The purpose of this study is to examine the incidence of unwanted pregnancy, the factors associated with it, and the incidence of abortion and barriers to contraceptive use among women with unwanted pregnancies. We also identify women at risk of an unwanted pregnancy, their characteristics and barriers they face to effective family planning.    The data for this study come from a community-based survey of 3,020 women aged 15-49, conducted in eight states in Nigeria in 2002-2003.     Preliminary analyzes reveal that 28% of the respondents have experienced an unwanted pregnancy. The incidence varied by characteristics including age, region of residence, and religious affiliation. More than half of the women who reported an unwanted pregnancy sought an abortion. 32% of respondents were at risk of an unwanted pregnancy at the time of survey.	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Gilda	 Sedgh	Boniface	 Oye-Adeniran	Isaac	 Adewole	Rubina	 Hussain
2005	32	Abortion	Son Preference and Induced Abortions in Rural China: Findings from the 2001 National Reproductive Health Survey	Using data from the 2001 National Family Planning/Reproductive Health Survey, this paper applies multi-factor logistic regression analysis to examine the effect of son preference on induced abortion of married women in rural China. We show that son preference and sex-selective abortion have existed for a long time in rural China, and have become more prevalent under the national population policy. After implementation of the population policy, the risk of induced abortion to end the next pregnancy for women with two children is significantly higher for those whose first birth is a girl. In order to eliminate sex-selective abortion entirely, a key objective should be to weaken son preference.	Shuzhuo	 Li	Yan	 Wei	Marcus	W. Feldman
2005	32	Abortion	Induced Abortion in India	Complete birth histories of 90,303 women between 15-49 from the 1998-1999 Indian NFHS were used in the paper. The overall induced abortion ratio was 17.04 per 1,000 pregnancies. The lowest induced abortion ratio was 5.27 per 1,000 pregnancies for first birth order, increased to 25.81 for third birth order and then declined marginally and non-linearly. Education of women was the most important factor that was associated with induced abortion. Having the first and second child late is related to previous induced abortion. Living in rural areas substantially reduced the odds of induced abortion. Nationally, sex of the previous child was not significantly associated with induced abortion. Ratios of induced abortion in India are low in association with a pattern of maternal advantage. Increasing women’s education would have profound implications to induced abortions in India. Timing of intention to conceive rather than sex of the previous child appears to be an important predictor of induced abortion nationally.	Saseendran	 Pallikadavath	R.	William  Stones
2005	32	Abortion	Abortions in Pakistan: Estimates from a National Study	This paper will present estimates, on the level of induced abortion in Pakistan using an indirect estimation methodology developed in the early nineties by one of the authors and that has since been applied in several countries. This approach allows us to generate estimates for the country as a whole, and for the four provinces, of the number of women treated in health facilities for induced abortion complications, the total number of abortions, the annual abortion rate, and the abortion ratio. The overall goal of the study is to help policy makers, program planners, and health care professionals to develop policy programs oriented to improve the sexual and reproductive health of Pakistani women by reducing unintended pregnancy rates and lessening the risks associated with illegal abortion.	Zeba	A. Sathar	Susheela	D. Singh	Fariyal	F. Fikree
2005	33	Author Meets Critics: "Growing up Global: Transitions to Adulthood in Developing Countries" Cynthia Lloyd and others	Author:		Cynthia	B. Lloyd
2005	34	Slow and Stalled Fertility Transitions	Stalling Fertility Transitions in the Developing World	Since the 1960s many developing countries have experienced rapid fertility declines. It is widely expected that countries that are currently still in transition will continue their declines until fertility also drops to or even below replacement. However, fertility in the late 1990s declined less rapidly then projected earlier in a number of countries and in a few cases fertility stalled in mid-transition (e.g. Bangladesh, Dominican Republic, Ghana, Kenya, Turkey). This new phenomenon is examined through an analysis of the roles of different levels of explanatory variables ranging from the proximate determinants (e.g. use of contraception), demand for contraception, reproductive preferences (e.g. desired family size), socio-economic factors (e.g. education) and access to family planning. DHS surveys in 38 developing countries provide the data for this study. Preliminary results indicate that fertility preferences as well as the demand for and use of contraception show virtually no change in countries with stalling fertility.	John	 Bongaarts
2005	34	Slow and Stalled Fertility Transitions	Fertility Decline in Egypt: Current Status, Future Prospects	The TFR in Egypt exceeds 3.0, and fertility has declined slowly during the past fifteen years. There appears to be a resistance to having only two births. This paper uses multiple sources of data and multiple methodologies to examine the following three questions: (1) To what extent can the excess of current fertility over replacement-level fertility be attributed to wanted versus unwanted fertility? This will be answered by applying a new methodology for estimating unwanted fertility. (2) What accounts for the continuing attachment of a substantial fraction of Egyptian couples to desired fertility of three or more births? This will be answered through regression analysis of survey data collected in 2004 that contain extensive inquiry on costs/benefits of children, familial norms, and related factors. (3) How much fertility reduction could be achieved by more effective family planning practice? This will be answered using 2000 DHS data and TFR simulation.	Laila	 El-Zeini
2005	34	Slow and Stalled Fertility Transitions	Measurement Issues and Proximate Determinants of Slow and Stagnating Fertility Decline: Case Studies of Kenya and the Philippines	Bongaarts (2002:297) has recently observed that, “as countries approach the later stages of the transition [from higher to lower fertility], the pace of decline will slow down.” The reasons: early declines are attributable to diffusion and social interaction processes while later, further reductions are tied to level of socioeconomic development.     This paper will first assess what the recent trends in fertility have been in two countries. It will then look at a model of the determinants of fertility in developing countries proposed by Bulatao and Lee (1983) to illustrate the fact that couples’ childbearing decisions, underlying stagnation, and reversal of fertility decline are driven by policy and program-related factors arguably determined by level of development but more directly tied to government and donor commitment to family planning. Such commitment is, in turn, amenable to change in the absence of broad changes in level of national development.	Thomas	M. McDevitt	Peter	 Johnson
2005	34	Slow and Stalled Fertility Transitions	The Kenya Stall	The 2003 DHS for Kenya has indicated a clear stall in the decline of fertility, in contraceptive prevalence, and most intriguingly a reversal of the long-term trend toward intentions to have fewer children. This trend seems pervasive and has occurred across ages and parities, in urban and rural areas, and in every province. It is particularly dramatic among the less educated, while among women with at least some secondary schooling, the familiar trend toward wanting fewer children has continued. The paper will explore the details of these changes and will include analyzes of the relationship with HIV/AIDS and with the recent increase in child mortality. The shift in preferences is only part of the story, however, since there has also been a significant increase in the proportion of births that are unwanted. Recent trends in contraceptive failure rates will be analyzed.	Charles	 Westoff	Anne	R. Cross
2005	35	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Family Intergenerational Transfers to Provide Long-Term Care: Why Do Families Differ from Each Other?	Intergenerational transfers occur within a family context, but most research on the topic focuses on attributes and behaviors of individual kin and not on family environment itself, including each family’s variant on the norms of kinship. We use four waves of the Health and Retirement Study to examine the effect of family transfer culture on the probability of adult children providing care to their frail mothers. We measure the family transfer culture with two indicators of family exchanges in previous generations: one, whether the elderly mother’s family received help from kin when she was growing up; and, two, whether the elderly mother lived with her grandmother when she was a child. We find that the first indicator of family culture has a positive, significant association on the child’s provision of personal care. We also show that stepchildren raised outside the family culture have a markedly weaker commitment to step-mothers.	John	C. Henretta	Beth	 Soldo
2005	35	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Long-Term Health Benefits from Investments in Children's Education	In this paper, we hypothesize that education of adult children has a separate effect on health and survival of their elderly parents that is independent from children's SES status, income, and financial support given to their parents. In particular, we investigate the role of children's education for health and mortality risks of elderly parents in the context of Mexico. Our analyzes are based on the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) that is one of the handful of datasets for developing countries combining detailed information about the health dynamics of elderly people and transfer behaviors between them and their adult children. A unique aspect of our analyzes is the attempt to resolve the endogeneity of children's education by incorporating the instrumental variable approach. The proposed methods provide for the first time a systematic attempt using instrumental variable estimation to establish the effect of child education on parental health at old ages.	Iliana	V. Kohler
2005	35	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Effects of Childhood Family Conditions on Later-Life Mortality: Evidence from the Utah Population Database, 1850-2002	We examine how key early family circumstances affect mortality risks decades later. Early life conditions are measured by parental mortality, parental fertility (e.g., offspring sibship size, parental age at offspring birth), religious upbringing, and parental SES. Prior to these early life conditions are familial and genetic factors that affect life-span. Accordingly, we consider the role of parental and familial longevity on adult mortality risks. We analyze the large Utah Population Database (UPDB) which contains a vast amount of genealogical and other vital/health data that contain full life histories of individuals and hundreds of their relatives. To control for unobserved heterogeneity, we analyze sib-pair data for 12,000 sib-pairs using frailty models. We found modest effects of key childhood conditions (birth order, sibship size, parental religiosity, parental SES, and parental death in childhood). Our measures of familial aggregation of longevity were large and suggest an alternative view of early life conditions.	Ken	R. Smith	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Gilda	 Garibotti	Richard	 Kerber
2005	35	Family and Health Over the Life Course	The Effect of Education of Adult Children on the Mortality of Their Elderly Parents	A body of research shows an older adult’s education is an important mortality determinant. But, in societies such as Taiwan, where families are highly integrated, it is possible that education of family members also influences survival. Such may particularly be the case in settings with large gaps in levels of education across generations and high levels of resource transfers between family members. This study employs fourteen years of longitudinal data from Taiwan to examine combined effects of education of older adults and their children on mortality outcomes of older adults. Hazard models using Gompertz curves for baseline survival are employed to determine whose education is important in determining survival, whether the education of a child has an influence over and above the education of the parent, and whether the education of parent and child have joint or separate influences on survival probabilities.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Linda	G. Martin	Yi-Li	 Chuang
2005	36	Parental Employment, Time, and Child Care	Taking Time Away from “Smelling the Roses”: Where Do Mothers Raising Children with Disabilities Find the Time to Work?	Studies show that increasing numbers of children have a disability and that they are raised by working parents. Strides have also been made in showing that mothers raising children with disabilities have greater difficulties associated with employment than mothers raising children without disabilities. Despite experiencing more difficulties more frequently, most mothers raising children with disabilities work and like most families, they too must juggle work and family demands. However, unlike working mothers whose children are not disabled, working mothers raising disabled children face added obstacles and tasks associated with the children’s conditions. Given that raising children with disabilities compared with children without disabilities involves more tasks and time, an unanswered question is: how do working mothers raising children with disabilities find the time to work? Using data from time use diaries, this study theorizes and shows that these particular mothers find the time to work by reducing time for leisure activities.	Peter	D. Brandon
2005	36	Parental Employment, Time, and Child Care	Market Mechanisms in the Formal Child Care Market: Why the Slow and Inconsistent Expansion in Supply?	In an environment where women continue to work in ever greater numbers and where welfare reform policy explicitly holds maternal employment as its goal, the need for appropriate child care to support working parents and to promote the healthy social and cognitive development of their children is evident. Using a new panel dataset of county-level child care supply measures, this paper contributes to a substantial child care literature by systematically examining and quantifying the determinants of local care expansion for the United States between 1990 and 2000. Results indicate that female employment and state and federal subsidy spending positively and significantly impacted upon actual county level child care quantity expansion, with employment increases generating approximately 10% of the expansion, tax policy generating approximately 15% of the expansion, and direct subsidy spending increases generating approximately one third of the expansion. Poor and rural areas yielded the biggest response to policy intervention.	Carlena	 Cochi Ficano
2005	36	Parental Employment, Time, and Child Care	The Second Shift: Parents' Labor Market Participation, Schedule Configurations and Allocation of Time to Children	Contrary to predictions of comparative advantage and bargaining theories, husbands’ childcare time does not increase with wives’ wages. I develop a model of childcare vs. leisure choice focusing on after-work time and the extent of its overlap between spouses. It enables an alternative test of parents’ substitutability in child quality production, as well as analysis of the effect of schedule changes. Empirical implications are tested using 1997 PSID-CDS combined with May 1997 CPS. IV estimation implies no gender differences when a parent is at home and spouse is at work (during non-overlap). Differences in parents’ responses to each other’s availability occur in the overlap. Women compensate for men’s childcare time provided earlier in the day, but not vise-versa. Contrary to previous findings, results suggest that greater non-overlap may decrease, rather than increase men’s involvement. Flexible schedules may enable more parental care through greater after-work time, but not through greater staggering.	Irina	 Paley
2005	36	Parental Employment, Time, and Child Care	A Routine Juggling Act: Managing Child Care and Employment	Rising labor force participation among mothers of young children since the 1970s and the passage of strict work requirements for welfare recipients in 1996 have increased scholarly attention to the challenge of balancing the often conflicting demands of work and family. This challenge is particularly acute for mothers at the lower end of the socio-economic spectrum, who are more likely to be single and to work non-standard or weekend hours than middle- or upper-class mothers. But little is known about mothers’ daily experiences managing childcare and employment. We use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, which follows a cohort of 4,898 children born to mostly unmarried mothers in large U.S. cities, to examine how often mothers’ regular child care arrangements fall through, how often child care problems cause mothers to miss work and how often mothers report experiencing stress stemming from conflicts between child care and work.	Margaret	L. Usdansky	Douglas	A. Wolf
2005	37	Cultural Demography	Population Mobility of Indigenous Peoples: An Analysis of the Multi-Level Determinants of Off-Farm Employment in the Ecuadorian Amazon	Population mobility is an important demographic process related to patterns of market integration of indigenous peoples. In the context of the Amazon, population mobility, other than colonization, has received scant attention. Research on the mobility of indigenous populations in particular is underrepresented in the literature. The process of market integration itself suggests various forms of population mobility such as out-migration, temporary migration for off-farm employment, travel to markets, and commuting to job sites. This paper focuses on off-farm employment, and uses a multi-level model to examine the household, and community factors that impact the mobility decision. The study uses data from a survey of 500 households representing 5 different indigenous groups to compare cross-culturally the demographic, geographic, socio-economic, and biophysical determinants of off-farm employment. The research is an advance in that it integrates existing conceptual frameworks of mobility determinants and applies the integrated framework in a new context.	Jason	 Bremner	Clark	L. Gray
2005	37	Cultural Demography	Low Fertility and Social Policy: Comparing Poland and Russia	Until the period of political and social transformation that began in 1989, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe were characterized by relatively stable demographic developments. The dramatic changes in demographic processes since the fall of communist regimes were thus unexpected in their range, direction, and pace. This paper examines what is and is not known about these significant shifts in fertility and family formation. Drawing on multi-disciplinary perspectives from demography, sociology, and cultural anthropology, we outline the similarities and differences in population trends, policies, and debates over low fertility in Poland and Russia. We argue that population politics and social policy must be part of new theoretical formulations regarding fertility and family change. Our findings highlight the importance of debates and policies in creating a specific environment in which fertility changes occur, and notes how different these environments may be between countries, even with apparently similar trends.	Ewa	 Fratczak	Michele	 Rivkin-Fish
2005	37	Cultural Demography	Now the Woman Cooks and the Man Just Eats: the Changing Cultural Demography of Marriage in Cameroon	The social institution of the family has undergone dramatic change in much of Africa over the past century. In contrast to theories of convergence, these transformations have not been of a single kind or in a single direction (c.f. Berry 2000; Bongaarts 2001). This paper examines post-independence family change among the Beti, an ethnic group residing primarily in southern Cameroon. I focus on the cultural demography of marriage: its timing, social coordination, and associated exchanges. Using a combination of sources (ethnographic, archival, the 1978 WFS and 1998 DHS), the paper shows that non-marital births has increased dramatically since the 1960s, with both bridal pregnancy and marital conceptions declining, and that first marriages have been postponed. The paper further examines the social and economic bases of these changes-particularly the decline of esep fields-and concludes with a discussion of why some elite Beti women now seek husbands on the Internet.	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2005	37	Cultural Demography	Towards a Social Demography of Musics and Musicians		Judah	 Matras	Edward	 Stanford
2005	37	Cultural Demography	Temporal Factors in the Rise of Taiwanese Identity: Taiwan-Born Immigrants in the United States	In the United States, a growing share of Taiwan-born immigrants identify themselves as Taiwanese rather than Chinese. This paper investigates the rise of Taiwanese identity between 1990 and 2000 through cohort analysis. We pay particular attention to the duration of U.S. residence and examine how different birth cohorts and immigrant cohorts have fared, while controlling for acculturation, education, socioeconomic status, and geography. We expect to find: Taiwanese identity is strongest in older cohorts and recent arrivals; the growing awareness is most evident among younger cohorts. While Taiwan-borns who have a higher level of education and socioeconomic status are more prone to Taiwanese identity, assimilation leads to a lower propensity. Large geographic variations exist. Taiwanese are not separated from other ethnic Chinese by their identity. For Taiwan-born immigrants, Taiwanese appears to be a “rebellious” identity and a symbolic expression of solidarity with their compatriots back home, powered by growing Taiwanese nationalism.	Zhou	 Yu
2005	38	Centenarian Data: What We Know, What We Think We Know	Familial Determinants of Sardinian Longevity: A Genealogical Approach	The aims of this paper are to discuss the centenarian’s validation and familial determinants affecting Sardinian longevity, through a genealogical approach. The paper will present the first results of a genealogical tree reconstruction of selected centenarians aged 105 and above who belong to specific communities, mostly situated in the province of Nuoro, the area with the highest centenarian rate and where the sex ratio is relatively more favorable to men. We included an accurate centenarian’s age validation which requires a very meticulous examination of a large amount of civil status records. For each centenarian we have to check: the birth, marriage and death (if he/she is dead) certificates; and the population register records. The same records have to be found for the centenarian’s parents, children, brothers and sisters. In addition we include a detailed examination of parish registers which represent a source of inestimable value for our purposes.	Graziella	 Caselli	Lucia	 Pozzi	Luca	 Deiana
2005	38	Centenarian Data: What We Know, What We Think We Know	Month of Birth Influences Survival up to Age 105+. First Results From the Age Validation Study of German Semi-Supercentenarians	Using data from Germany, we examine if month of birth influences survival up to age 105. Since age reporting at the highest ages is notoriously unreliable we draw on age-validated information from a huge age validation project of 1348 German semi-supercentenarians aged 105+. We use the month of birth as an exogenous indicator for seasonal changes in the environment around the time of birth. We find that the seasonal distribution of birth dates changes with age. For semi-supercentenarians the seasonality is more pronounced than at the time of their births (1880-1900). Among the December-born the relative risk of survival from birth to age 105+ is 17 per cent higher than the average, among the June-born, 23 per cent lower. The month-of-birth pattern in the survival risks of the German semi-supercentenarians resembles closely the month-of-birth pattern in remaining life expectancy at age 50 in Denmark.	Gabriele	 Doblhammer	Rembrandt	 Scholz	Heiner	 Maier
2005	38	Centenarian Data: What We Know, What We Think We Know	Mortality of Centenarians: A Study Based on the Social Security Administration Death Master File	SSA Death Master File (DMF) covers deaths that occurred in the period 1937-2003 and is considered by some researchers superior in quality to the official U.S. vital statistics. Some birth cohorts in DMF may be considered as extinct or almost extinct. Detailed information about birth and death dates of decedents allowed us to estimate hazard rates of older persons at each month of age. Study of three birth cohorts (1885, 1889 and 1891) showed that mortality grows steadily without deceleration from 85-90 to 102-105 years of age. Then statistical noise rapidly increases and mortality tends to decelerate. Life expectancy at age 80 depends on month of birth: persons born in April-June live shorter than persons born in October-November and this periodicity repeats in every birth cohort. However, by age 100 this dependence of survival on month of birth disappears indicating that centenarians indeed represent a selected population.	Leonid	A. Gavrilov	Natalia	S. Gavrilova
2005	38	Centenarian Data: What We Know, What We Think We Know	Number of Centenarians in the United States, 1990, 2000, and 2010, Based on Improved Medicare Data	The size of the centenarian population in the United States at the beginning and end of the decade of the 1990's is estimated using improved Medicare enrollment data. Its size at the end of the next decade is projected from the starting population ages 90 and above at the beginning of the decade by applying the set of age-specific mortality probabilities during the prior decade.  The size and growth of the centenarian population in the United States will be put in international perspective. We have undertaken several initiatives at the microdata level to improve the quality of Medicare enrollment and mortality data, particularly with respect to errors in age reporting and recording and failures to record deaths.	Bert	 Kestenbaum	Betty	R. Ferguson
2005	39	Demographic Perspectives on Emotions, Happiness, and Hormones	The Emotions and Reproductive Health	It is surprising that social demography has so little to say on the emotional basis of demographic behavior. The central proposition of my paper is that emotions are particularly important for understanding the problems of reproductive health and for promoting better reproductive health. This understanding can feed into policies for reproductive health that incorporate the usual questions of access to knowledge or services or personal autonomy, but also go beyond these to take into account the fact that much sexual and reproductive behavior is motivated by emotional states that can suppress prior knowledge, services or agency.    The paper draws upon the emerging theoretical literature on emotions in the disciplines of sociology and anthropology to explore the role of emotions in what demographers call ‘healthy sexuality’ in particular and reproductive health in general. I focus especially on the cultural meaning, the ideal, and the experienced reality of the emotion of ‘love’.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu
2005	39	Demographic Perspectives on Emotions, Happiness, and Hormones	Life Cycle Happiness and Its Sources	Happiness rises slightly, on average, as people progress from age18 to 45, and declines slowly thereafter. This pattern is the net result of disparate life cycle movements in the satisfaction people get from the principal sources of happiness: their financial situation, family life, health, and work. The slight rise in happiness through midlife is due chiefly to growing satisfaction with one’s family life and job, which in combination more than offset decreasing satisfaction with one’s health. Beyond midlife, happiness edges downward as a continuing decline in satisfaction with health is joined by diminishing satisfaction with one’s family situation and job. These negative trends beyond midlife are offset to a considerable extent, however, by a sizeable upturn in people’s satisfaction with their financial situation, particularly in older age. These findings are based on an analysis of the United States General Social Surveys conducted between 1972 and 2002.	Richard	 Easterlin
2005	39	Demographic Perspectives on Emotions, Happiness, and Hormones	Time Trends in the Male Accident Hump: A Biological Clock for Men?	The proposed paper looks at time-trends and cross-cultural comparisons in the timing and magnitude of the male accident hump, the surplus mortality that is observed in young adult males. This accident hump coincides with the peak of testosterone over the life cycle and is presumably driven at least part by the male biological life cycle. It may have evolved as a by-product of risk-taking behavior that among our distant ancestors increased mating opportunities.     Early results detect an accident hump in mortality curves from as early as the mid-18th century. A shift of the curve to younger ages seems to have occurred over time, either as a result of changing risk conditions (e.g., the introduction of the automobile) or changing risk-taking behavior, perhaps brought about by accelerated hormonal timing by males exposed to secular improvements in nutrition.	Joshua	R. Goldstein
2005	39	Demographic Perspectives on Emotions, Happiness, and Hormones	The Gendered and Ethnic Politics of Security in Tijuana, Mexico	This study provides an ethnographic view of the varieties of insecurities that Tijuanans experience, revealing security as a politically and socially constructed tool of power rather than as a universal concept belonging to the domain of the state. Specifically, it examines how the Mexican state interweaves stereotypes of gender and ethnicity to make citizens, suspects, and security policies. Thus, what the state proposes as security often becomes a threat to the most marginalized Tijuanans, as it defines those acting outside such categories as security threats. Widespread migration, as well as the prevalence of local and transnational crime, accentuates the distrust and strangerhood felt by Tijuanans arriving from across Mexico with different dialects and ways of life. When official notions of appropriate gender and ethnic roles are internalized at the community level as natural moral divisions, differences among residents, who might otherwise have common interests, become exacerbated.	Rebecca	B. Meyers
2005	40	Intermarriage	Intermarriage and Integration of Asians in the United States and Canada	We analyzed the 5 percent PUMS from the 2000 U.S. census and complete census data from the 2001 Canadian census to compare intermarriage and social integration of Asians in the United States and Canada. The majority of married Asians in both the U.S. and Canada are inmarried but the Asian intermarriage rate is higher in the U.S. Intermarriage is more likely among younger and more highly educated Asians in both countries. Japanese and Filipinos in both countries are more likely to intermarry, and in the U.S., Koreans are also more likely to intermarry. U.S. and Canadian-born Asians are two to five times more likely to be intermarried than foreign-born Asians, and native-born Asian women are more likely than native-born men to intermarry. The findings suggest that intermarriage among Asians in both the U.S. and Canada will increase, with important implications for future ethnic demographic trends and social integration of Asians.	Sharon	M. Lee	Monica	 Boyd
2005	40	Intermarriage	Religious Intermarriage and Conversion in the United States: Patterns and Changes Over Time	Marital heterogamy has increased in the U.S. and other countries. This study of religion and marriage introduces three innovations: First, we examine both religious conversion for marriage and religious intermarriage. Second, we compare intermarriage and conversion in both first marriages and higher order marriages. Finally, we distinguish religious groups much more finely than most previous studies. The National Survey of Families and Households is used to explore the characteristics associated with religious intermarriage, homogamy and conversion. The findings show an increase in the percentage of religious intermarriages, from about 20% of all first marriages before 1950, to about 40% of first marriages in the mid-1980s, and a slight decrease in marriages that involve a religious conversion. In all marriage cohorts, intermarriage is more common in higher order marriages than first marriages and conversion is more common in first marriages than in higher order marriages.	Alisa	C. Lewin	Linda	 Waite
2005	40	Intermarriage	Changing Marriage Markets and the Availability of Partners: Interracial Marriage, 1990-2000	In the United States, interracial marriage increased rapidly in recent years but the increase was not evenly distributed from one geographical area to another. While geographical differences may indicate differences in American race relations and racial distance, the racial mix in local marriage markets affect opportunities for interracial contact. Growing concentration of minorities in metropolitan areas may promote interracial marriage as a result of more opportunities for social contact across racial boundaries, but may also discourage interracial marriage because of imbalances in the sex ratio across racial groups. Using data from the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) of the 1990 and 2000 censuses, we examine how marriage market conditions (availability of partners by race and ethnicity and educational attainment) in metropolitan areas affect changes in interracial cohabitation and marriage among whites, blacks, Latinos, Asians, and American Indians. We also examine how educational attainment and nativity play a role in interracial marriage.	Zhenchao	 Qian	Daniel	T. Lichter
2005	40	Intermarriage	Marrying into the American Population: Cross-Nativity Marriages in the United States	Early in the 20th century, cross-nativity marriages between immigrants and native-born Americans were considered by scholars to be a requirement for the “fusing” of the foreign immigrant groups with the American population. In the paper, we describe patterns of cross-nativity marriage during the last half of the 20th century. Our results suggest that cross-nativity marriages are a complex, but increasingly common phenomenon that appears to be affected by immigration policy, the increasing ease of international travel and study, and the military deployment of American men and women overseas. We then provide an analysis of cross-nativity marriages using 2000 U.S. census data. These analyzes confirm the importance of military service while also showing complex sex-specific and race-specific patterns of cross-nativity marriage. They also suggest that cross-nativity marriage operates like other indicators of assimilation into the American population: cross-nativity marriage is more common among those who enter the U.S. earlier in life.	Gillian	 Stevens	Hiromi	 Ishizawa	Xavier	 Escandell
2005	41	The Demography of Indigenous Populations	Tendencies and Trends in Designating AAIN Race at Birth	The objective of this paper is to examine recent trends in racial identification at birth based on data from Washington State’s Center for Health Statistics between 1992 and 2002. Issues to be considered include the racial designation of American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) children from mixed race unions, and preferences for the mother’s compared with the father’s race in different counties. Sink (1997) identified the tendency to designate a child AIAN when either one of the parents is AIAN, unlike other racial groups. Another important question is how these tendencies may be changing over the ten year period of data. Such information is crucial to providing a better understanding of future AIAN populations, and could also shed light on the transition to a multiracial-identified society that was initiated with Census 2000.	Gretchen	 Greene	Jeri	 Sawyer
2005	41	The Demography of Indigenous Populations	Stability and Change in Ethnic Identification: An Aggregate Level Analysis	The paper uses a cohort approach to detect changes in the identification of ethnic origin between the 1986 and 2001 Australian censuses. The aim was to observe whether particular ancestry groups were more or less likely to show stability or change in their numbers between the two censuses. Age-sex specific survival ratios were applied to three 15-year age cohorts by ancestry in 1986 to estimate the number that would have survived to 2001, adjusting for emigration and underenumeration. Some groups appeared to demonstrate remarkable consistency in their ancestry response in the two censuses. Others showed an increase in numbers between the two censuses that could be attributed to differences in the format of the ancestry question and the guidelines and examples provided on the census form. The coding of only two ancestries appeared to have contributed to a decrease in the size of some groups.	Siew-Ean	 Khoo
2005	41	The Demography of Indigenous Populations	Understanding the Inter-Generational Transmission of Minority Identity: How Mothers in New Zealand Label Their Biracial Maori European Children	Recent studies have shown many intermarried parents identify their child as monoracial in surveys, even when given the option to assign multiple races. The identification of biracial children as a minority race is often assumed to reflect the disposition of the minority parent, even though few studies control for which parent identified the child, or the specific racial heritage of the minority parent. This paper uses New Zealand data on the ethnic labels assigned to Maori-European children by their mothers, to examine two potential explanations for the uneven transmission of minority racial identity: 1) mainstream parents actively choose to affiliate their child with the minority parent’s race; 2) the diffuse effects of multi-generational intermarriage means minority parents who acknowledge their own mixed heritage are less reliable transmitters of their minority ethnicity. Regression analyzes show both factors to be significant, net of other explanatory factors.	Tahu	 Kukutai
2005	41	The Demography of Indigenous Populations	Do They Belong to the Same Group as Their Mothers? Identity of the Aboriginal Children in Canada	In the past 15 years, the growth of the populations of Aboriginal identity in Canada has been very large and cannot be solely explained by demographic factors. It is due, to a big degree, to the change over time (intragenerational) and between generations (intergenerational) in the ethnic identity reported by individuals. Using the data from the 1996 and 2001 Censuses, the study of 3 aboriginal groups (North American Indian, Métis and Inuit) demonstrates that the ethnicity of children born to aboriginal parents differs significantly from that of their parents. Among the 3 groups, Métis intergenerational mobility is the highest, regardless of their place of residence in Canada. Inward mobility from the non-aboriginal population compensates for the outward mobility for all the 3 groups, mitigating effects of declining fertility observed among the aboriginal populations in Canada.	Margaret	 Michalowski	Marie-France	 Germain
2005	42	Union Dissolution	He Left, She Left: Gains to Marriage, Relative Resources, and Divorce Initiation	Theories of divorce contain, at least implicitly, ideas about when and under what circumstances husbands or wives will initiate divorce. The innovation of our study is to use three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to classify divorces according to whether the wife or husband initiates it and to analyze the distinct determinants of women leaving men and men leaving women. Preliminary results with two waves of the NSFH indicate that there is substantial evidence that having a dim view of the quality of the marriage at Wave 1 is associated with being the one to initiate divorce by Wave 2, although the evidence is much clearer for wives than husbands. Preliminary results also suggest that relative earnings do not affect initiation, failing to confirm the women’s independence effect.	Liana	C. Sayer	Paul	 Allison
2005	42	Union Dissolution	Family Instability and Selection Effects on Children	A growing body of literature suggests that children who experience multiple transitions in family structure may fare worse developmentally than children raised in stable two-parent families and perhaps even than children raised in stable, single-parent families. This body of research presents what we call the instability hypothesis, the prediction that children are affected by disruption and changes in family structure as much as (or even more than) by the type of family structures they experience. A plausible alternative is that multiple transitions and negative child outcomes may be associated with each other through common causal factors reflected in the parents’ antecedent behaviors and attributes. We call this the selection hypothesis. We test the selection hypothesis against the instability hypothesis in a statistical analysis of nationally representative longitudinal data (NLSY79 and its mother-child supplement, the CNLSY) that includes detailed information on children’s behavioral and cognitive development, family history, and mother’s background prior to the child’s birth.	Paula	 Fomby	Andrew	J. Cherlin
2005	42	Union Dissolution	Divorce and Marriage: Does the Marriage Wage Premium Matter?	There is a sizeable literature on the wage premium of married men. Nearly all of the studies in this area attempt to determine why this premium exists and, recently, why it has been falling. There is also a growing economic literature on marriage and divorce, which complements the large sociological, anthropological and demographic literatures on the same subject. This paper combines these two research areas by attempting to determine whether an individual’s probability of marrying (if single) or divorcing (if married) is affected by the magnitude of his estimated premium. Micro data from the NLSY79 is used to follow more than 1500 white men over a twenty year period. Results are forthcoming.	Amy	 Schmidt
2005	42	Union Dissolution	Divorce, Parental Status, and Adult Health and Well-Being	Substantial evidence indicates that divorce has negative consequences for adult health and well-being. Because most research focuses on the average consequences of divorce, we know very little about factors that might moderate this association. The present study tests the following central hypothesis: The transition to divorce or separation is associated with a substantial decline in health and psychological well-being, but only among parents of young children. For those with older children and for childless individuals, divorce has only negligible consequences for adult health. Analysis of two waves of data from the National Survey of Families and Households supports this hypothesis. The transition to divorce is associated with: (a) increased depression only among parents of pre-school aged children, (b) increased alcohol abuse only among mothers of pre-school aged children, (c) diminished happiness for men regardless of parental status, and (d) diminished happiness only for women with pre-school aged children.	Kristi	 Williams
2005	43	Community Influences on Health and Mortality	Women’s Social Context and the Care of Sick Children in Rural Bangladesh	This study examines the associations between women’s position in the household and community (here it is village) and the care of children with acute illnesses in rural Bangladesh using data of the Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey conducted in 1996. Women’s position is indicated by their education, domestic autonomy, social capital and household socioeconomic status, and their village-level position is indicated by percentage of ever-married women who have high autonomy, social capital and education. The results show that children are more likely to be treated by health providers over home-care if their mothers have education and high social capital in the village, controlling for illness and child’s characteristics. Household socioeconomic status is the strongest predictor of use of trained providers (doctors or paramedics) over others. High village-level women’s education and short distance to trained providers are associated with increased use of such providers.	Nurul	 Alam	Ian	M. Timaeus
2005	43	Community Influences on Health and Mortality	Socioeconomic Inequalities in Early Childhood Malnutrition and Morbidity: Modification of the Household-Level Effects by the Community SES	This paper examines variations among communities in childhood malnutrition and diarrhea morbidity, explores the influences of socioeconomic status (SES) on child health, and investigates how the SES of families and that of communities interact in this process. Using multilevel modeling and data from Demographic and Health Surveys of five African countries, it shows evidence of contextual effects and a strong patterning in childhood malnutrition and morbidity along SES lines, with community socioeconomic SES having an independent effect in some instances. It also reveals that living in poorest conditions increases the odds of suffering from both malnutrition and diarrhea, as opposed to experiencing only one of the two outcomes. Importantly, community SES significantly modifies the effects of the household SES, suggesting that measures to improve access of mothers and children to basic community resources may be necessary preconditions for higher levels of familial socioeconomic situation to contribute to improved child health.	Jean-Christophe	 Fotso	Barthelemy	D. Kuate
2005	43	Community Influences on Health and Mortality	The Impact of China's 2003 SARS Epidemic on Behavior and Knowledge	Using data from a 2003-2004 survey conducted in four provinces of China, we examine knowledge of and responses to the SARS epidemic of 2003. Our general interest is in whether and to what extent knowledge of and responses to the epidemic were universal and invariant, or whether knowledge and responses varied over individuals as a function sociodemographically defined position, and varied over places as a function of SARS prevalence and migrant population concentration. We study the following questions: 1) To what extent did SARS alter travel? 2) To what extent did SARS affect employment? 3) Were knowledge and beliefs sociodemographically distributed? 4) Did experience with SARS alter hygiene practices? 5) Was the response to SARS contextually driven? We answer these questions using a series of regression functions, allowing for clustering of observations where needed. Results for travel and work stoppages are based on extensive histories provided by respondents.	William	M. Mason	Yao	 Lu	Yi	 Pan	Yaqiang	 Qi
2005	43	Community Influences on Health and Mortality	Community Mobilization and the Reproductive Health Needs of Married Adolescents in South Asia	Young women in South Asia enter marriage early and without adequate access to sexual and reproductive health information and services. Social norms around girls’ access to information, mobility, and decision-making power, severely limit their access to resources with which to address their reproductive health needs. Few efforts that attempt to address the social and normative barriers related to the reproductive health of young women have been well-evaluated or systematically documented. This paper presents evidence from intervention research in India and Nepal on the positive effects of community mobilization in improving reproductive health awareness and use of maternal care services for young, married women. We present analyzes illustrating the opportunities and challenges of comprehensive community mobilization efforts in changing the systemic and contextual barriers to good reproductive health for young married women when compared with more traditional reproductive health program approaches.	Sanyukta	 Mathur	Rohini	P. Pande	Alka	 Barua	Manik	Ram  Mahajan
2005	44	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Was Postwar Suburbanization 'White Flight'? Evidence from the Black Migration	In the postwar period, metropolitan areas experienced higher-than-average episodes of white suburbanization when black in-migration was high. While this may be evidence of ‘white flight’, consider that black migrants may have been attracted to cities by factors underlying the demand for suburban living (e.g., income growth), or by cheaper central city housing left in suburbanization’s wake. To disentangle this causality, I develop an instrumental variables procedure using two aspects of the black migration: (1) due to transportation routes and community networks, every city’s black migrant stock has a unique state-of-birth profile, and (2) black migration was prompted – in part – by southern agricultural change. One can then predict the growth rate of a city’s black population by weighting the predicted stream of ‘pushed’ migration from southern states by a city-specific profile. Even after accounting for migrant location choice, I find that 30 percent of postwar white suburbanization can be attributed to urban racial change.	Leah	Platt Boustan
2005	44	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Dynamic Models of Neighborhood Change	This paper uses an agent-based (microsimulation) model to examine the relationships among economic inequality, residential mobility, and race and income segregation. I estimate models of residential choice using data from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (LA FANS). These models describe the probability that a household with a given race and income moves into a housing unit, conditional on the unit's price and neighborhood composition. I then use a realistic agent-based model to relate the residential choice behaviors estimated from the LA FANS to patterns of neighborhood turnover. The agent-based model includes a market mechanism that allows housing prices to respond to changes in aggregate demand for neighborhoods. I simulate mobility behavior in Los Angeles County from 1990-2000 using the residential choice functions estimated from the LA FANS, and examine segregation outcomes under varying assumptions about economic inequality within and among race groups.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch
2005	44	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Neighborhood Racial Integration in U.S. Metropolitan Areas, 1970-2000: Is it Stable or Just a Passing Phase?	Between 1980 and 2000, the level of residential segregation, or dissimilarity score, between whites and blacks declined by 8.8 percentage points, going from 73.9 to 65.1. Although the current average level of segregation is considered to be in the high range of segregation scores, it is evident that some progress has been made with respect to residential integration between whites and blacks. However, the extent to which racially integrated neighborhoods exist and remain stable over time is not well researched. One recent study finds that more than 50 percent of integrated neighborhoods remain stable over time, but the focus is only on a decade-long period (Ellen 2000). The goal of this paper is to build upon the work that Ellen has done and explicitly document the extent to which racially integrated neighborhoods remain stable between 1970 and 2000 and examine the correlates of this stability.	Samantha	 Friedman
2005	44	Residential Mobility and Neighborhood Change	Public Housing and the Spatial Concentration of Poverty: New National Estimates	This paper provides the first national estimates of the contribution of public housing to the spatial concentration of poverty in American cities. Past studies of the contribution of public housing to poverty concentration have focused on estimates for single cities, and have used regression methods that will tend to overstate the importance of public housing because they do not account for where residents would be living if not in public housing projects. Instead, I use a series of simple simulations that reallocate the residents of public housing to other types of tracts. The overall level of concentrated poverty it not strongly influenced by public housing because the number of persons resident in public housing is too small as a percentage of all housing. The contact with high-poverty neighborhoods experienced by (former) public housing residents, however, declines notably under some relocation scenarios.	Lincoln	 Quillian
2005	45	Contraception	Contraception During the Life Course in Switzerland	The aim of the analysis is to investigate relations between the reproductive life cycle and the adoption of a specific method of contraception in the case of women living in Switzerland. We are especially interested in the transition from a spacing to a stopping strategy of childbearing, which in Switzerland can correspond to the adoption of the IUD or the male or female sterilization. Our hypothesis is that this change in the contraceptive behavior strongly depends from institutional factors, like advises and contraceptive prescriptions given in family planning centers or by gynecologists. To test this hypothesis, we use data from the three Swiss health surveys of 1992, 1997 and 2002. We focus our analysis on women living in couple born between 1958 and 1967, who experienced the transition to a stopping strategy of childbearing between 1992 and 2002.	Jean-Marie	 Le Goff	Isabella	 Locatelli
2005	45	Contraception	Determinants of Discontinuation and Switching of Oral Contraceptives in Brazil: Implications for Assessing Differentials in Quality of Family Planning Services	Contraceptive prevalence is relatively high in Brazil, with orals the most popular reversible method (27% in 1996). However, important differentials persist across sub-regions and social groups in family planning outcomes. This study examines the factors associated with discontinuation and switching of orals versus other reversible methods, with a focus on the mechanisms of contraceptive dynamics that might be linked with quality of care. Data are drawn from the Demographic and Health Survey calendar, and linked with municipal-level information on the health service environment. Multilevel discrete-time competing risks hazard models are used to estimate the fixed- and random-effects on the probability of a woman making a specific transition at a given duration of use. Preliminary findings reveal that orals accounted for over 50% of episodes of contraceptive use in 1991-96. Identifying the determinants of discontinuation and switching could assist program managers in improving service quality among all segments of the population.	Iuri	da Costa  Leite	Neeru	 Gupta
2005	45	Contraception	Women’s Status and Contraceptive Use in Egypt	Using the 1995 Egypt Demographic and Health Survey, we examine the association between various women's status variables and contraception use. We find that certain dimensions of female autonomy are indeed important for contraception use in the Egyptian context, while there is no clear relationship for other dimensions. We find that the decision-making index is the most important dimension of female autonomy in predicting a woman’s use of modern contraception. The mobility index and the gender role index are respectively the second and third most important dimensions of women’s autonomy that predict a woman’s modern contraception use. Surprisingly, none of the financial autonomy variables are significant. We conclude that although certain women’s autonomy variables predict a woman’s modern contraception use, level of development is a much stronger predictor.	Sonya	 Rastogi	Kim	 Nguyen
2005	45	Contraception	Union Status, Union Stability and Sterilization in New Zealand	Most research on contraceptive sterilization is based on married women and/or their partners. Because women and men are spending much more of their reproductive lives in cohabiting unions and singlehood, sterilization decisions may increasingly be made by individuals rather than couples. In addition, the value of reproductive potential may be greater in the later childbearing years if new partnerships are formed with desires for a common child, thus reducing demand for sterilization. Extending research conducted in the U.S., we examine effects of union status and union stability on the risk of tubal sterilization in New Zealand. We use the 1995 New Zealand Fertility and Family Survey and specify age (from 25) as the baseline duration dependency. In addition to combinations of prior and current union status, we control for women's education and minority status, and estimate duration dependence on age of youngest child and duration in current union status.	Elizabeth	 Thomson	Bettina	 Friese	Huey-Chi	 Chang
2005	46	Intermetropolitan Migration in the United States	Technology, Age Effects, and the Homogenization of U.S. Metropolitan Areas: 1970-2000	Computer and telecommunications technologies potentially affect migration in two ways: by creating locational flexibility, and by influencing an area’s economic prospects. Within 99 MSAs, I examine three occupations-- high technology, manufacturing and finance--that were influenced by innovations between 1970 and 2000.     As expected, the results show that high concentrations of high-technology and finance occupations generally have a positive pull for migrants, with younger migrants most attracted to technology jobs. High-concentrations of manufacturing jobs have a negative effect.     Surprisingly however, the explanatory power of the model declines substantially across the three decades. The decline is driven by decreases in the variation of in-migration and of the occupation variables, most notably manufacturing. Additionally, the age composition of the population became more similar over the period.     These patterns illustrate an increasing homogenization of MSAs between 1970-2000 in terms of: employment opportunity in these three innovating occupations, age patterns and levels of in-migration.	Katherine	 Bartley
2005	46	Intermetropolitan Migration in the United States	Metropolitan Area Structure, Welfare Policy and Migration of Poor Families	This study investigates whether economic and demographic structure of metropolitan places moderates the push and pull of stringent versus lenient welfare policies in the migration decisions of poor families. Metropolitan areas with better employment opportunities and higher concentrations of the same racial and ethnic groups to which potential migrants belong should reduce the migration push associated with stringent welfare policies. They should also reduce intrastate and intra-metropolitan migration. Data are from the 1996 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, the Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (metropolitan and state economic characteristics), and the decennial census (metropolitan population structure). Modeling both destination and departure effects of metropolitan economic and demographic characteristics, state welfare policy measures, and selected covariates in a nested discrete-time event history migration analysis, findings address the role of metropolitan area structure and state welfare rules in migration.	Gordon	F. De Jong
2005	46	Intermetropolitan Migration in the United States	Social and Spatial Mobility in Immigrant Incorporation	It is increasingly realized that prospects for immigrant incorporation are contingent on where immigrants are located within the U.S. There are several theoretical implications of this realization for assessments of immigrant economic progress. First, comparisons of immigrant/native wage gaps should take into account the different residential patterns of immigrants and natives in the United States. Second, immigrants’ decisions on where to locate and whether or not to move should be related to the different opportunities available in different labor markets. I first weight wage regressions by relative shares of immigrant and native-born groups by major metropolitan area in order to determine the extent to which geography plays a part in the wage gaps between immigrants and natives. Second, the importance of internal mobility in determining wage outcomes is assessed through a two-stage Heckman model which examines the selectivity of internal migration in determining labor market outcomes.	Jamie	 Goodwin-White
2005	46	Intermetropolitan Migration in the United States	Decentralization of the Foreign Born Population: The Role of Gateway States	The U.S. foreign born population is becoming less geographically centralized. The 2000 census show increased immigrant outmigration from gateway states like California and New York. Additionally, the percentage of new arrivals settling in gateway states has declined. These trends suggest that the importance of gateway states may be declining. This study examines mobility among the foreign born. Using the 2000 PUMS, I examine intra-state and inter-state migration, both in and out of gateway states. Outmigration from gateway states occurred at a lower rate than did that from other states. Rates of intra-state migration were highest within gateway states, and intra-state migration tended to relocate immigrants from more to less “immigrant-intensive” locations. Multivariate analysis reveals that mobility behavior varied by year of entry, country of origin and human capital and demographic characteristics. While decentralization is occurring, gateway states have retained an important role in immigrant settlement.	Katherine	 Hempstead
2005	46	Intermetropolitan Migration in the United States	Crossing State Boundaries: Economic Structure, Educational Attainment, and Interstate Migration	How have the migration patterns of American young adults changed in the 1990s? Do highly educated individuals differ in their interstate mobility patterns from less educated individuals? How do state-level structural characteristics affect their moves? Using 5% IPUMS data from the 1990 and 2000 censuses, we employ log-linear models to examine these questions. Not only do we take into account mobility among neighboring states, regions, and intra-regional, we also pay attention to the economic structure of each state. We achieve this by linking state level characteristics, such as the shares of manufacturing, information, and technology jobs to the census data. We aim to examine how changes in state-level factors in the 1990s affect mobility patterns of young adults and how young adults’ educational attainment plays a role in mobility patterns.	Kevin	 Shafer
2005	47	New Directions on Mortality Research	Human Mortality and Chronic Disease Incidence at Extreme Ages: New Data and Analysis	We analyze mortality and chronic disease incidence including cancer, CVD, diabetes etc. at ages 65 and above with special emphasis on individuals above age 85 when a strong deviation from the Gompertz mortality function has been observed. We study these phenomena using nationally representative National Long Term Care Survey (NLTCS) longitudinal data collected from 1982 to 1999 because of the high quality of age reporting (it is linked to continue time Medicare records since 1982) and over samples of persons aged 95+ in 1994 and 1999 (to be done again in the 2004 NLTCS). To model these complex mortality and incidence patterns we develop a four parameter model with a location parameter, a fixed (genetic) heterogeneity distribution and parameter expressing the relative balance of anabolic and catabolic biological processes. This four parameter model gave us excellent fits to the mortality and chronic disease incidence data.	Igor	 Akushevich	Kenneth	G. Manton	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski
2005	47	New Directions on Mortality Research	Patterns of Mortality Improvement over Age and Time: Estimation, Presentation and Implications	Changes in mortality over time are usually analyzed by exploring trends in death rates or by calculating rates of mortality improvement. Typically rates of mortality improvement are computed over extended periods of time and over broad age groups as dictated by stability of estimates. However this approach might conceal important details of temporal mortality dynamics potentially hindering development of adequate mortality models for exploration, comparisons or forecasting mortality trends. In this work we estimated surfaces of mortality improvement for several developed countries by a smoothing tensor product spline. The results suggest that mortality did not decline uniform over time across the countries. Moreover strong cohort-like patterns have been detected for several populations. These findings have a potential importance for building better models of mortality forecasts. The origin of such cohort-like patterns is still obscure; further work is required to provide possible explanations for the observed patterns.	Kirill	F. Andreev	James	W. Vaupel
2005	47	New Directions on Mortality Research	The Pattern of Mortality Convergence in Older Ages	According to the selective survival theory, as persons enter old age, the mortality inequality decreases effect of sociodemographic factors due to inherited genetic characteristics. This study examines how different convergence patterns appear due to sociodemographic factors by dividing them into four groups consisting of ascribed sociodemographic factor, endogenous factor, social contextual and environmental to investigate the variety of convergence pattern. We suspect that as a person ages, first the determinations and coefficients of social factors decrease, second, ascribed sociodemographic factor decreases the most, and third, exogenous factor converges the least. We employ the data set of the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS) older men as the main source of information.	Sang	Lim  Lee	Philip	B. Mason
2005	47	New Directions on Mortality Research	Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality among the Oldest Old in China	Though the inverse relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and mortality has been documented for many populations throughout the world, whether this relationship holds true for the elderly population has been questioned. Most notably, some scholars have suggested that the relationship may disappear at the oldest ages. Using data from the 1998, 2000 and 2002 waves of “The Chinese Healthy Longevity Survey,” this paper examines the relationship between socioeconomic status and mortality among the oldest old (80+) population in China. Our results demonstrate the continuing prevalence of SES differentials in mortality--higher SES is significantly associated with lower mortality risks--among the oldest-old population in China.	Haiyan	 Zhu
2005	48	Parents' Work and Children's Lives	Parents' Nonstandard Work Schedules and Adolescents' Socio-Emotional Outcomes	The main focus of this paper is to assess whether the effects of parental employment on adolescents’ socio-emotional outcomes (i.e., depression, sexual behavior, substance use, and defiant behavior) differ by parental work schedules. This paper uses data from a large national sample of children in the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child Supplement (NLSY79-CS). The NLSY79-CS is well suited for this analysis because, in addition to collecting detailed information on family demographic background and home environment, it also contains information on various dimensions of parental work schedules (e.g., working at evenings, nights, or rotating shifts).	Wen-Jui	 Han	Jane	 Waldfogel
2005	48	Parents' Work and Children's Lives	Effects of Welfare and Employment Policies on Adolescents with Younger Siblings: Exploring the Mini-Mom Phenomenon	Emerging evidence indicates that low-income adolescents may be particularly vulnerable to policy-driven increases in maternal employment in the context of welfare reform. The current study examines whether sibling care accounts for the effects of welfare reform programs on low-income adolescents with younger siblings. Increases in maternal employment might increase the extent to which adolescents assume “adult” household responsibilities, such as caring for younger siblings. While assuming these responsibilities might enhance self-esteem and maturity, it is possible that these adolescents also feel fatigued and have less time to tend to school-related activities. To explore potentially competing processes, the current study uses data from five longitudinal experimental evaluations of welfare programs aimed at encouraging employment among low-income mothers. Predictors of sibling care are also explored as a complementary strategy to understanding its effects on adolescents. Preliminary findings are presented and the public release of this paper is schedule for June 2005.	JoAnn	 Hsueh	Lisa	A. Gennetian
2005	48	Parents' Work and Children's Lives	Parental Job Loss and Children’s Academic Progress	We use data from the 1996 Survey of Income and Program Participation to examine children’s grade repetition and suspension/expulsion as a function of maternal and paternal job experiences in married-couple families. We identify parents who were underemployed, had one job loss, had multiple job losses, or were persistently unemployed over a two-year period. Distinguishing involuntary from voluntary job losses, we examine whether parental job experiences relate to children’s academic progress through income instability and source or parental stress and emotional care. Mothers’ employment is never significantly associated with children’s academic progress. In contrast, we found significant adverse associations between fathers’ involuntary job losses on children’s probability of grade repetition and fathers’ multiple job losses on children’s probability of school suspension/expulsion. The associations between fathers’ job losses and grade repetition are especially true for lower-income and younger children, whereas associations between fathers’ job losses and suspension/expulsion are apparent for higher-income children.	Ariel	 Kalil	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2005	48	Parents' Work and Children's Lives	Economic Conditions, Parental Job Loss, and Children’s Living Arrangements	This study examines how economic conditions relate to children's living arrangements over time. We use data from the 1989-2004 CPS to document changes in living arrangements, defining these as children living with: two parents, one parent, one parent and a cohabitor, parent(s) and grandparent(s), parent(s) and others, and no parents. We use these data to study how variations in state economic conditions over time affect the distribution of living arrangements. We use various specifications to correct for demographic trends in living arrangements not related to economic conditions and include controls for welfare reform measures put in place during the time period as well as other background characteristics. We also use the 2001 SIPP to examine how parental job loss affects children's living arrangements over a one-year period. We follow families in which a parent is laid off to model the effect of these layoffs on changes in family structure and living arrangements.	Rebecca	A. London	Robert	 Fairlie
2005	49	Explaining Family Change and Variation	Couple Relationships in Economically Disadvantaged Settings		Elijah	 Anderson
2005	49	Explaining Family Change and Variation	Constancy and Change in Life Course Development		P.	Lindsay  Chase-Lansdale
2005	49	Explaining Family Change and Variation	Explaining Family Change and Variation		V.	Joseph  Hotz
2005	49	Explaining Family Change and Variation	Cross-National Variation in Family Change		Ron	 Lesthaeghe
2005	50	Interactions Between Fertility and Reproductive Health	Why Did Reproductive Health Improve in Washington DC in the 1990s? The Role of Demographic and Socioeconomic Changes	Washington DC experienced astounding improvements in reproductive health in the 1990s: the infant mortality dropped by one half; mean birth weight climbed 73 grams; LBW fell by 30 percent, VLBW fell by one third; the proportion preterm fell by one quarter; and the proportion full-term, low weight fell by 30 percent. The prevalence of socio-demographic risk-factors such as unwed and teen motherhood also declined. Results indicate that changes in marital status and age account for none of the improvements in reproductive health. Improvement in health was restricted to black mothers and infants, yet there was little trend in marital status among blacks. Changes in the maternal age distribution had, if anything, an adverse impact on maternal and infant health in the district because, among DC blacks, rates of (e.g.) LBW rise with age. Increased education improved health, and a 50% decline in black births boosted “compositionally” DC reproductive health indicators.	Sanders	 Korenman	Danielle	H. Ferry
2005	50	Interactions Between Fertility and Reproductive Health	Effects of Increased Access to Infertility Treatment on Infant Health Outcomes: Evidence from Twin Births	Reproductive technologies have radically improved since the introduction of the first fertility drugs in the late 1960s. These technologies make conception possible for many couples who otherwise would have been unable to reproduce. We analyze twin births, where use of reproductive technologies is relatively common. This paper examines the association between advanced reproductive technologies and birth outcomes during 1981–1999. It also examines the effect of subsidies for the use of infertility treatment on birth outcomes. Subsidies in the form of state mandates to cover infertility treatment are associated with small but statistically significant negative effects on gestation, birth weight, and the 5-minute Apgar score, and the effects are larger in magnitude for older mothers. These results suggest that effects of investment by these mothers are outweighed by impacts of either the infertility treatments themselves or by the selection into pregnancy of the infertile mothers.	Marianne	 Bitler
2005	50	Interactions Between Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Importance of Motherhood: A Community Based Study of Infertility in Moshi, Northern Tanzania	This paper examines the ramifications of infertility and coping mechanisms in an African urban population with low fertility. The study was conducted in Moshi, Tanzania. The methodology included a survey of 2,019 women and in-depth interviews with 25 fertile and 25 infertile women. Of the 1,549 sexually active women 2.7% had never had a child in spite of trying to conceive for at least 2 years. Out of the 1,352 women who had previously had a child an additional 6.1% were subsequently infertile. A logistic regression analysis suggested that infertile women were more likely to have been married at least twice and to be infected with Trichomonas. The most important finding from the qualitative analysis concerns the major difference between childlessness and subsequent infertility in terms of implications for the effected women. Childless women were stigmatized, were called names such as gumba and tasa and had little respect in the community.	Ulla	M. Larsen	Marida	 Hollos
2005	50	Interactions Between Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Relationship between Female Genital Cutting and Fertility: A Case Study in Northern Ghana	There is a growing body of literature on the impact of the practice of female genital cutting (FGC) on fertility. To date, no study has found an association between reproductive capability and FGC, although women who have been cut have been found to be more likely to experience obstetric complications. The purposes of this analysis are to measure the fertility effects of genital cutting and to increase understanding of the differential fertility patterns of cut and uncut women in a rural traditional setting where excision, an FGC form of intermediate severity, is prevalent.  Crude age-specific fertility rates demonstrate that circumcised women have higher fertility than women who have not been circumcised. However, once characteristics including polygamy, education, parity, and religion are controlled for, fertility levels among cut and uncut women are not significantly different. Comparisons of background characteristics and fertility patterns and behaviors among circumcised and uncircumcised women are discussed.	Elizabeth	F. Jackson	Philip	B. Adongo	Ayaga	A. Bawah	Ellie	 Feinglass
2005	51	One Parent Families	Multiple Partner Fertility: Implications for Research and Policy	Recent research has begun to document the incidence of multiple partner fertility and implications for research and policy. Complex family structures raise difficult conceptual and technical issues. In this paper we address many of these issues using longitudinal administrative data on over 16,000 women receiving welfare in Wisconsin, their children, the legally established fathers of their children, and any additional mothers and children of those fathers. We analyze patterns of multiple partner fertility, highlighting the striking differences in results over time, and based on samples of mothers, fathers, and children/sibships. We discuss the implications for poverty measures and welfare and child support policy.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2005	51	One Parent Families	Who Becomes a Multigenerational Grandmother? Selection into Multigenerational Households	Who becomes a multigenerational grandmother? Multigenerational coresidence is increasingly prevalent among adult single mothers with children. Research on the effects of multigenerational coresidence on children, however, is equivocal, though our recent study (DeLeire and Kalil, 2002) found that teenagers in multigenerational families have better educational and behavioral outcomes than even teenagers in 2-biological parent families. Understanding issues of who chooses to form a multigenerational household is necessary for understanding whether observed positive benefits of multigenerational coresidence are merely the result of selection. To address this question, we use data on a sample of 640 grandmothers from the NLSY-CS, 44% of whom have co-resided with their daughter and grandchild.	Thomas	 DeLeire	Ariel	 Kalil
2005	51	One Parent Families	Marital Perceptions of Single Low-Income African American Mothers as Determinants of Family Formation Structure and Outlook	Because of the high proportions of African American children born to single mothers, the cumulative population of women and children at risk for negative outcomes associated with single motherhood continues to increase. I contend that single, low-income African American mothers perceive that there are fewer gains to marriage than there are losses to remaining single. Preliminary results consistently indicate that the mother’s earnings were negatively associated with perceptions of marriage, with the opposite effect relative to the earnings of the father. Cohabiting mothers had more favorable perceptions of the benefits of marriage for children, but not for themselves as it relates to financial security. While paternal educational attainment was negatively related to maternal perceptions of marriage, maternal educational attainment had a positive effect. Positive predictors of marital union and expected marital union included increases in perceived financial security, having older children outside of the focal romantic relationship, and paternal earnings.	Tiffanye	 Sledge
2005	51	One Parent Families	Cohort Estimates of U.S. Nonmarital Fertility	This paper presents cohort estimates of nonmarital fertility for U.S. women born between 1915 and 1965. Our knowledge about historical trends in nonmarital fertility is based heavily on period estimates of the proportion of births occurring outside of marriage. Such estimates say little about changes in nonmarital childbearing for successive birth cohorts of women. This paper seeks to fill this notable omission in the literature. I use retrospective fertility and marital histories for U.S. women in the June 1980, 1985, 1990, and 1995 Current Population Surveys to  provide estimates of cohort trends in: completed nonmarital  fertility, subsequent nonmarital fertility given a nonmarital first birth, and patterns of nonmarital fertility for those women who bear children both within and outside of marriage. I contrast cohort and period trends, and show how estimates vary under alternative definitions, for example, births that occur between separation and the formal dissolution of a marriage.	Lawrence	L. Wu
2005	52	Income and Wealth Inequality	What's Happening to the American Dream? Changes in the Transition to Home Ownership 1968-1997	In this paper I examine changes in the likelihood of becoming a home owner over three decades. I organize my analysis around three questions. First, has the likelihood of becoming a home owner changed over this time period? Second, to the extent that the likelihood of becoming a home owner has declined, has the trend more pronounced among persons with lower education and among minorities? Third, to what extent are these changes due to changes in the relative affordability of housing, to changes in family composition, and to shifts in policy or macroeconomic context? Using data from the 1968-1997 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics merged with data characterizing local housing markets, I estimate a series of discrete time event history models to address these questions. My results support prior studies of trends in ownership rates which have shown increasing polarization in home ownership.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes
2005	52	Income and Wealth Inequality	Health and Wealth of Elderly Couples: Causality Tests Using Dynamic Panel Data Models	A positive relationship between socio-economic status (SES) and health, the so-called health-wealth gradient, is repeatedly found in most industrialized countries with similar levels of health care technology and economic welfare. This study analyzes causality from health to wealth (health causation) and from wealth to health (wealth or social causation) for elderly couples in the US. Using six biennial waves of couples aged 51-61 in 1992 from the Health and Retirement Study, we compare the recently developed strategy using Granger causality tests of Adams et al. (2003) with tests for causality in dynamic panel data models incorporating unobserved heterogeneity. While Adams et al. tests reject the hypothesis of no causality from wealth to health, the tests in the dynamic panel data model do not provide evidence of wealth-health causality. On the other hand, both methodologies lead to strong evidence of causal effects from both spouses' health on household wealth.	Pierre-Carl	 Michaud	Arthur	H. Van Soest
2005	52	Income and Wealth Inequality	Changes in Consumption at Retirement: The Role of Income and Wealth Inequality	Prior research has found a drop in consumption at retirement and interpreted the drop as a failure to save adequately due to a lack of forward-looking behavior by workers. If true this interpretation would further imply that welfare unexpectedly declines at retirement. This research will compare changes in consumption at retirement in panel with anticipated changes, and find whether anticipated drops are the same as actual drops. It will document whether the magnitude of the decline is associated with income and wealth which would suggest that income and wealth inequality are partly responsible for the decline on average. Besides providing evidence about the retirement-consumption puzzle and any associated change in self-assessed well-being at retirement, these findings will suggest whether policy should encourage more planning for retirement and more pre-retirement saving.	Susann	 Rohwedder
2005	52	Income and Wealth Inequality	Trends in Women’s Labor Supply and the Family Income Inequality: 1982-2001	This paper shows the results from an analysis of women’s labor supply in the United States and draw inference on the relationship between female labor supply and family income inequality. Using the CPS data from 1982 to 2001, I analyzed the trends in the female labor supply. Disaggregated by education and family income, the data reveal a story that is not usually discussed elsewhere. Educational differentials in labor supply have been persistent, but income differentials have been narrowing. Women’s education continues to be a strong force driving women’s commitment to the labor market, whereas family income has become a less powerful disincentive for women’s employment over time. It is not simply more women in the labor force that caused a greater, or smaller, income inequality. With more high-income women in the labor market working longer hours than before, the family income distribution has become more unequal.	Taek-Jin	 Shin
2005	53	Marital Status, Partnership Status, and Health	Partnership History and Health and Mortality in Later Life: An Analysis of Record Linkage Data from England & Wales	The literature on links between marital status and health shows an advantage for the married, with the never-married generally the most disadvantaged, although results for older women, are not clear cut. Fewer studies have examined the effect of marital history on health in mid and later life. We use data from the ONS Longitudinal Study, a record linkage study of 1% of the population of England & Wales, to analyze relationships between partnership history and health over a period spanning three decades (1971-2001). Marital history data comes from retrospective information collected in 1971; current status data collected in 1971, 1981, 1991 & 2001; and linked event data on widow/widowerhood. Those in cohabiting unions can also be identified. We analyze differentials in mortality 1991-2001 and, for survivors, differentials in health status in 2001, by partnership and socio-demographic history 1971-1991. Results show the importance of life course, rather than just current status, effects.	Emily	 Grundy	Cecilia	 Tomassini	Sabya	 Farooq
2005	53	Marital Status, Partnership Status, and Health	Is it Really about Time and Gender?: Spousal Employment and Behavioral Investments in Health	Employed individuals generally exhibit better health than their non-employed counterparts. But wives garner health advantages if their husbands are employed or earn high incomes, although husbands typically experience worse health if their wives are employed or earn high levels of income. I employ the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to test whether these relationships hold when predicting changes in health behaviors between 1998 and 2000. Contrary to prior work, I find that (1) employment is inconsistently related to changes in health behaviors for men and women, (2) having a husband who works or earns high levels of income is seldom associated with changes toward healthier behaviors for women, and (3) having a wife who works or earns high levels of income is inconsistently associated with changes in husbands’ health behaviors for men. I discuss reasons why the intersection among gender, marriage, employment, and behavioral investments in health is inadequately explained by current sociological theory.	Patrick	 Krueger
2005	53	Marital Status, Partnership Status, and Health	Nonmarital Cohabitation and Health	A considerable amount of research has established that the married live longer, healthier lives than the previously- and never-married. Similar research on the health benefits of cohabitation is sparse. Using longitudinal data from AddHealth and generalized linear model techniques we investigate the impact of nonmarital cohabitation on a range of physical and mental health indicators and health behaviors. We also examine the mechanisms through which cohabitation affects health (i.e., selection and protection) and contrast the health effects of cohabitation with those reported for marriage.    Preliminary results indicate that cohabitors report lower physical health than married or single individuals, but that cohabiting males receive some mental health benefits relative to singles. Cohabiting men and women also engage in some better health behaviors than singles.    There also appears to be substantial selection into cohabitation by individuals with relatively low physical and mental health that contributes to the observed health differentials.	Michael	S. Pollard	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris
2005	53	Marital Status, Partnership Status, and Health	For Better or for Worse? The Effect of Union Transitions on the Mental and Physical Health of Single Mothers	Is marriage equally beneficial to everyone? This question should be important to policy makers interested in the potential effectiveness of marriage-promotion strategies. The present study uses longitudinal data from the National Survey of Families and Households to test the hypothesis that single mothers do not receive the same mental and physical health benefits from entering a marriage compared to their childless counterparts. Results indicate that entering a marriage does not benefit the mental and physical health of single mothers, even when the analysis is restricted to those whose marriages endure throughout the study period. Single mothers who enter a marriage that dissolves before the end of the study report increased psychological distress and diminished self-assessed health relative to the continually unmarried. Even marriages that endure do not offer physical health benefits to single mothers. Cohabitation offers no significant mental and physical health benefits to single mothers or their childless counterparts.	Kristi	 Williams	Sharon	 Sassler	Lisa	 Nicholson
2005	53	Marital Status, Partnership Status, and Health	Marriage, Health and Later-Life Mortality: Results from a Sample of Union Army Veterans	This study exploits a rich historical collection of data drawn from the pension, military and census records of nearly 10,000 Union Army veterans who were living in 1900. The purpose is to investigate the role that marital status has on mortality. Simple descriptive statistics show that married veterans have a 10-year survival rate about 5 percentage points higher than non-married veterans. Proportional hazard models reveal that these marital status effects are robust to the inclusion of both demographic variables and health status at baseline. The strongest effects are for widowers, though the divorced/separated and never married also have higher mortality than the married. Finally, estimates are also obtained separately for those with both “healthy” and “unhealthy” BMI levels. These estimates show that the marital status effects exist primarily among less healthy veterans, which implies that marriage is an important buffer against mortality among those whose mortality risks are high.	Sven	E. Wilson
2005	54	Education and Fertility	Education and the Transition to Motherhood: A Comparative Analysis of Western Europe	This study focuses on micro-level interrelationship between the educational trajectories of women and the transition to motherhood. We disentangle the impact of events in one trajectory on events in the other trajectory, from common factors such as aspirations and orientations that simultaneously affect both trajectories. We argue that macro-level institutional factors are the key ones shaping this interrelationship. To shed light on the empirical relevance of macro-level factors, we adopt an international comparative approach. We apply simultaneous hazard models to individual-level data from Fertility and Family Surveys (FFS) in 11 Western European countries. We find important international differences in micro-level relationships: the mutual influence and the importance of common factors for both processes are weaker where welfare regimes, and social policies that allow role combinations in particular, are stronger.	Francesco	C. Billari	Dimiter	 Philipov
2005	54	Education and Fertility	Does Education Make Men in Sub-Saharan Africa More Receptive to Women’s Contraceptive Behavior?	This study examines the influence of men’s education on the reproductive behavior of their female partners, regarding their use of modern contraception in sub-Saharan Africa. The goal is to incorporate the male perspective in the examination of the impact of men's education on the contraceptive behavior of their women. The study analyzes DHS datasets from Sub-Saharan African countries. And it looks at men whose wives do not want to have more children and see whether the men’s education make a difference. It tested the hypothesis that, the higher the level of a man’s education, the more receptive he would be to his wife's contraceptive behavior. Questions answered include what women have more say in their reproductive behavior? And how closely does their contraceptive use reflect their own preferences?	John	 Boateng	F.	Nii-Amoo  Dodoo
2005	54	Education and Fertility	The Effects of Educational Reversals on First Births in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Dynamic Multilevel Perspective	In many areas throughout sub-Saharan Africa, young adult cohorts are less educated than their predecessors because economic crisis brought on declines in school enrollments during the 1980s or 1990s. While low education would typically predict high fertility, a decline itself could theoretically have a counteracting effect if relative deprivation motivates lower fertility. We use Demographic and Health Survey data from 16 countries in sub-Saharan Africa in a multilevel fixed-effects model to assess the importance of educational reversals for first-birth timing. Our work indicates that a crisis that includes education decline is particularly unlikely to produce a delayed entry into parenthood.	Laurie	 DeRose	Oystein	 Kravdal
2005	54	Education and Fertility	Will the Bologna Declaration Bring Babies? The Effects of a University Reform on Fertility and Educational Attainment Patterns	The Bologna Declaration was signed in 1999 by most European nations. It will have the effect of streamlining and in many cases shortening tertiary education across the continent. In our study we are concerned about some demographic consequences from the reform. In particular, we explore the effects of the Bologna Declaration on Italian population structure and dynamics. On the one hand, the reform increases tertiary educational enrollment, which decreases fertility levels. However, as it compresses educational duration, it also implies lower graduation ages, which raises childbearing levels. The net effect of this university reform on fertility is studied by decomposing changes in fertility (i.e. the Total Fertility Rate) into two components: one due to changes in age education specific fertility rates, and one due to compositional changes in educational attainment.	Marija	 Mamolo	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2005	55	Fertility and Family Planning in the United States	Family Organization, Family Planning Services, Race, and Early Sexual Behavior	This study employs detailed life histories to investigate the relationship between family organization, receipt of family planning services, and the rate of first sexual intercourse and contraceptive use at first intercourse for whites and blacks. The theoretical framework integrates hypotheses about family organization and instability with ideas about family planning services to formulate a multidimensional model of the forces shaping early sexual behavior. This rich theoretical framework also addresses racial differences in processes shaping sexual behavior. Unique data measuring family, family planning, and sexual dynamics early in life, permit detailed empirical estimates for numerous dimensions of this comprehensive model. Findings reveal significant consequences of many dimensions of family organization for the timing of first sex and contraceptive use at first sex for white women, but relatively few consequences for black women. However, receipt of family planning services early in life has long-term, enduring effects on contraceptive behavior for both black and white women.	Sarah	R. Brauner
2005	55	Fertility and Family Planning in the United States	Contextual Determinants of Race Differences in Condom Use: The Respective Roles of Concentrated Affluence and Family Planning Clinics	Recent data indicate that non-Latino African American adolescents are more likely to use condoms than White or Latino adolescents. In this research, we employ data from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN) along with data from the 1990 Decennial Census to examine contextual determinants of race differences in condom use among sexually active adolescents in the city of Chicago. We consider the following hypotheses: (1) to what extent are race differences in adolescent condom use explained by neighborhood concentrated affluence; and (2) to what extent are these differences attributable to the aggregate perception of the presence of a neighborhood family planning clinic? Findings indicate that race differences in condom use are accounted for in part by concentrated affluence, and that this concentrated affluence effect is attributable in part to community-level perceptions of the presence of a neighborhood family planning clinic.	Lori	A. Burrington	Christopher	 Browning
2005	55	Fertility and Family Planning in the United States	Effects of Infertility Mandates on Fertility	Infertility currently affects over 6 million individuals in the United States, and one in ten couples cannot conceive without medical assistance. While most health insurance plans nationwide do not cover infertility diagnoses or treatments, to date fourteen states have enacted some form of infertility insurance mandate. These mandates will provide important information on the costs and benefits of further expansions of infertility coverage at either the state or the federal level. In this paper, I use fertility rates by age cohort, race and state to examine whether these mandates were successful in increasing fertility rates among those women most likely to be affected. I also examine whether mandated coverage increases access to those groups of individuals who were previously less likely to obtain services.	Lucie	 Schmidt
2005	55	Fertility and Family Planning in the United States	The Paradox of Declining Infertility Rates in the United States	This paper analyzes the decline in 12-month infertility rates among married women aged 15-44 in the United States from 1982-2002. Data from the National Survey of Family Growth are used to calculate trends in the prevalence of 12-month infertility. The trends are analyzed for all  married women, and by subgroups defined by age, parity, education, income and race/ethnicity. The decline in 12-month infertility rates in the United States between 1982 and 2002 was evident in nearly all subgroups of married women, even after controlling for compositional differences of the population over time. In the multivariate analysis, infertility was more likely among women who were: nulliparous and older, non-Hispanic black or Hispanic, and didn't have a college degree. We conclude that changes in the composition of the population between 1982 and 2002 do not explain the decline in infertility.	Elizabeth	H. Stephen	Anjani	 Chandra
2005	56	The Impact of Healthy Behaviors on Well Being and Longevity	Obesity and Central Obesity in Elderly People in Latin America and the Caribbean – Are We Fat?	This study provides estimates of obesity and central obesity in six countries of Latin America and the Caribbean from a large representative sample of elderly individuals. Levels of obesity are so high in this region that women in these countries are usually fatter than their counterparts in the United States. Elders from Uruguay have the highest obesity rate followed by those from Chile and Mexico. Elderly men and women from Cuba have the lowest average weight and the lowest prevalence of obesity. Brazilians, Chileans and Mexicans have the highest values of waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio, which implies that elderly in these countries are at higher risk of developing diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Men are taller than women and heavier as well (Barbados is an exception), but average body mass index is higher among women. Height and weight tend to decline with increases in age and this may be associated with historical trends and aging itself.	Flavia	 Andrade
2005	56	The Impact of Healthy Behaviors on Well Being and Longevity	Childhood Influences on Diabetes among Older Americans	The health experiences of today’s older population are strongly tied to conditions experienced decades earlier in life. Working within a life-course framework, we estimate nested multinomial logistic regression models with data from the 1998 wave of the Health and Retirement Study to evaluate the influence of a number of theoretically important aspects of childhood to identify the major facets of childhood associated with adult diabetes. We also investigate the core mediating mechanisms potentially linking childhood conditions with diabetes – adult achievement processes and adult lifestyle factors such as obesity. The results show that persons born in the South, with low levels of educational attainment, with low SES in the family of origin, and with poor childhood health all had significantly higher odds of reported diabetes. We also found that obesity, smoking, and socioeconomic achievement processes are powerful mechanisms linking childhood disadvantage with a greater odds of diabetes at older ages.	Latrica	E. Best	Mark	D. Hayward
2005	56	The Impact of Healthy Behaviors on Well Being and Longevity	The Impact of Health Behaviors and Life Quality on Gender Differences in Mortality	Since gender-specific mortality differences are known a great deal of research has been conducted on this subject. The resulting hypotheses for explaining male excess mortality can be sub-divided into two basic categories: the biological approach (focusing on biological and genetic factors) and the non-biological approach (focusing on behavioral and environmental factors). It has been proven impossible to explain the observed trends in mortality differences between women and men by relying solely on one of the two groups of theories. Recent studies indicate that the majority of the female survival advantage can be attributed to gender behaviors while the impact of biological factors seems to be limited to 1-2 years in life expectancy at birth. The main goal of this paper is to reach a deeper quantification of the impact of gender-specific health behaviors and gender differences in life quality using new micro level data for Western Germany.	Marc	A. Luy	Paola	 Di Giulio
2005	56	The Impact of Healthy Behaviors on Well Being and Longevity	Healthy People 2010: The Contribution of Good Health Behaviors to the Length and Quality of Healthy Life Years	Despite improvements in prevalence of smoking and physical activity, increases in obesity have raised serious concerns among policymakers that the current generation will have poorer quality and length of life than previous generations. Healthy People 2010 examines the impact of changes in health behaviors through its first goal of increasing the quality and length of healthy life years, specifically years of life with good health behaviors. This paper explores the extent to which changes in HP2010 health promotion and mortality objectives contribute to trends in healthy life expectancy.  analyzes are based on the 1999-2000 and 2001-2002 mortality data from the National Vital Statistics System, and 1999-2000 and 2001-2002 health behavior data from the National Health Interview Survey. Using the Sullivan method, I calculate the years of life with good health behaviors. I then use the Arriaga decomposition method to investigate the contribution of each health behavior and related cause of death to changes in health expectancy.	Erin	B. Reidy
2005	57	Statistical Demography	A 2-Step Empirical Likelihood Approach for Combining Sample and Population Data in Regression Estimation	Apart from the sample, sometimes limited information on the relationship of explanatory variables with the dependent variable may be known from population-level data. Using the method of constrained maximum likelihood estimation we have previously shown that it is possible to include such population-level information and achieve a large reduction in the bias and variance of the estimates of these regression coefficients. We propose here an alternative 2-step empirical likelihood based approach. We first compute optimal weights for the sample, which both maximize the empirical likelihood and satisfy the population constraints. These weights are then used in a standard statistical package to produce the parameter and standard error estimates, with the Hessian derived separately. Like the constrained MLE the use of population constraint leads to correct and substantially lower standard errors. However the 2-step approach is computationally much more flexible, allowing for estimation with multiple population constraints and multiple covariates.	Sanjay	 Chaudhuri	Mark	S. Handcock	Michael	 Rendall
2005	57	Statistical Demography	Predicting Work and Family Trajectories	Techniques based on sequence analysis, and in particular Optimal Matching Analysis (OMA), have been used to build clusters of life courses. Proposals on the prediction of life course sequences have been made by McVicar and Anyandike-Danes (2001), who use multinomial  logit models to study the determinants of cluster membership, adopting thus a two-step approach. The main problem with this approach is that cluster found  not considering the prediction purpose may be hardly predictable. We propose a new algorithm, modifying the first step of this procedure. Clusters are still obtained  considering OMA, but the predictive problem is taken into account also in the first step, when clusters are formed. The aim is to define clusters that are better predictable given a set of covariates. We apply this algorithm to British Household Panel Survey data on the employment and family trajectories of women, and we show the advantage of the proposed algorithm.	Raffaella	 Piccarreta
2005	57	Statistical Demography	A Statistical Reformulation of Demographic Methods to Assess the Quality of Age and Date Reporting, with Application to the Demographic and Health Surveys	Demographers have developed several procedures to identify systematic patterns of misreporting of ages, dates, and intervals in survey and census data. Most of these methods concern digit preference, transfers across specified boundaries, omission, and non-response. Almost all methods to identify and describe such patterns use aggregated data, such as the age and sex distribution or the distribution of time since last birth. This paper adapts, integrates, and extends these procedures within the framework of statistical methods for individual-level data, primarily logit and multinomial logit regression. This approach leads to the calculation of interpretable parameter estimates with standard errors and confidence intervals, corrected for the sample design, and the inclusion of covariates that may be related to misreporting. This research was motivated by the author's assessment of age and date reporting in all surveys conducted by the Demographic and Health Surveys project, and the paper includes illustrations from that assessment.	Thomas	W. Pullum
2005	57	Statistical Demography	A Simple Explanation of Tempo Effects in Fertility – and Why Such Issues are Irrelevant for Mortality Analysis	We propose a general definition of the tempo of demographic processes based on percentiles of age distributions of events (e.g., birth, death) and develop formal models of tempo change for both fertility and mortality within a common framework. Using these models we attempt to explain as clearly as possible the nature of tempo effects in fertility and to demonstrate the absence of comparable effects for mortality. One key observation is that in situations of tempo delay, cohorts spend increasing amounts of time passing between equivalent percentiles of a distribution, leading to longer waiting or survival times. Mathematically, these longer intervals have mirror images in the form of reduced demographic rates (assuming no change in cohort quantum). We show that the associated reduction in period fertility results entirely from stretching cohort reproductive intervals and misrepresents cohort quantum. However, a similar reduction in period mortality accurately reflects gains in cohort survival.	John	R. Wilmoth
2005	58	Educational Patterns in Developing Countries	The Implications of Changing Educational Opportunities in Rural Pakistan 1997-2004: School Access, Choice and Quality	This paper will assess the effects of primary schooling opportunities (including access, choice and quality) and recent changes in those opportunities at the community level on a range in school outcomes in rural Punjab and North West Frontier Province. These outcomes include the decision to enter primary school, the age of entry and the completion of primary school. The analysis will be based on two waves of data drawn from 12 rural villages. The first wave was collected in December 1997 and the second wave was conducted roughly 6 years later in January 2004. As far as we know, these data are among the few that have been collected in a developing country setting that track changes in the school environment over time while at the same time following behavioral change within the same setting.	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Cem	 Mete	Monica	 Grant
2005	58	Educational Patterns in Developing Countries	The Effect of Family Size on Educational Attainment in China: Cohort Variations	In industrialized nations family size generally depresses educational attainment—the larger the number of siblings, the lower the educational attainment, presumably because of the reduction of family resources (both material and intellectual) available to each child. However, this association is much less consistent in developing nations, and there is some evidence of substantial change over time. In this paper, we study the effect of number of siblings on educational attainment in China, a nation that has experienced sharp vacillations between policies designed to promote equality (between urban and rural residents and between men and women) and policies designed to promote economic development. The implementation of these policies in the educational arena has alternately reduced and increased competition for educational resources and, we show, has correspondingly reduced and increased the effect of the number of children in a family on their educational attainment.	Yao	 Lu	Donald	J. Treiman
2005	58	Educational Patterns in Developing Countries	Demographic Aspects of Intergenerational Transmission: Women's Schooling and the Schooling of the Next Generation	The effect of socioeconomic characteristics in one generation on the socioeconomic achievement of the next generation is the central concern of social stratification research. Researchers typically address this issue by analyzing the associations between the characteristics of parents and offspring. This approach, however, focuses on observed parent-offspring pairs and ignores that changes in the characteristics of one generation may alter the numbers and types of family relationships that are created in the next one. In earlier work, we proposed new models of intergenerational effects that included demographic mechanisms such as marriage and fertility and made these endogenous to changes in women’s schooling. In the proposed work, we extend these models to include: differential timing of marriage and fertility; information on family structure in the transmission process; differential child and maternal mortality; and differences by cohort in the context of rapid demographic change. Our models are estimated using data on Indonesia.	Vida	 Maralani	Robert	D. Mare
2005	58	Educational Patterns in Developing Countries	A Cohort Analysis of Educational Stratification by Race and Gender in 20th Century Brazil	During the 20th century there was an overwhelming improvement in Brazilian education. However, the country still presents high educational inequalities. In this paper, we investigate educational stratification by gender and race for cohorts of adults born during the last century. Our goal is to identify how gender and race operate and interact in shaping schooling, using data from 1977-2002 nationally representative household surveys (PNADs). We find that male advantage in schooling was reversed by cohorts born since the 1950s. Female advantage increases within younger cohorts. The schooling gap between whites and non-whites remains. These figures lead to research questions we then address by estimating regression models: Male advantage on schooling was reversed for both whites and non-whites? With the same magnitude? Racial educational inequalities within gender prevailed across cohorts? By addressing these questions, this work contributes for a better understanding of educational patterns of Brazilian cohorts throughout the last century.	Leticia	J. Marteleto	Vitor	Felipe  Miranda
2005	59	Disability, Schooling, and Employment	Mommy, Are You Going to Work Today? A Quantitative/Qualitative, Multidisciplinary Analysis of Peruvian Mothers’ Employment	Despite economic models’ usefulness and mathematical elegance, they fail to explain several important processes generally attributed to sociological and psychological factors. Also, previous sociological and psychological studies indicate that different implications are observed using alternative dependent variables. Using two unique information sources, Peruvian poor mothers’ employment decisions are analyzed integrating economic, sociological, and psychological perspectives. This study combines quantitative and qualitative information from the 2002 Young Lives Project – Peru survey and focus groups (sub-sample of YLP-P participants). Results show that depression/anxiety and domestic violence have significant effects on maternal work attachment, and participation, particularly in self-employed occupations. Qualitative outcomes support these findings showing moderating effects associated with crime rates and sexual violence. Mother's and children’s physical health negatively affects participation, mainly in paid activities, but have non-significant effects on work stability. Active (although not passive) interactions with the community increase work participation (mostly self-employed) and stability.	Paola	Tami  Aritomi
2005	59	Disability, Schooling, and Employment	Child Disability and Parents' Workforce Participation	This study explores workforce participation among parents of children with disability. Prior research has found that these families often face increased financial and caregiving burdens, but few have examined the direct effect of these burdens on workforce participation. Greater caregiving demands may make mothers of these children more likely to exit the labor market. In turn, fathers of these children may need to work additional jobs in order to compensate for their partner's withdrawal from the workforce. We examine mother's work trajectories after the birth of a child with or without disability, as well as the subsequent workforce participation of their husbands. Results from matched records of the 1993 NHIS and the 1995 NSFG find that women of children with disability are more likely to spend a greater proportion of their child’s life not working, while preliminary results indicate that their male partners are subsequently working more than one job.	Maryhelen	 D'Ottavi	Carrie	E. Spearin
2005	59	Disability, Schooling, and Employment	Parental Chronic Illness and Child Welfare	Many developing countries have begun to struggle with a double disease burden – they remain plagued by infectious disease, but these countries now also contend with the chronic diseases associated with longevity. However, the effect of chronic disease on households in developing countries has largely been overlooked in the literature. Chronic illnesses tend to be expensive, leading to concern about their effects on more vulnerable household members, particularly children. If parental investments in children decrease, there may be long-term effects on the child’s productivity and quality of life. In this paper, we estimate the effects of parental chronic illness on two measures of human capital investments in children – school enrollment and health care use. We use a panel dataset from Indonesia that combines excellent measures of health status and child human capital, which offers the opportunity to address some issues of endogeneity in the health-child investment relationship for which cross-sectional data is unsuited.	Jules	R. Elkins
2005	59	Disability, Schooling, and Employment	Measuring Children's Disabilities via Household Surveys: The MICS Experience	This paper documents UNICEF's experience in measuring children's disability via household surveys and documents the main findings of this exercise in over 20 developing countries. The data was collected under the Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey methodology developed by UNICEF to monitor the advancement towards the goals of the World Summit for Children in 1990 and ratified during the 2002 UNGASS for children. The disability module included under MICS is a tool to collect data on the type of impairments children have (e.g. seeing, hearing, muscle movement impairments, language production and reception, etc.) or about actual health conditions (e.g. epilepsy). A few questions ask about activity limitations (difficulties doing activities required or desired for everyday living (e.g. walking, learning).  After analyzing disability indicators by socio-economic and demographic indicators within and between countries, the paper will present methodological and policy recommendations.	Edilberto	 Loaiza
2005	60	Social Inequalities and Health: Methodological Advances	Health Trajectories over the Life Course: The Consequences of Childhood Health and Social Background Factors	Individual health is not static nor can it be divorced from the cumulative impacts of lived experience. Because its basic theoretical and methodological insight is to recognize that individual life circumstances and the events that shape them are best understood in the context of previous events and circumstances, the life course perspective has the potential to provide great insight into the factors and processes that shape health. This study examines the impact of early life circumstances on life course health trajectories. Specifically, it investigates the effect of poor childhood health and socioeconomic status on both overall level of adult health and disability as well their trajectories over time. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and latent growth curve models I estimate the effects of early life health and social circumstances on both the overall level (latent intercept) and slope of adult health trajectories.	Steven	A. Haas
2005	60	Social Inequalities and Health: Methodological Advances	Social Differences in Health and Mortality in Old Age. Evidence from US Survey Data and Danish Register Data	My question is if and why social differences in health and mortality decrease with age. Most research finds this decrease but the reasons and the role of unobserved heterogeneity are unknown. My data come from the US Health and Retirement Study (N=9376) and from the Danish Demographic Database (Denmark’s population above age 58) that offer detailed information about SES and health information. Event-history-analysis is used and frailty models address mortality selection. A new method is developed to consider the systematic difference in the change of average frailty over age between social groups. SES differentials in mortality converge with age in Denmark but not in the US. In both countries they converge strongly with decreasing health. Controlled for health, the differences are stable across age in both countries. Controlling for mortality selection reduces the converging pattern over age.	Rasmus	 Hoffmann
2005	60	Social Inequalities and Health: Methodological Advances	Socioeconomic Status and Health Over the Life Course: An Aging-Vector Approach	The “cumulative advantage hypothesis” suggests SES-based diverging gap in health over the life course. However, previous studies, which mainly used cross-sectional analyzes and focused on education and physical health, gave inconsistent results about the pattern. Using the ACL national probability sample collected in 1986, 1989, and 1994, this study examines the cumulative effects of education and family income on mental health as well as physical health. This study suggests an aging-vector approach, an innovative growth curve modeling which examines health trajectories in all the life stages, as an alternative to studying entire life-course patterns using relatively short-term longitudinal data. Moreover, this approach deals with the issues of mortality selection and confounding problem between aging process and cohort difference, which were the limitations of previous studies. In findings, overall results support consistent diverging gap in health across all the life stages with implying persistent lifelong health inequality by SES.	Jinyoung	 Kim
2005	60	Social Inequalities and Health: Methodological Advances	A Test of the Social Causation Hypothesis and the SES Gradient: The Utility of Wealth, Self Reported Health, and Unmeasured Heterogeneity	This study examines the “social causation hypothesis” of several conventional SES measures and health. To control for alternative interpretations, such as “health selection” and “reverse causality” this study employs: measures which are not as sensitive to changes in health, such as wealth; self reported health measures; and event history methods that have been developed to control unmeasured heterogeneity. All results are net of the standard measures of occupation, income, and education.	    The data used for this study come from the PSID. Results indicate that income, wealth, and employment status are all important factors in predicting mortality net of self reported health. This contributes to the SES and health literature by utilizing all known approaches to mitigate directionality problems. Although this does preclude the potential effect of health on status, it does suggest that certain measures of SES are strongly associated with health.	Michael	L. Spittel
2005	61	Community Structure and Migration	The Interrelation between Social Context, Social Structure, and Social Capital of International Migration Flows from Mexico to the U.S.: The Case of Guanajuato, Mexico	Even though the concept of “social capital” is widely used, it is still so “abstract” that Ronald Burt argues that it is mostly used as a “metaphor” of advantage. In this paper I relay on a series of sociological concepts and exclusive social network data collected in four communities in the state of Guanajuato, Mexico, (two rural villages, a town, and a city) to exemplify the importance of the relationship between social context, social network structure, and social capital related to Mexican migration to the United States. First, I explore the type of network structure that exists among the migrant networks. Then, I relate that type of network structure to the social context defined according to the size of the community of origin of the migrant. Finally, I relate the social network structure and the social context to the social capital outcomes of the migrants.	Nadia	 Flores
2005	61	Community Structure and Migration	The Initiation and Growth of Migration Streams from Communities in Five Latin American Countries	A variety of theories describe how a migration stream begins and how it is perpetuated, providing a synthetic account of international migration. In this research I model the proportion of a community that has ever migrated in a given year as a function of the level of development of the community, economic opportunities in the community, and the characteristics of migrants from that community in the U.S. I use the Mexican Migration Project and Latin American Migration Project data for communities in Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Puerto Rico. I find significant and positive relationships between indicators of the level of development and the initiation of migration. Furthermore, higher levels of migrant remittances lead to the perpetuation of the migration stream in most cases. These findings provide empirical evidence for a synthetic account of international migration.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2005	61	Community Structure and Migration	Diversity within Non-English Language Communities: Chicago in 2000	With the 2000 Census data, I identify non-English language (NEL) communities (defined as spatial concentrations of speakers) and investigate the linguistic, demographic, and socioeconomic characteristics of these communities in Chicago. I seek to answer two research questions. First, do non-English language speakers live close enough to form spatially bounded communities? Second, what are these communities like? For example, are they linguistically homogenous (comprised of one non-English language group) or linguistically diverse (comprised of multiple non-English language groups)? I use exploratory spatial data analysis to describe and visualize distributions of NEL neighborhoods (as represented by census tracts). I then use spatial autocorrelation analysis to identify spatial clusters of NEL neighborhoods. The findings suggest that there are NEL communities in central cities. Inconsistent with spatial assimilation theory, the findings also show that there are NEL communities in suburbs and that there is a language group specific pattern in NEL communities.	Hiromi	 Ishizawa
2005	61	Community Structure and Migration	International Migration and Self-Employment: Evidence from 4 Mexican Communities	Using data from four Mexican urban communities, this study seeks to find out what kind of self-employment activities are more efficient retaining population in their communities, and whether these activities constitute a counterbalance to the migration networks. The central question is whether migration substitutes self-employment or complements it through remittances and human capital. To answer it, we use personal data, data on business activity, and data on migration experience. The estimated model shows that family networks play a fundamental role in migration determination, with lower importance when self employment variables are included. As the causality between migration and self-employment is not theoretically clear, the migration equation is estimated by two stage least squares and instrumental variables, to correct for the endogeneity problem. Our results suggest self-employment indeed deter migration, even in the presence of migration networks.	Liliana	 Meza	Carla	 Pederzini
2005	62	Census Coverage and Population Estimates	Characteristics of the Components of Net International Migration: 2004	International migration is a topic that reaches beyond the interest of demographers and media. With the advent of annually updated data from the American Community Survey (ACS), the U.S. Census Bureau has worked to update the methods from the 1990s that relied on new information every ten years. This poster looks at the descriptive statistics for the components of net international migration (net migration of the foreign born, net movement from Puerto Rico and native emigration) as well as for the combined components used in the 2004 population estimates. By looking at distributions by broad age group, sex, Hispanic origin, race, and geography, we examine the effects of international migration on the estimates of the population. The poster will summarize the methods used to derive the final estimates for the component pieces as well as the combined international migration component and indicate the direction of future research using the ACS.	Betsy	 Guzmán
2005	62	Census Coverage and Population Estimates	Understanding Factors that Contributed to the Large Error of Closure in Census 2000	This paper puts in perspective the relative contribution of the two components of the large 6.8 million error of closure, which resulted when the 1990 census-based population estimate of 274.6 million was compared to the Census 2000 count of 281.4 million: (1) the amount attributable to change in coverage from 1990 to 2000, (2) the amount attributable to error in the population estimates for 2000. Many users believe that the error of closure was largely caused by the understatement of growth by the population estimates for the 1990's. Now that the coverage studies for 2000 have been completed, we can systematically assess the contribution of estimates error and coverage change. The findings show that 60 percent or more of the error of closure is attributable to the dramatic reduction in net undercount from 1990 to 2000; the remainder includes that accounted for by estimation error.	Gregory	 Robinson	Kirsten	 West
2005	62	Census Coverage and Population Estimates	New Approaches and Estimates of Foreign Born Emigration	Post-censal population estimates depend on the accuracy of estimates of demographic components of change. Of these components, emigration of the foreign born is probably the least well known. Indirect methods (i.e., the residual method) are particularly problematic for estimating emigration for recent arrivals. We introduce a new method that takes advantage of the unique design of the CPS. The CPS follows housing units—not necessarily individuals—over 16 months. Individuals in the March CPS not successfully followed up include those who died, internal migrants, and emigrants. We use statistical methods to estimate the proportion of emigrants among those not followed up. Our method produces emigration estimates that are comparable to residual-based methods in the case of earlier arrivals (immigrants who arrived more than ten years ago), but yields much higher estimates for earlier arrivals. Also, we find distinct yet predictable patterns of emigration and return migration by country-of-origin and legal status.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Jeffrey	S. Passel	Weiwei	 Zhang
2005	62	Census Coverage and Population Estimates	Summary of the 2003 American Community Survey Data on Seasonality: An Analysis of Responses to Question 25	This paper summarizes the frequency distribution of responses to Question 25 on the 2003 ACS questionnaire in order to learn more about the prevalence of seasonal residence and to examine the potential impact of counting people where they are living or staying for at least two months as opposed to counting people where they usually live or stay based on a six months criterion. While this measure underestimates the actual number of seasonal housing units (responses are obtained from occupied units), it serves as an indicator of the number of seasonal households captured in the ACS. For the 88 counties included in the analysis, this number is small, less than two percent on average.	Kirsten	 West	Jason	 Devine
2005	63	Aging and Household Structure in Developing Countries	Patterns and Trends of Grandparenting in China	Using data from the China Health and Nutrition Survey (1991, 1993, 1997, 2000), I document the scope and extent of grandparent caring for grandchildren in China. I investigate the proportion of children who are cared for by grandparents, the time frame and the level of caregiving responsibilities the grandparents have, and the location where grandparent caregiving takes place. I extend beyond the boundary of the household, by examining the level of care provided by both co-residing and non-co-residing grandparents. I focus on urban and rural differences in grandparental care, where socioeconomic contexts are known to vary vastly. I distinguish care provided by paternal and maternal grandparents, of whom the traditional patriarchal and patrilineal culture has distinctive expectations. Finally, I explore the patterns of grandparent caregiving over time, and how it is linked with changing demographic trends, as fertility and mortality continue to decline in China.	Feinian	 Chen
2005	63	Aging and Household Structure in Developing Countries	Moving from Household Structure to Living Arrangement Transitions: What Do We Learn?	Household structure, and particularly coresidence with children, is one of the most widely used indicators of elderly well-being. Most studies have focused on household structure at a given point in time or on aggregate trends over time. The prevalence measures typically used may be misleading as to the underlying transitions into and out of coresidence. The primary objectives of this paper are to evaluate these inherent ambiguities in the relationship between coresidence prevalence measures and the transition levels, and to investigate transitions in coresidence with married children among elderly in Taiwan. The paper uses data from five waves of the Survey of Health and Living Status of the Elderly in Taiwan (1989-2003), a nationally representative panel survey, employing both multivariate regression and multistate lifetable methods to examine transitions in coresidence with regard to their underlying rates, implications for ‘coresidence life expectancy’, and the factors that predict transitions in and out of coresidence.	Albert	 Hermalin	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Kristine	R. Baker	Yi-Li	 Chuang
2005	63	Aging and Household Structure in Developing Countries	Social Support and Quality of Life: China’s Oldest Old	In this paper, we explore the relationships between social support and quality of life using 1998 Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey (CLHLS). In societies where adult children are expected to care for elderly parents, it is often assumed that the elderly residing with one of their children would have the best quality of life. We find evidence that suggests otherwise. Elderly people living in nursing homes are more satisfied with their quality of life compared to the elderly living with children. The elderly living alone report the lowest quality of life. Our results point to the importance of social support from friends and peers in fostering high quality of life for the elderly.	Min	 Zhou
2005	63	Aging and Household Structure in Developing Countries	Dynamics of Residential Arrangements of Older Women in Mexico	Previous studies in developed countries regularly report that higher levels of personal income increase the likelihood of residential independence for the elderly while poor health reduces the odds. In this paper, we extend this literature to Mexico, a country where public transfer programs are lean in coverage and generosity of benefits. Many older women, and especially widows, have few residential options other than to live with the families of an adult child. In this paper we use multi-level models to analyze residential arrangements of unmarried mothers aged 50 and over. Data are from the first two waves of the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS). The outcome of interest is whether each child lives with or nearby his/her mother, recognizing three levels: time, shared family traits, including time-specific attributes of the mother, and individual child traits, including past residential and migration history.	Beth	 Soldo	Rania	 Tfaily
2005	63	Aging and Household Structure in Developing Countries	Psychological Disposition and Self-Reported Health in Old Age: An Examination of the Oldest Old in China	Using data from the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey (1998 and 2000), our analysis examines the effect psychological disposition has on self-rated health among the oldest old (those aged 80+) in China. China will continue to depend on non-medical and preventative strategies for promoting healthy ageing because of deficient public resources. Our principal objective is to identify whether psychological disposition represents an avenue toward successful ageing. Our findings demonstrate that a robust psychological disposition does indeed improve self-rated health. The influence of psychological disposition is independent of variance in health status, health bevaviours, gender, and major sociodemographic variables. Our findings also show that this effect differs between age groups, as the relationship between psychological disposition and self-rated health is significant for octogenarians and nonagenarians, but is non-significant for centenarians.	Zheng	 Wu	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2005	64	Migration in Developing Countries	Migration, Urbanization and Deforestation in the Ecuadorian Amazon: The Second Generation	Since the 1970s, migration to the Amazon has led to rapid population growth and land clearing. Over time, a second phenomenon has emerged–urbanization. This paper uses longitudinal household survey data on migrant settler colonists in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon, from 1990 and 1999, to analyze what happens to the second generation. A multinomial discrete-time hazard model is used to estimate the determinants of out-migration to urban and rural areas, and addresses key questions: Do the children of the migrant settlers stay on the farm or move out as they reach adulthood? Do they extend the frontier by moving to rural destinations, or do they feed the growth of local towns/cities? The results show important differentials between migrants and non-migrants and among types of migrants in personal characteristics, human capital, landholdings, lifecycle, access to community infrastructure, and networks. The paper concludes with policy implications.	Alisson	F. Barbieri	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2005	64	Migration in Developing Countries	The Impact of Remittances on Rural Households in Nang Rong, Thailand	The impact of out-migration on places of origin depends, in the first instance, on remittance flows back to the origin, and in the second instance, on how those remittances are used. This paper uses prospective survey data collected from almost 5000 rural households in Nang Rong, Thailand to explore the effects of migration and remittances on the subsequent ownership of productive assets and consumer goods. Examples of productive assets in this setting are large and small tractors, itans (a locally made multipurpose vehicle), and sewing machines. Examples of consumer goods are televisions, telephones, and refrigerators. In addition, there are some items that may be either or both, including motorcycles, cars, pickups, or trucks. We examine each of these possibilities separately. Preliminary results indicate that the number of migrants (i.e., previous household members) who sent money in 1993/4 had a positive impact on both productive assets and consumer goods in 2000.	Barbara	 Entwisle	Yuying	 Tong
2005	64	Migration in Developing Countries	Individual versus Household Migration Decision Rules: Gender Differences in Intentions to Migrate in South Africa	The objective of this paper is to analyze how individually-held own-future versus alternative household well-being migration decision rules effect the intentions to migrate of male and female adults in South Africa. Drawing on the neoclassical and new household economic as well as gender and migration literatures, data from the Causes of Migration in South Africa national migration survey are used to test gender-specific regression models of intentions to migrate. The results show significant and gender differentiated effects of migration decision rules for both short and longer-term time-horizon migration intentions. The results also document important differences in marital status, value-expectancy, life satisfaction, human capital, family migration pressure, and demographic determinants of migration intentions within gender models.	Bina	 Gubhaju	Gordon	F. De Jong
2005	64	Migration in Developing Countries	Pattern and Determinants of Occupational Mobility of Adult Ghanaian In-Migrants in the Central Region	Despite the increasing migration and the fact that economic and job opportunities are the most important factors motivating migration, little is known about the occupational mobility of in-migrants in developing countries. This paper focuses on patterns and determinants of occupational mobility for in-migrants in the Central Region of Ghana. Discrete-time event-history models were used. The findings showed that the well known U-shaped curve pattern of occupational mobility of immigrants found in developed countries was also found in Ghana. Education was the most important determinant of occupational mobility. Interestingly, education stimulates not only upward but also downward mobility. Besides, being married substantially decreases the likelihood of experiencing upward mobility. Although women are more likely to experience occupational mobility than men, the relationship is not statistically significant. Lastly, the findings suggested that urban areas provide more upward occupational opportunities than rural areas. Shortcomings of the paper and recommendations are also discussed.	Liem	T. Nguyen
2005	65	Forging the Future in Work, Family, Health and Well-being Research	A Comparative Perspective on Paid Work, Family Caregiving, and Family Formation and Dissolution		Thomas	A. DiPrete
2005	65	Forging the Future in Work, Family, Health and Well-being Research	Work, Family, Health and Well-Being: What We Know and Don’t Know about Outcomes for Children		Jane	 Waldfogel
2005	65	Forging the Future in Work, Family, Health and Well-being Research	Work, Older Families, and Intergenerational Caregiving: What We Know, What We Need to Know		Judith	A. Seltzer
2005	65	Forging the Future in Work, Family, Health and Well-being Research	Work and Family-Related Behavior: What We Know, What We Need to Know about Race-Ethnic, Class and Gender Variation		Paula	S. England
2005	66	Cohabitation	Transitions from Cohabitation to Marriage	Using Waves 1 through 9 of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) 2001 Panel, this paper uses couple-month data and event history analysis to examine the association between characteristics of cohabiting couples and their likelihood of marrying or dissolving. Characteristics of the couple include their educational attainment, whether the partners were formerly married, their age, race and origin, economic characteristics, whether each partner has children, and if the couple has children together. This research marks the first time that detailed monthly SIPP data have been used to conduct a prospective longitudinal analysis of cohabitation dynamics. The analysis explicitly controls for right censoring. We identify the importance of the presence and type of children in the household, the continued importance of higher education in increasing the odds of marriage, and the potential for a curvilinear relationship between male partner’s income and the likelihood of marriage.	Jason	 Fields	Rose	 Kreider
2005	66	Cohabitation	Educational Homogamy in Marital and Cohabiting Unions: A Test of the Double Selection Hypothesis	I use log-linear models and data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) and the 1987-88 and 1992-94 waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to compare the odds of educational homogamy in cohabitation and marriage. Preliminary results using NLSY79 data show that differences in the educational resemblance of married and cohabiting couples vary depending on the sample used and the point at which assortative mating patterns are measured. Cohabitors are much less likely to be educationally homogamous than married couples using a sample of prevailing unions. Restricting the sample to newly formed unions, however, eliminates this difference. Nevertheless, I find support for the hypothesis that couples who enter marriage via cohabitation are “doubly selected” and are more homogamous than cohabiting couples who split up. I find no difference in the resemblance of couples whose marriages are preceded by cohabitation and those marry without first cohabiting.	Christine	R. Schwartz
2005	66	Cohabitation	Specialization in Household Activities within Cohabiting versus Married Households	A simple model of intrahousehold specialization is developed. This model predicts that the shorter the expected duration of a relationship, the less intrahousehold specialization will arise. Cohabiting relationships are of shorter duration than marriages in the United States, suggesting that cohabiting households will specialize less than married households. Data on household time use from the National Survey of Families and Households are used to provide evidence of intrahousehold specialization as a whole and to test its sensitivity to the duration of the relationship. Differences in home ownership, parental status, employment status, and age are observed between cohabiting and married households and found to be important determinants of specialization. Results indicate that on average cohabiting households engage in less intrahousehold specialization than married households, with much of the differential attributable to the shorter length of cohabiting relationships rather than to the type of relationship per se.	Leslie	 Stratton
2005	66	Cohabitation	Single and Multiple Cohabitors' Risks of Divorce	We use the Intergenerational Study of Parents and Children and the National Survey of Families and Households to examine how selection and the experience of single and multiple cohabitations affect the rate of divorce. Compared to prior research that has been primarily based on cross-sectional surveys with retrospective data, we use measures of attitudes toward cohabitation, marriage, and divorce prior to any of those experiences. We examine the effect of single and multiple cohabitations on the rate of divorce in a model while including pre-union attitudes to marriage and families. analyzes suggest that controlling for attitudes toward marriage and divorce before cohabitation reduces the effect of previous cohabitation experiences. However, much of the effect of cohabitation is left unexplained.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Mary	H. Benin
2005	67	Dynamics and Patterns of Sexual Behavior in China	Frequency of Intercourse in China and Its Implications for Historical Fertility	There is wide agreement that marital fertility in late imperial China was low compared to that in historical Europe, but the explanation for this difference has set off a sharp debate in the field of Chinese historical demography, pitting proponents of intentional fertility control against proponents of a natural fertility regime. Using data from major surveys, this paper demonstrates that Chinese coital frequency is low in international comparative perspective, and it argues that general trends in health, economy, family, ideology, and contraceptive use make it unlikely that coital frequency has declined over time. On the assumption that low coital frequency typified Chinese marriage in earlier times, we apply a model of the proximate determinants of fertility to estimate the mean expected birth interval. The results suggest that frequency of intercourse and breastfeeding customs are together sufficient to explain the low marital fertility observed in the late imperial period.	William	 Lavely
2005	67	Dynamics and Patterns of Sexual Behavior in China	Sexual Mixing by Age and Education in China	Major changes in sexual norms and behaviors are occurring in China. Sexual unions other than marriage are on the rise. The country is also facing a comeback of STDs and an emerging HIV/AIDS epidemic, which is expected to spread to the general population via heterosexual transmission. We use log-linear analyzes to examine and compare age and educational sexual mixing patterns for primary and a secondary partnerships reported by respondents to the China Health and Family Life Survey. We find that: (a) age and educational homogamy are present in both types of partnership; (b) social constraints more strongly govern primary relationships; and (c) individuals who experience both types of partnerships are consistent about choice of partner in term of demographic and social attributes. Our   results have significant implications for our understanding of the social organization of sexual partnering in China as well as for the potential for spread of sexually transmitted infections.	Jing	 Li	Giovanna	 Merli
2005	67	Dynamics and Patterns of Sexual Behavior in China	Unwanted Sexual Activity among Married Women in Urban China	This paper examines the precursors and consequences of unwanted marital sex in a national sample of 1,166 married urban Chinese women aged 20-64. Married women reported more unwanted sex when the relationship quality was poor (hitting, uncommitted husband, lack of daily intimacy and foreplay, and husband's insensitivity to wife’s sexual needs). Women also reported more unwanted sex when they had higher expectations, a negative view of sex, fewer resources, childhood sexual contact and multiple sexual partners in a lifetime. In addition, physical and psychological problems, alcohol consumption, small children, and lack of support contributed to unwanted sex. Net of feedback effects, unwanted sex diminished women’s psychological well-being.	William	L. Parish	Melissa	 Kew	Ye	 Luo	Edward	O. Laumann	Zhiyuan	 Yu
2005	67	Dynamics and Patterns of Sexual Behavior in China	Migration, Gender, and STD/HIV Risky Sexual Behavior in Contemporary China	The link between migration and STDs/HIV has captured a great deal of research attention. Little research has been focused on gendered health consequences of migration. Also lacking is our understanding of how the interplay between migration and gender may render female migrants particularly vulnerable to STDs/HIV. Using data from a population-based survey conducted in 2003, this paper examines HIV/STD risks among female migrants in China. Chi-squared tests of difference in proportions and multiple logistic regressions were used in the analysis. Results suggest that the impact of migration on risky sexual behavior was more pronounced among female than male migrants; female migrants, particularly those working in the service and entertainment industry, experienced disproportionate increases in risky sexual behavior and were at high risk of STDs/HIV. However, female migrants and non-migrants did not differ significantly in the self-reported history of STDs/HIV. Prevention interventions are urgently needed to target female temporary migrants.	Xiushi	 Yang
2005	68	Family Structure and Child Development	The Role of Grandparents in Single-Mother Families	This paper asks two research questions: first, does living with a grandparent reduce the potential detrimental influences of single-parenthood on children? Second, does this relationship vary by race or ethnicity? We employ a random effects model using data from the NLSY79 mother-child files. Results from preliminary analyzes suggest that, for black children, grandparent co-residence is not associated with delinquency. For white children, living with a grandparent is associated with reduced delinquency, but not particularly for children living with a single mother. Future work will expand the set of outcomes examined, as well as the age group of children we study.	Rachel	 Dunifon	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2005	68	Family Structure and Child Development	Nonresident Fathers' Contributions to Adolescent Well-Being	Using the National Survey of Families and Households, we examine how multiple dimensions of nonresident father involvement are associated with different dimensions of adolescent well-being. We pay particular attention to the quality of father-child ties and father’s responsive parenting. Relationship quality and responsive fathering are modestly associated with fewer externalizing and internalizing problems among adolescents. Furthermore, father involvement is equally beneficial for different groups of children (e.g., boys and girls). At the same time, however, the quality of the mother-child relationship has stronger, more consistent effects on child well-being. Adolescents are worse off on a range of outcomes when they have weak ties to both their parents.	Valarie	 King	Juliana	M. Sobolewski
2005	68	Family Structure and Child Development	Cumulative Risks and Child Health and Development by Family Structure, Education, and Race/Ethnicity	The number of developmental risk factors a child is exposed to is often found to be more harmful to healthy development than any one particular risk factor alone. This analysis uses data from a new birth cohort study to examine the level of risk factors that children are exposed to at birth, and how their risk increases or decreases between birth and age 3. We also determine whether the level and change in risk differs by the family structure, race/ethnicity, and education level of the mother. In addition, we examine the association between these risk factors and child health and development at age 3, and how this association is moderated by family structure, race/ethnicity, and education level. Preliminary findings suggest that children born to unmarried and less educated mothers not only experience more disadvantages at birth, but that this disparity increases over time.	Cynthia	A. Osborne	Sara	 McLanahan
2005	68	Family Structure and Child Development	Diverse Pathways into Stepfamilies and the Emotional Well-Being of Adolescents	Although approximately one-third of all children born in the United States are expected to spend some time living in a married or cohabiting stepfamily, our understanding of the implications of stepfamilies for the well-being of youth remains remarkably incomplete. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this research investigates the relationship between living in a stepfamily and adolescent depressive symptomatology and suicide ideation, paying careful attention to variation in pathways of stepfamily formation. I test multiple theoretical explanations for the effects of family structure on adolescent emotional well-being, including perspectives emphasizing economic deprivation, socialization and social control, stress and instability, community connections, and the pre-existing selective characteristics of stepfamilies. The results of this research point to a complex relationship between stepfamilies and adolescent emotional well-being, and suggest both positive and negative effects.	Megan	M. Sweeney
2005	69	Residential Segregation	Are Immigrants Buying to Get In?: The Role of Ethnic Clustering on the Homeownership Propensities of 12 Toronto Ethnic Groups, 1996-2001	Numerous studies equate immigrant homeownership with assimilation into the residential mainstream, though only rarely is this claim verified by studying the ethnic character of neighborhoods where immigrants actually buy homes. In this study I use the 1996 and 2001 census of Canada master files and bivariate probit models with sample selection corrections (a.k.a. Heckman probit models) to assess the neighborhood-level ethnic determinants of homeownership in Toronto, Canada. By determining whether low levels of ethnic concentration accompany a home purchase, I can assess whether immigrants exit their enclaves in search of a home in the ‘promised land’, as traditional assimilation theory suggests, or if some now seek homes in the ‘ethnic communities’ that Logan, Alba and Zhang (2002) recently introduced. Assessing the role of concentration under equilibrium conditions, I find that same-group concentration positively affects the propensity to buy homes for Chinese and Italians, and dissuades Jamaicans to buy homes.	Michael	 Haan
2005	69	Residential Segregation	Immigrant Residential Patterns in U.S. Metropolitan Areas, 1990-2000	A number of recent studies have shown that residential segregation among various Asian and Hispanic groups has remained the same or increased in recent decades, even as African American segregation has declined. High levels of immigration likely affect patterns of segregation, as new immigrants often settle in ethnic enclaves even as longer-term residents may disperse into outlying areas. The purpose of this analysis is to examine patterns of segregation in 1990 and 2000 for various racial/ethnic groups by nativity, country of origin, and, among the foreign-born, year of entry. These analyzes will provide insight as to whether the spatial assimilation model is an appropriate one for understanding residential patterns, and how patterns changed over the 1990s.	John	 Iceland	Cynthia	 Lake
2005	69	Residential Segregation	Are New Residential Developments Segregated? Evidence from California’s Newest Neighborhoods	New residential developments are often the subject of much controversy. Some regard these neighborhoods and their proliferation as serious problems, contributing to environmental degradation, increased traffic, as well as leading to increased segregation and economic exclusivity. Others are concerned that not enough new neighborhoods are being built and that the high price of housing is a reflection of the difficulty in gaining regulatory approval to build the large new housing developments necessary to keep pace with the nation’s growing population. In this paper, we examine California’s newest neighborhoods. California is at the epicenter of racial and ethnic change in America, and the state’s newest residential neighborhoods could either reflect or respond to such change. We find that California’s newest neighborhoods are home to many families with children, yet do not reflect the full diversity of the state’s population by race and ethnicity. In particular, the poor (who are disproportionately non-white) are priced out of these new neighborhoods.	Hans	 Johnson	Joseph	M. Hayes
2005	69	Residential Segregation	Perceiving the Metropolis: Seeing the City through a Prism of Race	Recent research highlights the choices people make about moving into certain communities as a mechanism helping to maintain patterns of racial residential segregation. Understanding how residents perceive communities in their metropolis and how those perceptions are shaped by race—both of the respondent and in the composition of the community—can help determine if these perceptions perpetuate or attenuate segregation. Building on findings from earlier studies, we report the results of new survey data from Detroit using maps to measure respondents’ knowledge and impressions of a large number of communities. We first examine evaluations of each community and assess the effect of respondent race, controlling for a range of respondent characteristics. Second, we use “community” as the unit of analysis to identify the degree to which racial composition, social class, school quality and geographical location of the community predict overall evaluations.	Maria	 Krysan	Michael	 Bader
2005	70	Public Policy and International Migration	Remittances and the Healthcare Use of Populations in Origin Communities: Evidence from Mexico	Workers’ remittances to Mexico have grown to $14.5 billion. While a significant fraction appears to be sent to Mexico to finance the purchase of food, housing, education, land or businesses, the single largest category (57%) reported in surveys has been health expenses. Yet, little attention has been paid to assessing the impact of international remittances on the healthcare use of Mexicans.    We examine the impact of remittances on the healthcare use of Mexicans in their origin communities. The Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares is used to estimate a simultaneous equation system of remittance receipt and healthcare use that addresses the following questions: (1) Do Mexican migrants send money back home for healthcare use reasons? and (2) Does the receipt of remittances alter healthcare use patterns? The second part of the study estimates the elasticity of healthcare use to remittance receipt by means of a hurdle model.	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Susan	 Pozo
2005	70	Public Policy and International Migration	Seeking Safe Haven: U.S. Welfare Reform and the Dynamics of Social and Political Citizenship	In 1996, the U.S. Congress passed the “Welfare Reform Act,” legislation that introduced political citizenship as a criterion for receipt of welfare. This research examines implications for naturalization of state differences in the level and degree of access to welfare benefits after Welfare Reform. Instrumental-legal (IL) and institutional-contextual (IC) theoretical perspectives about the nature of citizenship suggest different effects of combinations of benefit levels and access on naturalization. Based on Survey of Program Dynamics (SPD) data for 1988-2002, and as predicted by IC theory, state-level combinations in benefit levels and access most symbolizing high ambiguity about contexts of immigrant reception are more likely to explain levels of and increases in the tendency to naturalize than certain other combinations as predicted by IL theory. This conclusion is buttressed by the finding that increases in welfare receipt by the post-reform period are no greater among post-reform naturalizers than pre-reform naturalizers.	Frank	D. Bean	Jennifer	 Van Hook
2005	70	Public Policy and International Migration	Health Insurance and Health Care Use among Older Mexican Immigrants in the U.S.: Comparison with Their Origin-Country Counterparts	We seek to inform public policy on the health behaviors of old age Mexican immigrants to the U.S. by comparing patterns of health care utilization in the U.S. and Mexico. We highlight the role of health insurance in the propensity to have doctor visits and hospitalizations, controlling for aspects of economic and socio-demographic characteristics and health. We find that the elderly of Mexican origin are more likely to be hospitalized in the U.S. than those in Mexico regardless of health insurance. However, in the absence of health insurance, visits to the doctor are more likely in Mexico than the U.S. The results indicate that availability of health insurance encourages Mexicans in the U.S. to visit a doctor to a larger extent than it does in Mexico, while it enables Mexicans in Mexico to be hospitalized to a greater extent than it does in the U.S.	Rebeca	 Wong	Juan	José  Diaz	Monica	 Espinoza
2005	70	Public Policy and International Migration	The Role of Research in Informing Public Policy on International Migration in a Changing World	Although immigration has been central to the development of the United States, US immigration policy has been shaped more by perception than knowledge about the impacts of immigration law and immigrants themselves. The paper explores the policy and research roles of the reconfigured immigration agencies in DHS and the US government and discusses new approaches being used to maximize development of policy relevant information within the US government. It contrasts the US approach with the development and use of policy relevant research and information within the EU in light of the emergence of EU countries as immigrant-receiving nations. Comparisons are also made with information development for policymaking in Canada and Australia. The paper also discusses current efforts by international organizations to encourage policy-relevant research on immigration on a more global basis. Finally, the paper challenges researchers to consider the policy relevance of their work and suggests fertile areas for exploration.	Lisa	S. Roney	Linda	W. Gordon
2005	70	Public Policy and International Migration	Pathways to U.S. Citizenship for Child Immigrants	This study investigates independent naturalization of child immigrants. For child immigrants adopted, parental nativity status conveys citizenship. For child immigrants accompanying or joining parent immigrants, parental naturalizing conveys citizenship to minors. Naturalizing parents need to request citizenship certificates, or an adult son or daughter may later request a U.S. passport through the State Department based on derivative status. This study focuses on naturalizing as adults by child immigrants whose parents had not naturalized during their childhood. Younger immigrants would be more likely to derive citizenship and less likely to naturalize as adults. Older immigrants would be more likely to naturalize as independent adults, because their parents had not naturalized while they were minors. This approach adds understanding of naturalization outcomes for recent child immigrants reaching adulthood. The Child Citizenship Act, effective February 27, 2001, was meant to simplify the transition to citizenship for child immigrants.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield
2005	71	Adolescent Fertility	Updating Estimates of Contraceptive Use at First Sexual Intercourse among Teenagers in the United States	This research will update national estimates of contraceptive use at first intercourse among male and female teenagers in the United States, using 2002 data from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). This analysis will update findings from the mid-1990s, presenting method-specific trends and differentials. During this time new programs and new contraceptive technologies have emerged, that have no doubt impacted levels of usage overall and within demographic subgroups.   The 2002 data were collected based on interviews with 12,571 men and women aged 15-44 in the United States. In-person interviews were conducted with 1,150 female teenagers, and 1,121 male teenagers. For selected analyzes, prior cycles of the NSFG and figures from the National Survey of Adolescent Males are used.   Results indicate that teens' use of contraceptives at first intercourse has increased since 1995, and the condom remains the most commonly used method at first intercourse.	Joyce	C. Abma	Brittany	 Dawson
2005	71	Adolescent Fertility	Understanding the Fertility-Economy Link for Teenagers	During the 1990s, the economy strengthened and teenage fertility and the rate of sexual activity and the lack of contraception decreased sharply. Black female teenagers, who generally experienced greater relative economic gains than white female teenagers, had even greater declines in fertility, the rate of sexual activity, and the lack of contraception. These patterns suggest a potential link between the economy and fertility-related outcomes. This project uses the NLSY-1997 to estimate how changes in the economy affect fertility and its proximate determinants—the rate of sexual activity, contraception use, pregnancies, and abortions—for all teenagers and across race/ethnicity. Relative to previous analyzes, the contributions of our analysis include: (1) using alternative aggregate economic indicators that aren’t particular to teenagers (which could be endogenous); (2) using a more recent cohort of teenagers; and (3) performing simulations to calculate how much the economy contributed to changes in teenage fertility-related outcomes.	Jeremy	 Arkes	Jacob	A. Klerman
2005	71	Adolescent Fertility	Does Early Motherhood have Adverse Consequences for Later Socio-Economic Circumstances and Health? Evidence from Two British Longitudinal Studies	This paper contributes to the debate about the impact of early motherhood on women's later life health. Two British nationally representative longitudinal studies are used to examine associations between early childbearing and mid-life health and investigate whether these are still apparent after allowance for antecedent characteristics of early mothers. Both datasets show that early motherhood is a raised risk for a socially disadvantaged adult life. Neither physical nor mental health disadvantage were fully accounted for by factors associated with selection into early motherhood or by factors associated with adult socio-economic circumstances, suggesting some potential long term biological effect of early pregnancy.	Suzanne	L. Butterworth	Mike	 Wadsworth	Emily	 Grundy	Cecilia	 Tomassini
2005	71	Adolescent Fertility	Condom Availability in Schools: A Follow-up Evaluation of Philadelphia's Health Resource Centers	Adolescent birth rates have been declining for over a decade. School condom availability programs may have been a factor driving this decline. One such program began in 1991, when nine Philadelphia public schools began making condoms available to students. They did so by establishing in-school Health Resource Centers (HRCs), staffed by health care professionals who provide counseling, referrals, and condoms. This initiative was intended to reduce teenage pregnancy rates and curb the spread of STDs and HIV. Using data from the Philadelphia Educational Longitudinal Study, as well as matched birth records, we examine the STD, pregnancy, and birth rates of about 1500 Philadelphia public school students over the four years following their entry into 9th grade. Students at HRC schools were no less likely to have a pregnancy or contract an STD. However, the relationship between HRC school attendance and birth rates was more complex.	Adena	M. Galinsky	Frank	 Furstenberg
2005	71	Adolescent Fertility	Like Mother, Like Daughter? The Intergenerational Consequences of Teen Childbearing	This paper uses NLSY79-Young Adult data to examine the intergenerational implications of teen childbearing. Specifically, we examine the factors that are associated with the likelihood that the child of a teen mother will bear a child before age 20, and the likelihood of having a child out of wedlock. In addition, among those having a first birth, we will examine the probability of a subsequent birth. Reflecting an interest in the resiliency of children and families, we also examine factors that may be related to the children of teen mothers delaying childbearing past age 20 and having children within wedlock. We expect that disadvantages while growing up and the mother’s own marital and fertility behavior will influence the likelihood that the child of a teen mother will herself/himself delay childbearing and avoid out-of-wedlock births.	Susan	 Jekielek
2005	72	School Demography	Experimenting with School Attendance Area Free Lunch Estimates: A Census 2000 Special Tabulation Case Study	Free and Reduced-Price Lunch counts from the National School Lunch Program (NSLP) have become the de facto standard for identifying school-level poverty. Although these data have significant and well-known shortcomings, including age bias and administrative incentives to over-report disadvantaged students, no other systematic source of school-level poverty data currently exists. This lack of an independent, comparable school-level poverty indicator hampers attempts to evaluate NSLP data quality and program efficacy. This case study analysis used a GIS to define and construct boundary data for 233 schools in a large urban school system, and then applied Census 2000 sample data to create school-area estimates of Free Lunch and Reduced-Price Lunch eligible students. These school-area Census estimates were then compared to school-reported NSLP counts. The findings show a number of systematic differences between the reported and estimated values, even after accounting for differences in school demographics and NSLP data collection methods.	Douglas	 Geverdt
2005	72	School Demography	The School Closure Crisis: A Challenge for Demographers	Falling birth numbers after 1990 produced school enrollment declines nationwide. These declines, combined with funding difficulties, have resulted in many elementary schools closing, and by the end of the decade, middle and high school closures will follow. The number of California public schools closed in 2003 was four times the 2002 figure. This paper explores school closure patterns and their causes, with emphasis on California. Demographers can help decide whether school closures are warranted and which schools should be closed. We provide enrollment forecasts, by ethnicity if needed, to inform closure decisions. We analyze where students enroll versus where the live, as well as attendance-area forecasts showing which subareas of a school district are losing the most students. We help with housing forecasts, longitudinal student yield analyzes, and housing turnover studies. This paper provides case studies as well as explanations of demographic trends associated with school closure.	Jeanne	 Gobalet
2005	72	School Demography	Future Demographic Challenges to California School Districts	California’s distinctive demographics impose extraordinary demands on the state’s public education system, shaping current and future statewide educational needs. First, California has within its borders 12.8% of the nation’s school-age population but only 11.8% of the nation’s adult population (potential taxpayers). Consequently, California taxpayers shoulder disproportionate responsibility for persons of school age. Second, ethnic and racial diversity is advanced among California’s youth, and one-tenth of Californians are recent immigrants, generating an abundance of “English learners” and linguistically isolated households. Both these disparities heighten educational costs for affected school districts: English learners by imposing specialized and/or higher per capita staffing needs and linguistic isolation by hampering two-way communication between schools and parents. Third, the continuing geographic redistribution of population within the state will amplify public school enrollment growth in particular clusters of counties. Inevitably, particular school districts will be strained by enrollment pressure, staffing needs, and crowding of existing facilities.	Peter	A. Morrison
2005	72	School Demography	Educational Achievement of Adolescents: Does School Segregation Matter?	Little attention has been paid to the role of ethnic social capital in school context as a factor of academic achievement of adolescents. Multilevel modeling on nationally representative data (the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health) revealed that racial and ethnic composition of schools had no significant bearing on the academic outcomes of adolescents, while the income composition did. Moreover, the effect of friendship segregation not only exceeds those of school racial and ethnic composition and income composition but also figures as one of the strongest predictors of the academic achievement when all individual-level factors are controlled for. The results indicate that in schools where friendships are highly segregated by race and ethnicity students have better academic achievement than in schools where friendships are not segregated. Similarly, in schools where low-income students are concentrated the academic achievement is lower than in schools where the percentage of these students is low.	Igor	 Ryabov
2005	72	School Demography	Residential Instability as a Dimension of Rural Community/School District Disadvantage	Residential mobility is often thought to be voluntary, largely opportunity-related, and a primary means to improve economic well-being, quality of life, enter a better school district, or otherwise take advantage of greater opportunities at migration destinations. However, residential mobility associated with economic distress often does not fit these models. Frequent, often short distance residential movement across already distressed communities and school districts may be unplanned and involuntary. We analyze the special school district tabulation of Census 2000 data, and New York State BEDS data to examine local residential mobility within and across rural New York State school districts, exploring the relationship between local mobility levels and more standard metrics of community disadvantage. We discuss the implications of local residential instability for school districts and other community institutions, arguing that this movement may be understood as both a cause and consequence of community disadvantage, with disproportionately negative impacts for children and schools.	Kai	A. Schafft	Robin	M. Blakely
2005	73	Population Health and SES Disparities in the US and Canada	Trends in Area- and Individual-Level Socioeconomic Inequalities in U.S. All-Cause and Cancer Mortality, 1970-2000	Despite impressive reductions in overall U.S. mortality and subsequent increases in life expectancy during the latter half of the twentieth century, substantial disparities in mortality among various socioeconomic groups continue to exist, and in many instances, such disparities appear to be widening. Using national mortality data and the National Longitudinal Mortality Study, this paper analyzes trends in all-cause mortality across the life course by both area- and individual level socioeconomic factors (e.g., education, income, poverty, and area deprivation) from 1970 to 2000, showing a widening of the social gradient in male and female mortality over time for each age cohort. The paper also analyzes the dynamic nature of social disparities in mortality for all cancers combined and for such major cancers as lung, colon/rectum, prostate, breast, and cervix; and discusses policy implications of these disparities for cancer prevention and control and for overall health improvement in the United States.	Gopal	K. Singh
2005	73	Population Health and SES Disparities in the US and Canada	Trends in Area-Level Socioeconomic Inequality in Total and Cause-Specific Mortality in Canada from 1971 to 1998	This paper reanalyzes Canadian mortality data from 1971 through 1996, plus death data for 1997 and 1998 newly coded to small area. Attention is given to details which affect comparability with area-level analyzes of socioeconomic inequalities in the US: geographic level coded, nature of the area-level SES variable, method of construction of the quantiles (within regions or nationally), inclusion or exclusion of institutional residents, and size of the open age group. Probable impacts of each of these factors are discussed. Alternative analyzes will attempt to quantify the impacts, and to produce more comparable data for the evaluation of Canada-US differences in SES inequalities in mortality.	Russell	 Wilkins	Jean-Marie	 Berthelot
2005	73	Population Health and SES Disparities in the US and Canada	Joint Canada/United States Survey of Health: An Overview and First Results	International comparisons of health are often hampered by important differences in key aspects such as survey instrument, data collection methods, etc. The 2003 Joint Canada/US Survey of Health (JCUSH) represents the first time the same survey is conducted by national statistical offices to measure the health of both Canadian and US citizens, using standardized methodology. This presentation will briefly review the procedural and the methodological lessons learned in conducting JCUSH, and to discuss some of the first results obtained in the subsequent analyzes. For example, we will show comparisons between Canada and the United States of health status such as self-perceived health and mobility limitation, health risk behaviors such as smoking and body mass index and health care utilization such as unmet needs and visit to doctor or dentist. We also examine how these measures vary by important socio-demographic dimensions such as income and insurance status, where appropriate.	Edward	 Ng	François	 Gendron	Claudia	 Sanmartin	Jean-Marie	 Berthelot	Debra	L. Blackwell	Jane	 Gentleman	Michael	 Martinez	Catherine	 Simile
2005	73	Population Health and SES Disparities in the US and Canada	Health Profiles of Non-Institutionalized Senior Citizens in the U.S. and Canada: Findings from the Joint Canada/United States Survey of Health	Previous research has shown that Canadians are more likely to receive medical services and have higher hospital utilization rates than their United States counterparts, who are more likely to receive specialist care. In addition, health care contacts are higher in Canada than in the United States. However, much of this earlier research was limited to comparisons of regional/provincial data, which are not nationally representative. We use the Joint Canada/U.S. Survey of Health (JCUSH) to examine access to care, health status, and disability among non-institutionalized senior citizens in the United States and Canada (i.e., persons 65 years of age and older who live in private dwellings). Unlike previous data, the JCUSH are fully comparable data, in that the same instrument was used for interviewing both Canadian and U.S. respondents. Furthermore, when appropriately weighted, the Joint Survey data are representative of the populations of both countries.	Eve	 Powell-Griner	Debra	L. Blackwell
2005	74	Biodemography	Aging in the Wild	The objectives of this paper are to: (1)extend the ‘captive cohort life table’ (Mueller et al. 2004) which, with certain simplifying assumptions (stable, stationary), can be used to estimate survival and age structure in wild populations using the distribution of deaths of a randomly-selected group of individuals of unknown age; (2) describe a new model that can be used to estimate the age structure of any wild population based on remaining birth and/or death rates of captive individuals of unknown age if: i) age-specific vital rates are known, and ii) the probability of capturing individuals is not age-biased; (3) bring these models to bear on age-specific data derived from 1,000 wild-captured fruit flies from California, Greece and Mexico maintained in the laboratory post-capture; and (4) discuss the implications of the findings for biodemography in particular and for demography in general including the use of the basic concepts in demographic anthropology.	James	R. Carey	Nikos	 Papadopoulos	Pablo	 Liedo	Hans	 Muller	Jane-Ling	 Wang
2005	74	Biodemography	A New Estimate of Permanent Sterility by Age	The proportions of couples already sterile (definitely) by woman’s age have been estimated by various authors: Vincent, Henry, Trussell-Wilson, Leridon… These rates have been estimated either from the proportions of newly married couples remaining childless, or indirectly from observed distributions of ages at last live birth. This means that the level of sterility which is measured is the probability of being unable to have a live birth, not of conceiving: if a woman is unable to deliver a child after some age x, it may be because she is unable to conceive or because the pregnancy ends in a spontaneous abortion. For some applications it is unfortunate to mix up these two dimensions, the decrease of fecundability and the increase of foetal wastage when the woman (and possibly the man) gets older. We have derived new rates of sterility by age which might be later combined with the risks of spontaneous abortion.	Henri	F. Leridon
2005	74	Biodemography	Is a Baby Later in Life a Life Extending Event?	There are reports that a late birth may increase a mother’s or a father’s life span. The database used here includes all descendants of King George I of England (1660–1727) and his wife, Sophie Dorothea (1666–1726), born in the royal dynasties in Europe up to 1939 (n=1,672). These descendants formed the uppermost layer of the European aristocracy. A novel feature in this study is the use of pedigree information. In pairs of evermarried full sisters or full brothers, both surviving to 45 or 50 years, both having at least one child, the study examines whether the sibling with the first—or last—child born later in life also lived a longer life. This design controls for genetics, socioeconomic status, parity, social support, child mortality, birth cohort, and various environmental factors. In the 157 pairs of such sisters and 191 pairs of such brothers, later reproduction did not extend the life span.	Ulrich	 Mueller
2005	74	Biodemography	Do Grandmothers Promote Inclusive Fitness?: Evidence from the Utah Population Database	The Grandmother Hypothesis suggests that menopause stops a mother from investing in offspring that are less likely to survive to reproductive maturity and allows that investment to be applied to her earlier offspring and their progeny. This should increase a women's own inclusive fitness over what she could have realized by having more offspring of her own. There have been few tests of these hypotheses. We test key aspects of the hypothesis by using the Utah Population Data Base (UPDB) based on data from over 40,000 mothers, their mothers (and fathers), and 185,000 of their offspring, all drawn from a period of time reflecting natural fertility conditions in the Western frontier (mid to late 1800s). We find evidence indicating that grandmothers are associated with shorter birth intervals of their daughters, and favorable survival patterns for their grandchildren.	Ken	R. Smith	Edward	 Christenson	Alan	 Rogers
2005	75	Child Health and Socioeconomic Status	The Role of Community Context in Children's Health: Evidence from the Philippines	Over the last decade, there is accumulating evidence that the social environment at the community level exerts significant influence on the various behavioral and health outcomes of people living in them. Using multilevel models to separate out the variations in health outcomes that may be due to area-level factors from that of the characteristics of individuals and families, an increasing number of investigations using cross-sectional data show that independent of individual and family characteristics, where one lives matters. My research extends the work in this body of scholarship by using a longitudinal data to investigate the effects of the community socio-economic context on the survivorship and health of Filipino children. Aside from having the potential of establishing the social, behavioral and biological causal pathways between community context and health outcome, using longitudinal data allows for the examination of how changes in the community context affects health.	Marie	Joy B. Arguillas
2005	75	Child Health and Socioeconomic Status	Gender Differences in Child Survival in India: What Do We Know?	Even as mortality is declining and economic growth is accelerating, juvenile sex ratio in India has become more and more unfavorable towards girls. Research has focused on a number of predictors of excess female child mortality including poverty, family size, education, women’s education, employment and empowerment. However, empirical research consists of a patchwork of often contradictory findings. Results at micro level are often not supported by macro level observations and vice-versa. This paper examines the individual and community level influences on gender differences in infant and child survival in India using data 1998-99 National Family Health Survey which interviewed 89,199 ever-married women. Infant and child survival for 108,002 children born during the past 10 years is examined using hierarchical linear models.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Sonya	 Rastogi	Reeve	 Vanneman
2005	75	Child Health and Socioeconomic Status	The Effect of Socio-Economic Status (SES) on Likelihood of Sickness, Care-Seeking, and Choice of Provider for Children Under-Five in Ten Districts of Uganda	Logistic regression was used to test the association between SES and choice of first-level provider (public, private/NGO, and drug shop/traditional provider) for sick children under the age of five. Socio-economic status, as measured by asset-ownership, was not associated with probability of sickness, utilizing care, or the multinomial probability of choice of provider. A conditional logit model was also used to associate both provider characteristics and family SES to the provider that was visited (chosen) versus the second choice provider (not chosen). The conditional logit model showed a significant interaction effect of SES as measured by education of head of household and travel time. Those with any education were 38% less likely (OR=0.62, p=0.09) to choose a provider with an additional hour of travel time as compared to those with no education.	Gita	G. Mirchandani	David	 Bishai
2005	75	Child Health and Socioeconomic Status	Maternal Participation and Child Health in a Developing Setting	In recent years, the idea that participation in community activities may create network resources that in turn improve the well-being of individuals and families has gained considerable prominence among both researchers and policymakers. It has been suggested that the “social capital” generated from these networks may in some instances substitute for financial capital, particularly in poor communities or for poor households in developing countries. In this paper I assess the link between participation in community activities and health. Specifically, I ask whether children are healthier when their mothers are active within their communities. Panel data come from the 1997 and 2000 waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey. Preliminary results indicate that, in Indonesia, maternal community participation is positively related to child height-for-age in poorer households, mitigating the deleterious effects on health associated with living in a poor household. This relationship holds when community fixed effects are included in the estimations.	Jenna	 Nobles
2005	75	Child Health and Socioeconomic Status	Determinants of Children’s Growth in Height at the Individual, Family, and Community Level: The Case for Contemporary China	The central objective of the proposed research is to identify major determinants of children’s growth in height in contemporary China. First of all, I compare the relative importance between the effect of urban-rural divide and the effect of regional disparity on children’s growth in height. Second, I identify major determinants of children’s growth at the individual, family, and community level: 1) what are the effects of parental son preferences on differential growth trajectory of male and female children; 2) are there urban-rural differences in the effect of son preferences on children’s growth and; 3) how does the one-child-per-couple policy influence the effect of parental son preferences on children’s growth?    I will use data from the “China Health and Nutrition Survey” (CHNS), which is a panel research with multistage clustered sample of 3,800 households. I will use the currently available four panels (1989, 1991, 1993, and 1997) to estimate a set of multilevel growth models.	Shige	 Song
2005	76	Transition to Adulthood in Developed Countries	Association between Household Poverty and Adolescent Transitions to Union Formation and Parenthood in Europe: Evidence from the European Community Household Panel Survey	This study forms part of a larger scale international comparative study on timing and sequence of adolescent transitions to adulthood. In this paper, we use recent waves of the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) survey to examine the association between household poverty and adolescent transitions to union formation and parenthood in Europe. The analysis starts with an examination of the patterns in timing and sequence of adolescent transitions to union formation and parenthood using multi-state analysis. This is followed by an examination of the association between household poverty and the adolescent transition patterns. This part of the analysis features multilevel modeling to explore the role of contextual household and national factors on adolescent transitions, with particular reference to household poverty.	Monica	A. Magadi
2005	76	Transition to Adulthood in Developed Countries	Transition to Adulthood of Young Italian People: The Result of a CATI Survey	The paper analyzes transition to adulthood of two groups of Italian generations: the first group aged 23-27 and the second one 33-37. The study is based on the results of a  CATI survey conducted in the first half of 2004, consisting of a representative national sample of 3083 individuals.  We explore individuals' choices related to the processes that compose the transition to adulthood. The aim of the paper is to assess how the sequence of the steps  and/or the postponing of some steps - such as leaving parental house and entering a union - can affect  fertility behavior.  We therefore analyze the transition processes to all events of the life course as interrelating mechanisms, but where all are considered indispensable for choosing to have a child. In a longitudinal perspective, we also examine with respect to the younger cohort, detailed intentions and the prevalence of early home leavers.	Stefano	 Mazzuco	Letizia	 Mencarini	Rosella	 Rettaroli
2005	76	Transition to Adulthood in Developed Countries	Transitions to Work for Racial, Ethnic, and Immigrant Groups	The youth population of the United States is becoming increasingly diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, and nativity. We demonstrate that the patterns of transition from school-age to work-age are substantially different across demographic groups. For foreign-born youth, we explore school attendance and work behavior by origin and age of arrival. For U.S.-born youth, we use longitudinal data to investigate the determinants of racial and ethnic differences in educational attainment, work, and teen fertility. We also explore the association between poor starts for youth and future outcomes. We argue that the diversity of the youth population has important consequences for designing and evaluating programs for youth.	Deborah	S. Reed	Christopher	 Jepsen	Laura	 Hill
2005	76	Transition to Adulthood in Developed Countries	Leaving the Parental Home in Poland	This study describes trends in the process of leaving the parental home in Poland. Because of dramatic changes in Polish society after the breakdown of the Communist regime, a significant alteration of the determinants of leaving home is hypothesized. This is examined with data from the Polish retrospective survey, which was carried out in 2001. With the help of piecewise linear event history regressions the explanatory significance of demographic (number of siblings), social (composition of household), and economic (occupational status of parents, region of residence, educational level of respondents) factors on the timing of leaving home is investigated. First results show that leaving home before 1989 was highly dependent on marital formation and education enrollment. In general, young people left their home in order to set up new households. Further, more detailed analyzes (competing risk models) will examine whether this pattern remains stable or whether other factors became influential.	Kamil	 Sienkiewicz
2005	77	The Latino Population: Change and Continuity	The Incorporation of Hispanics into the US Health System Considering the Roles of Nativity, Duration and Citizenship: A Case for Acculturation?	This research examines differences in access to and sources of health care for adults among major Hispanic sub-populations of the United States in comparison to non-Hispanic Whites and Blacks, while considering the influences of nativity, duration and citizenship. Using the National Health Interview Survey from 1999-2001, logistic and mulitnomial regression models are estimated. Mexican American and Other Hispanics were less likely to report access to care in comparison to Non-Hispanic whites. Furthermore, Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans and Other Hispanics were much more likely in comparison to Non-Hispanic whites to report the use of a clinic and the emergency room than a private doctor’s office as their source of regular medical care. The impact of nativity, duration and citizenship explain much of the differentials in access to and sources of a regular source of care among Hispanic sub-groups.	Elizabeth	 Durden	Robert	A. Hummer
2005	77	The Latino Population: Change and Continuity	Inter-Hispanic Families: Trends and Implications for the Latino and U.S. Populations	Immigration and higher fertility has fueled growth of the Latino population in recent decades. Increases in inter-Hispanic marriages and families are another factor in Latino population growth. We examined public-use microdata from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses, and found that inter-Hispanic marriages have increased over time, from less than 1 percent of married couples in 1970 to over 3 percent in 2000. There has also been an increasing trend of Hispanic identification among children in inter-Hispanic families. The proportion of children in inter-Hispanic families who were reported as Hispanic grew from 43 percent in 1970 to 66 percent in 1980, a trend that has since stabilized. Since younger, better-educated, and native-born Hispanics are more likely to marry non-Hispanics, the findings suggest that inter-Hispanic marriages and family formation have been and will continue to be important factors in the future growth and composition of the U.S. Latino population.	Barry	 Edmonston	Sharon	M. Lee
2005	77	The Latino Population: Change and Continuity	New Hispanic Destinations and Public Policy Impacts in Rural America	Rapid and sizeable nonmetro Hispanic population growth has drawn substantial scholarly attention due to both the new geographies of recent migration flows as well as the public policy implications inherent in demographic differences - particularly age, gender, and household composition - between local residents and recent migrants. Such differences often stem from the process and logic of labor migration itself. We demonstrate how Hispanic population growth in new destinations translates into public policy outcomes through differences in demographic profiles between residents and in-migrants, focusing on characteristics at the national level for nonmetropolitan counties. We compare and contrast demographic characteristics of Hispanics in nonmetro counties where their populations are rapidly growing, established, and relatively insignificant, for 1990 and 2000. We then assess the impacts of Hispanic in-migration on indicators of public service demand, specifically schooling, health care, and housing. Ethnographic case studies provide qualitative support for our quantitative findings.	William	A. Kandel	Emilio	A. Parrado
2005	77	The Latino Population: Change and Continuity	A Sociodemographic Profile of Elderly Mexicans in the United States: The Case of the 0.25 Generation and Beyond	The Mexican experience in the U.S. has been shaped by international migration. Researchers have demonstrated that foreign-born Mexicans that came to the United States at an early age tend to have more favorable social and economic outcomes. Unfortunately, there is limited information on the social and economic fortunes of Mexicans on the other side of the life course—the elderly. We use data from the 2000 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) to examine the outcomes of six subgroups of Mexican elderly on selected social, economic, and health characteristics. The findings indicate that elderly immigrants that came to the U.S. when they were 65 or older tend to have higher levels of labor force participation and lower disability rates. The paper concludes with a discussion of the contributions of the results to the 1.5-generation and the epidemiological paradox literatures.	Rogelio	 Saenz	Mercedes	 Rubio
2005	78	Child Work and Schooling	School Dropout, Adolescent Labor and Family Structures in Mexico	This paper has two main goals. First, it documents the characteristics of adolescents’ school attendance and labor status in Mexico. Second, it identifies the influence of family characteristics and organization on adolescents’ schooling and work. Analysis of the link between family type and adolescents’ enrollment helps us understand how the transitions out of school and into the labor force occur during adolescence in Mexico. This work uses information from a 1997 nationally representative survey and multivariate techniques to look at the determinants of adolescent children’s educational and labor status. The analysis focuses on three dimensions related to family characteristics: the child’s corresidence status relative to parents, the mother’s working status, and the presence of extended kin (working or not working) in the household.	Silvia	Elena  Giorguli Saucedo
2005	78	Child Work and Schooling	When is Child Work Hazardous? Evidence from the SIMPOC Surveys	In 1999, the International Labor Organization's member countries unanimously adopted Convention 182 that calls for the urgent elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor. The Convention unambiguously identifies three forms to be targeted, namely forced labor, prostitution, and illicit activities. Hazardous work, a fourth and less-defined category is also included, and forms the largest category of the worst forms. ILO guidelines for identifying hazardous child work are phrased in subjective terms. We define and demonstrate a methodology for identifying hazardous forms using objective health measures from three child labor surveys. Each survey uses different questions to measure work and health and has its own benefits and limitations. We explore these and identify important commonalities and discrepancies. We refine current methods of analysis by considering how type of work, gender, age and development affect the risk of occupational injury. We treat household chores as work and consider their hazards separately.	Sarah	 Gormly	Amy	 Ritualo
2005	78	Child Work and Schooling	Children's Work and Schooling Outcomes in Indonesia	This paper examines the association between gender and sibship composition on children’s time use patterns across four activities—schooling, market oriented labor, non-market labor such as housework/childcare activities, and leisure. Using time allocation data collected from Indonesia, the quantitative results show gender divisions in children’s work activities with girls’ being primarily responsible for housework/childcare duties and boys’ primarily responsible for market oriented work. Having a younger sibling under the age of six increases the workload of both boys and girls; however, these increases in workload do not parallel decreases in schooling but parallel decreases in leisure. The qualitative data collected from focus groups conducted in Indonesia show that parents are reluctant to trade-off their children’s schooling time for labor and that parents wish to educate both their sons and daughters. Taken together, the results may suggest that children’s leisure time is a trade-off for work rather than schooling time for work.	Amy	 Hsin
2005	78	Child Work and Schooling	Children's Work and Mothers' Work - What is the Connection?	Does employment of mothers in poor countries pull children into the labor force? This question has not been explored in literatures on women’s employment and on child labor. In much of the developing world, statistics show fairly rapid increases in women’s labor force participation. A priori, it is not clear whether this trend has any effect on children’s work activities. There is a long history of analyzing the determinants of women’s employment and, more recently, a sizeable literature has focused on child labor. However, while studies of women’s employment often include measures of household composition, they do not explicitly consider the activities of children as being jointly determined with those of the women. Similarly, studies of child work and schooling typically control for exogenous characteristics of the mother, but do not jointly model her employment status. We examine the relationship between children’s and mothers’ employment using 2001 data from Brazil.	Deborah	 Levison	Deborah	S. DeGraff
2005	79	Advances in Healthy Life Expectancy Research	How Does Use of ‘Special’ Equipment Affect the Black-White Gap in Active Life Expectancy	Health differences between whites and blacks in the United States have been well documented. While considerable research has found black disadvantage in self-rated health, mortality, and disability, less work has examined the role of equipment use in this health comparison. We examine race differences in active life expectancy (ALE) and disabled life expectancy (DLE) by focusing on differences between these groups by their use/non-use of special equipment. We examine differences in each ADL-specific ALE and DLE using a Bayesian life-table approach. This method includes the ability to compute life expectancies with empirical intervals that allow for direct statistical comparison of group differences. Our initial findings indicate that the use of special equipment does inform the observed black-white differences in ALE and DLE. These findings vary by the particular ADL being examined and by gender. Implications regarding future research on race differences in health and implications for health policy are discussed.	J.	Scott  Brown	Scott	M. Lynch
2005	79	Advances in Healthy Life Expectancy Research	Trends in Disability in France over the Two Past Decades in the Light of the International Context and the Theoretical Explanations for the Disability Pattern	For the third time in France, the national health survey, conducted in 1980-1981, 1991-1992 and 2002-2003, includes the same general question on disability and allows to continue the chronological series initiated in 1980 : over the 1980's the French population experienced a decreasing prevalence for the severe and moderate levels of disability. As this most favorable situation appeared to be atypical compared to what happened elsewhere, this third point in the French series allows to assess whether these trends continued. Additional questions allow to further describe the population reporting disability, using detailed questions on different dimensions of functional health. This complementary analysis, which was not possible in the previous periods, suggests the underlying mechanisms explaining the French trends. These new results contribute to the international debate while conclusions are not so congruent from one country to another.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Pierre	 Mormiche
2005	79	Advances in Healthy Life Expectancy Research	Decomposing the Urban-Rural Gap in Life and Active Life Expectancies: Why Do Urban Elderly in Beijing Live Longer Healthier Lives than Their Rural Counterparts?	Broad differences exist in social and economic life between urban and rural areas of China. In this study, we use measures of life and active life expectancies to examine whether and how urban-rural differences extend to mortality and functional health experiences of Chinese elderly. Using a multistate life table method, we first estimate life and active life expectancies for men and women in urban and rural areas to examine the extent of the differences. We then decompose differences into five possible factors underlying the urban-rural gap, including levels of social support, socioeconomic characteristics, health behaviors, chronic health conditions, and access to health services. Our preliminary results show older adults in urban areas have distinct advantages with respect to both life and active life expectancies over their rural counterparts and differences can be largely explained by the urban-rural gap in socioeconomic status and access to health care.	Toshiko	 Kaneda	Zachary	 Zimmer	Zhe	 Tang	Xianghua	 Fang
2005	79	Advances in Healthy Life Expectancy Research	Active Life Expectancy of the Elderly Japanese: 1987, 1990 and 1999	In a number of countries changes in health over the past   two decades have been documented. For instance, in both   France and the United States disability decreased over the   last two decades but the prevalence of some major diseases   increased. We estimate active life expectancy in 1987, 1990   and 1999 in order to examine changes in the level of   disability among the elderly Japanese over the period   employing two nationally representative longitudinal   surveys conducted in Japan. The questions we address are:   1) Were there changes in active life expectancy over the   period? 2) Do changes in active life expectancy, if any,   differ by severity of disability? 3) Do changes in active   life expectancy differ by gender?	Yasuhiko	 Saito	Eileen	 Crimmins
2005	80	Religion and Religiosity: Trends and Patterns	Religious Affiliation and Participation as Determinants of Women's Educational Attainment and Wages	Using a human capital model, this paper develops hypotheses about how religious affiliation and participation during childhood influence years of schooling completed and subsequent performance in the labor market as measured by wages. The hypotheses are tested using data from the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth, a large-scale survey addressed to a representative sample of women in the United States. Religious affiliation is found to have a significant impact on years of schooling completed, with the effects being particularly pronounced for Jews and conservative Protestants. The impact of religious affiliation on wages largely mirrors its influence on educational attainment, although evidence of additional effects operating through other channels is also uncovered. In addition, the results show that young women who attend religious services frequently during childhood go on to complete more years of schooling than their less observant counterparts.	Evelyn	 Lehrer
2005	80	Religion and Religiosity: Trends and Patterns	Conservative Protestantism and Church Attendance Effects on Teen Pregnancy and Pregnancy Outcomes	This paper investigates the effect of conservative protestant upbringing and church attendance on teen pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes for a cohort of non-Hispanic White women who were at risk for teen pregnancy during the early 1980s. Multivariate models show that lower teen pregnancy rates are associated with frequent church attendance for all religious groups (including non-religious) and that conservative protestants generally have higher rates of teen pregnancy than other groups. However, devout conservative Protestants showed the lowest rates of teen pregnancy.	Daniel	A. Powers	Christopher	G. Ellison
2005	80	Religion and Religiosity: Trends and Patterns	Religious Involvement and HIV Risk: Initial Results from a Panel Study of Rural Malawians	Although some scholars have identified religion as a possibly important protective factor in the AIDS pandemic in Sub-Saharan Africa, evidence concerning the relationship between religion and AIDS behavior there remains sparse. Using a sample of married men from rural Malawi, we examine whether or not AIDS risk behavior and perceived risk are associated with religious affiliation or with religious involvement. Our analyzes of survey data from the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (2001) reveal few differences in risk-behavior and perceived risk according to religious affiliation. However, regular attendance at religious service is associated both with reduced odds of reporting extramarital partners and with lower levels of perceived risk of infection. Qualitative data analyzes of religious services in rural Malawi (2004) reveal that messages concerning morality in general, sexual morality in particular, illness, and HIV may constitute a key pathway in support of the survey evidence.	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2005	80	Religion and Religiosity: Trends and Patterns	Association of Religious Participation with Health and Survival among the Oldest-Old in China	Based on a unique longitudinal data set collected in 1998, 2000, and 2002 of the oldest-old aged 80-105 in China, we found that religious participants were significantly healthier than those who are non-participants, adjusting for demographic, family, social support/connection and health practice factors. The parametric survival model after correcting intra-subject correlations revealed that the overall risk of dying was 20% lower for the religious participants over a two-year follow-up period than for the non-participants, adjusted for demographic factors. The reduced risk was slightly lessened (17-18%) but remained statistically significant after controlling for family/social support and connections, and health practices. After the health conditions were added to the model as controlling variables, the beneficial effect of religious participation on survival was marginally significant. Separate models for the oldest old males and females indicate that the association between religious participation and health/survival was much stronger for women than for men.	Yi	 Zeng	Danan	 Gu	Linda	K. George
2005	81	Evolutionary Demography	When Senescence is Optimal and When it is Not	The age-trajectories of fertility and mortality are the two basic schedules in demography and the two fundamental functions in life-history biology and evolutionary theory.  Understanding the evolutionary-demographic forces that shape the age-trajectories of fertility and mortality is therefore a topic of the most profound interest and   importance in demography and biology. The main purpose of this research is to investigate the conditions that differentiate between the evolution of senescent versus   non-senescent life-history strategies. A senescent strategy is associated with increasing mortality and decreasing fertility with age. A non-senescent strategy is associated with constant or decreasing mortality and constant or increasing fertility with age.	Annette	 Baudisch
2005	81	Evolutionary Demography	Demographic Ethology: Adaptive and Non-Adaptive Functions of Age-Specific Behavioral Characteristics in Fruit Flies	The broad objective of this paper is to integrate life history theory, with its emphasis on demography, and ethology with its emphasis on evolutionary roots of animal behavior. Remarkably there appear to be only two sets of literature that contain information on age-specific behavioral characteristics: i) social insects (as Wilson states: “It would be difficult to overestimate the complexity of age polyethism… every category of social and individual behavior studied so far has proven to be affected … by age.” and ii) recent papers by Papadopoulos and co-workers on age-specific behavior in medflies (e.g supine behavior). There is no literature which establishes a coherency between demography and behavior. The specific goals of the current paper are to: i) present age-specific behavioral data on both the Mediterranean fruit fly and Drosophila; ii) interpret this behavior in adaptive, evolutionary contexts; and iii) generalize the concept of demographic ethology to include other species (including humans).	James	R. Carey	Nikos	 Papadopoulos	Hans	 Muller	Jane-Ling	 Wang
2005	81	Evolutionary Demography	The Evolution of Intergenerational Transfers and Longevity: An Optimal Life History Approach	How would resources be allocated among fertility, survival, and growth in an optimal life history? The budget constraint assumed by past treatments limits the energy used by each individual at each instant to what it produces at that instant. We develop explicit solutions for this case, extending the current literature that presents numerical solutions and permitting comparative static analysis. Then we consider under what conditions energy transfers from adults (parental care), which relax the rigid constraint by permitting energetic dependency and faster growth for the young, would be advantageous. In a sense, such transfers permit borrowing and lending across the life history. We show that if such transfers are advantageous, then increased survival will co-evolve with transfers. Our formal analysis is most relevant for the demographic context of cooperative breeders, but we expect that the results will hold more generally.	Cyrus	 Chu	Ronald	 Lee
2005	81	Evolutionary Demography	Demography and Food in Early Polynesia	The analysis of prehistoric demography requires a robust understanding of demographic rates and their changes, of food production in relation to agriculture, technology and soils, and of their interactions. We discuss the limitations of some key ideas, including Malthusian limits, carrying capacity, marginal areas, and sustainability. To address the limitations of demographic models, we suggest a data-driven approach that extracts the most from data on early humans – we illustrate this by developing a new model mortality schedule for prehistoric populations. To address the dynamics of food and soils, we describe a model of nutrient-cycling dynamics and explore the effects of different levels of harvesting intensity under water and nitrogen limitation. We interpret these results in terms of their likely effects on food availability. Such a modeling approach can provide a solid basis for analyzing productivity, resilience and sustainability over long time scales in prehistory.	Shripad	 Tuljapurkar
2005	81	Evolutionary Demography	Mutation Selection Balance in Biodemography	What evolutionary principles underlie rises in  mortality with age? Mutation accumulation  mediated by mutation-selection balance is among the oldest  answers to this question. A new mathematical model for  mutation-selection balance has been developed jointly  with David Steinsaltz and Steve Evans. This paper  applies that model to controversial cases in  biodemography, including proposals for explaining  Gompertz hazard functions, for dealing with the  breakdown known as the Wall of Death'' and for  incorporating social support and resource constraints  into the evolutionary theory of senescence.	Kenneth	 Wachter
2005	82	Gender Inequality in Developing Countries	Do Women's Land Rights Promote Empowerment and Child Health in Nepal?	Women’s land rights are increasingly put forth as a means to advance development by empowering women, increasing productivity, and promoting welfare and well-being. However, little empirical research has evaluated these claims. I use the 2001 Nepal Demographic and Health Survey to explore whether women’s land rights empower women and benefit young children’s health. Linear and logistic regression models provide evidence that land rights empower women by increasing their control over household decision making. Logistic regression models using indicators of nutritional status also support the hypothesis that women’s land rights benefit children’s health. Children of mothers who own land are significantly less likely to be severely underweight or stunted.	Keera	 Allendorf
2005	82	Gender Inequality in Developing Countries	Women's Empowerment in Rural Bangladesh: Insights from Longitudinal Data	In the past decade significant progress has been made in the conceptualization of women’s empowerment but challenges remain in the development of meaningful operational indicators. We use cross-sectional and longitudinal data from 1994 and 2002 surveys in rural Bangladesh to explore changes over time in the level and correlates of eight indicators of women’s empowerment. Using both cross-sectional and cohort samples we a) compare empowerment scores in 1994 and 2002 to identify changes over time and the degree of co-variance in the individual indicators; b) compare the correlates of empowerment (micro-credit and education) in 1994 and 2002, and examine the association between these factors and changes in empowerment over time among the cohort; and c) compare the association between empowerment and family planning use in 1994 with that in 2002 to determine the extent to which the empowerment scores remain salient predictors of family planning over time.	Lisa	M. Bates	Joanna	 Maselko	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler
2005	82	Gender Inequality in Developing Countries	Marriage and Motherhood: Influences on Women’s Power in Sexual Relationships	This paper examines how the institutions of “marriage” and “motherhood” shape women’s power in marital sexual relationships. We analyze qualitative data from research on married men and women in South India. Both men and women consider marriage and motherhood key in defining a woman. Although women are constrained in multiple ways by marriage and motherhood, they also create spaces for resistance and negotiation within these contexts, often by conforming to their expected roles of wife and mother or by highlighting societal expectations regarding men’s duties and responsibilities as husbands and fathers. For example, if a husband reneges on his role as provider, a wife can refuse sex or exercise her control in other ways. In our paper, we explore how programs addressing women’s and men’s vulnerability to HIV and other sexually transmitted infections may take into account the influences of the institutions of “marriage” and “motherhood.”	Suneeta	 Krishnan	Sanghamitra	 Iyengar	Rohini	P. Pande	Kalyani	 Subbiah	Eva	 Roca	Anuradha	 R	Diana	M. Measham
2005	82	Gender Inequality in Developing Countries	Migration and Relationship Power among Mexican Women	This paper draws on original data collected in Durham, NC and four sending communities in Mexico to examine the impact of migration on women’s relationship power. We analyze the personal, relationship, and social resources that condition the impact of migration on women’s power, and evaluate the usefulness of the recently presented Relationship Control Scale (RCS) for capturing these effects. We find support for perspectives that emphasize that migration can simultaneously mitigate and reinforce gender inequities. While Mexican women in the U.S. gain relative to their non-migrant peers in terms of emotional consonance with their partners, they lose with respect to relationship control and sexual negotiation. Methodologically, we find the RCS internally valid and useful for measuring the impact of resources on women’s power. However, the scale appears to combine diverse dimensions of relationship power that in our case were differentially affected by migration.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2005	83	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Toward a Broader View of Utilization: A Critical Review of the Literature on Utilization of Operations Research in Reproductive Health Programs	Encouraging health program managers to incorporate research findings into program operations is a priority of international organizations such as WHO and USAID. This paper reviews the literature on the use of operations research results by reproductive health programs and identifies conceptual, methodological and analytical obstacles to providing reliable guidelines for increasing the use of operations research results by reproductive health programs. The paper also argues for an improved conceptual framework and methodological techniques. The definition of utilization must be expanded to include both positive and negative research results, studies of utilization must be both prospective and retrospective, and the focus of utilization research must move beyond a simple enumeration of factors influencing the use of results to the identification of variables that discriminate between use and non-use, and that identify factors that can be manipulated to increase the likelihood of results utilization.	James	 Foreit	Celeste	 Marin	Karen	 Foreit
2005	83	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Quality of Care in China: From Pilot Project to National Program	China’s family planning program ranks as history’s most intensive effort to control national population growth. While many have lauded China’s effort to limit births as a fundamental part of its sustainable development goals, the population policy has also generated much international criticism. A long overdue reform of its approach to implementing the family planning program has begun to re-focus the program on client needs, informed choice of contraceptives, and better quality services. Originally inspired by the Cairo ICPD conference, the reform program began as a pilot project among six counties and has now become a blueprint for re-orienting the national family planning program. This article reviews the process by which a small innovative pilot project was scaled up into a national reform effort and the lessons learned about scaling up sensitive but needed innovation in a difficult political environment.	Joan	 Kaufman	Erli	 Zhang	Zhenming	 Xie
2005	83	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	The Dilemma of Past Success: Insiders’ Views on the Future of the International Family Planning Movement	The international family planning movement is believed by many to have played a significant role in reducing fertility levels in the developing world. Yet, the perceived success of family planning programs has led to recent questions about their relevance and future place on the development policy agenda. Within a framework derived from the sociological literature on social movements, we use interviews and focus group discussions with population insiders to examine current perspectives on the status and future of the family planning movement, factors contributing to its declining international visibility, the apparent consequences of this decline, and possible responses from the family planning field. Informants cited four possible directions of action for the movement: 1) forming strategic alliances with other movements, specifically HIV/AIDS; 2) repositioning the family planning message to mobilize and strengthen support; 3) improving service delivery to broaden public acceptance and use; and 4) nurturing and inspiring new leadership.	Amy	 Tsui	Ann	K. Blanc
2005	83	Reproductive Health in Developing Countries	Sex without Birth or Death: A Story of Two International Humanitarian Movements	In this paper we compare two international movements aimed at changing two demographic processes, birth and death, in developing countries. The aim of the first is to reduce fertility by interrupting the connection between sex and birth. The aim of the second movement is to reverse the AIDS pandemic by interrupting the connection between sex and death. We show that despite the differences in aims and in time-periods, both movements are strikingly similar. In both, the problem and its solution were defined internationally, and exported to developing countries through donor support and technical assistance. A standard choreography was developed in the population movement: this choreography was transferred to the AIDS control movement with little alteration, despite fundamental differences between birth and death. We show the similarities and differences between the two movements, and their contexts, in detail, and speculate about the causes of these similarities and differences.	John	G. Cleland
2005	84	The Social Impact of HIV/AIDS on Families and Households	Adult Mortality and the Long-Run Impact on Households	Using a unique panel data from Tanzania, this study evaluates the long-run impact of adult mortality on the economic well-being of households. This research will add to our understanding of coping processes and long-term outcomes of this major health shock and address important questions: Do long-run coping mechanisms differ from short-run adjustments? Are some types of households buffered from shocks more than others? Does AIDS increase poverty despite short-run coping and is AIDS a poverty trap for future generations? The panel data is unique in that it will allow us to link individual positions from 1991 to 2004. This is achieved via a careful tracking of individuals initially interviewed at the baseline, even if it involves individuals that have split-off from the original households, or if the original households as an entity have ceased to exist.	Kathleen	 Beegle	Stefan	 Dercon	Joachim	 De Weerdt
2005	84	The Social Impact of HIV/AIDS on Families and Households	The Probability of Maternal Orphanhood Under a Generalized AIDS Epidemic	Using stable population theory and AIDS-decremented model life tables, I build on the work of Lotka and Henry to develop a method to estimate the probability of orphanhood conditional on surviving to some age based on an analysis of first passage times of a Markov chain. I calculate the conditional probability that a girl who survives to adulthood has a living mother. Mortality decrements in the characteristic AIDS shape nearly double the conditional probability of orphanhood for all ages compared to a mortality schedule with the same life expectancy but no AIDS mortality. Fertility has a small effect and this is a function of the shape of the net maternity function. Despite the limitations, this analysis provides important qualitative insights into the demographic processes that link HIV disease and aggregate demographic outcomes. I suggest possibilities for future work in which the assumptions of the present analysis are relaxed.	James	H. Jones
2005	84	The Social Impact of HIV/AIDS on Families and Households	Education and Nutritional Status of Orphans and Children of HIV-Infected Parents in Kenya	We examine how school enrollment and nutritional status of orphans and children of HIV-infected parents differ from children of non-HIV-infected parents in Kenya. We also examine how parental and family characteristics differ between children of HIV-infected parents and children of non-HIV-infected parents. Our analysis is based on data from the 2003 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). The 2003 Kenya DHS is the first population-based nationally-representative survey to link individual HIV test results with the full set of behavioral, social, and demographic indicators included in the survey. Data are analyzed using both descriptive and multivariate statistical methods. Initial results indicate that 11 percent of children are orphaned and that these children are both nutritionally and educationally disadvantaged. Seven percent of Kenyan adults are HIV positive—9 percent of women and 5 percent of men. We determine whether children of HIV-infected parents are subject to greater disadvantage in health and education.	Vinod	 Mishra	Fred	 Arnold	Fredrick	 Otieno	Anne	R. Cross
2005	84	The Social Impact of HIV/AIDS on Families and Households	HIV-AIDS Morbidity and Mortality: Impact on Intra-Household Time Allocation of Rural Malawian Women and Men	Malawi is one of the countries seriously affected by HIV-AIDS. Adult HIV-prevalence is 14.2%, the eighth largest in the world. HIV-AIDS is the leading cause of death among those aged 20-49. These deaths can have serious implications on surviving members. AIDS morbidity and mortality are reported to be reducing the time that adults can spend on income generating activities, with the burden of care largely borne by women. However, no systematic analysis of adult male and female time allocation has been done to show this. This study will analyze determinants of time allocation decisions for Malawian adult males and females. Data on about 1,500 currently married women and their husbands will be used. The data were collected in 3 districts of rural Malawi in March to August 2004. Biomarker data on HIV-AIDS and STI illnesses was also collected. In addition, a time allocation diary was administered.	Ari	 Van Assche
2005	84	The Social Impact of HIV/AIDS on Families and Households	Orphans: The Second Wave of the AIDS Epidemic	There are roughly 143 million orphans in 93 countries of the developing world--children and youth under age 18 whose mother, father or both parents have died. Of these, about 15 million are orphans due to AIDS; four-fifths of them live in Africa. World-wide, AIDS is the leading cause of death for people ages 15-49, the prime child bearing ages. If the increase in people infected by HIV is the first wave, the rise in deaths due to AIDS and the rise in the number of orphans can be considered the second wave. This paper addresses four questions: What is special about orphans due to AIDS? What are their greatest needs? What programmatic approaches seem to be most promising in reaching them? And what are some of the research priorities?	Nancy	 Williamson
2005	85	Demography of the Middle East and North Africa	How Much Work is Too Much? Thresholds in the Effect of Child Work on Schooling -- The Case of Egypt	Child and youth work in developing countries is often assumed to have negative effects on schooling, regardless of the amount of work being performed. However, in the U.S., limited amounts of work have been found to be beneficial for child development, including performance in school. In this paper we examine how many hours of work can be undertaken before negative effects on school attendance are observed in Egypt. Elsewhere, we established that work for 14+ hours per week has a negative impact on schooling for both boys and girls, when girls’ work included time spent on household tasks. Here, we jointly estimate hours worked and school attendance using methods that allow us to test for the presence of thresholds in the effect of child work on schooling.	Ragui	 Assaad	Deborah	 Levison
2005	85	Demography of the Middle East and North Africa	Fertility Transition in the Middle East and North Africa: What Coale’s Indices Tell Us?	This study examines fertility of Muslim populations to contribute to fertility transition theory. Change in peoples’ worldviews is hypothesized as a trigger of processes behind driving fertility decline. Developmental Idealism and Islamic Reformism fuel this process. I present cluster analyzes of 26 countries of the Middle East and North Africa, using simple and composite fertility, socioeconomic, and policy indices. The aim is to uncover the internal structure of the data in support of pre-defined ideal types. I discuss the sample’s composition and the data, define patterns of fertility decline, and present the results of three multivariate cluster analysis models which link together the fertility indices and quantitative as well as qualitative explanatory variables. The results support classification of countries on the path of fertility transition along the line of DI. They uncover distinctive and common attributes of each cluster that have explanatory and predictive values with regard to fertility transition.	Hani	A. Guend
2005	85	Demography of the Middle East and North Africa	Infant Mortality in Egypt: Exploring the Role of Prenatal Care, and Implications for Public Policy	This study examines the importance of prenatal care and maternal education with regard to infant death in Egypt. Birth history data from Egypt Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS) 2000 are used to model the log odds of a child dying in the first year of life during the five-year period prior to survey. The analysis is three-fold. First, log probability models are used to arrive at accurate estimates of 1q0 and 4q1. Second, generalized linear models are used to examine the bivariate relationships between infant mortality and various determinants, including prenatal care, maternal education, birth order, sex of child, and type of place of residence. Lastly, the effects of these variables are analyzed in a multivariate context. We find that while several factors reduce the odds of infant death, it is prenatal care that maintains magnitude and significance in the multivariate analysis. Timely and important policy implications are offered.	George	J. Lara	Thomas	W. Pullum
2005	85	Demography of the Middle East and North Africa	Socioeconomic and Institutional Factors Underlying Fertility Stagnation among Muslims in Israel	The fertility of Muslims in Israel began a dramatic decline from levels near 8 children per woman in the 1950s to a little over 4 in the early 1980s. However, since then the apparent fertility transition appears to have stalled. Our study explores the role of household and community level forces in the stalled transition of Muslims in Israel using uniquely constructed, multilevel, merged dataset which links census data from 1983 and 1995 with birth registration records and additional community level indicators. We evaluate a number of potential explanations for the stagnation in fertility. Our analyzes are based on both fixed and random-effects models allowing us to both explore the role of heterogeneity in community effects on fertility as well as to attempt to purge unobservable differences between communities from the analysis.	Michael	 Shalev	Guy	 Stecklov
2005	86	Social Inequality and Health	Job Security and Health Outcomes in the United States	Empirical evidence has shown that job insecurity and unemployment are hazardous to an individual’s health. Job security appears to have declined in the United States in recent decades, and there is some evidence that differences in beliefs about job loss across subgroups of workers in the 1990s accurately reflected their relative likelihoods of involuntary job loss. In this study, we focus on the relative impacts of perceived and actual job insecurity on the health of U.S. workers. We use data from two longitudinal studies to (1) Assess the relationship between perceived risk of job loss and actual incidence of job loss, and examine the distribution of each, (2) Examine the effects of both job insecurity and actual involuntary employment termination on health outcomes, and (3) Explore some of the possible mechanisms for the relationship between job insecurity and physical and mental health.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Jennie	E. Brand
2005	86	Social Inequality and Health	Educational Differences in All-Cause and Cause-Specific Adult Mortality--Evidence from Bulgaria, Finland and the United States	We analyze educational differentials in all-cause and cause-specific mortality at working ages in Bulgaria, Finland, and the United States during the 1990s. The three countries are characterized by large differences in social and economic structure and historical development as well as differences in health behaviors and access to preventive and curative health care. In particular, we analyze whether cross-country mortality differentials are uniform across the education gradient or whether they are primarily concentrated among individuals with low levels of schooling. We also investigate whether educational differentials in mortality vary by gender or marital status. Finally, we examine whether educational disparities in cause-specific mortality differ among the three countries. International comparisons of educational differences in all-cause and cause-specific mortality shed light on the possible role of health policy and social and economic context on SES inequalities in mortality and the extent to which such inequalities vary by context.	Iliana	V. Kohler	Irma	T. Elo	Pekka	 Martikainen	Kirsten	 Smith
2005	86	Social Inequality and Health	Labor Displacement and Health: Investigating Alternative Causal Pathways	There is significant evidence documenting a positive association between labor displacement and poor health. However, the relative importance of alternative causal pathways behind this relationship remains unclear. Displacement may increase the risk of poor health; however, poor health may also make it difficult to keep a job. In this paper, I use multiple analytic strategies and both random effects and individual-level fixed effects models in an effort to untangle these issues. Emphasizing displacements that result from companies going out of business, relocating, or closing plants, I consider how job loss that is independent of baseline health status influences later health status. Estimating the consequences of labor displacement within occupational categories, I further consider how job loss influences health, net of selection into varying occupations. Preliminary results suggest that, while health-based selection may upwardly bias estimates, displacement has health consequences, net of selection.	Kate	W. Strully
2005	86	Social Inequality and Health	Inter-Cohort Trends in Age-Specific Health Inequalities: A Test of the Theory of “Fundamental Causes”	In a series of articles Link, Phelan and colleagues (eg, Link and Phelan 1995) argue that “social factors such as socioeconomic status … are likely ‘fundamental causes’ of disease that, because they embody access to important resources, affect multiple disease outcomes through multiple mechanisms, and consequently maintain an association with disease even when intervening mechanisms change.” Implicit in this argument is an empirical hypothesis: that the association between socioeconomic status and health has remained constant (or increased) across birth cohorts and over time. In this paper we discuss conceptual and practical problems inherent in testing this hypothesis. Briefly, to test this hypothesis it is necessary (for practical reasons) to employ a measure of socioeconomic status that does not change with age and (for theoretical reasons) that carries the same conceptual meaning over historical time. We conclude by using data from a variety of sources to offer evidence regarding this hypothesis.	John	R. Warren	Elaine	 Hernandez	Krista	N. Jenkins
2005	86	Social Inequality and Health	Self-Reported Health among Old-Age Populations: A Cross-National Comparison across Latin America	This paper examines covariates of self-reported health among individuals aged 60 or older in three parts. First, we examine the association of self-reported health with various measures of well being (functionality, self-report of chronic conditions, satisfaction with memory, satisfaction with financial conditions, and satisfaction with life) in an attempt to understand the meaning of the components of the overall self-reported health. Second, we examine the socioeconomic covariates of self-reported health, such as age, sex, education, income, availability of health insurance, to understand the social context in which health differences occur. And third, we make comparisons across seven countries in Latin America and the Caribbean region, to conclude about how generalized findings are. We use data from the SABE study, completed in seven cities of the region around the year 2000.	Martha	 Pelaez
2005	87	Comparative Perspectives on Population Growth, Fertility, and Contraception	The Effect of Modernization on Desired Fertility in Egypt	Using a conceptual framework that borrows notions both from the economic theory of fertility and social interaction theory, this paper assesses the relative importance of social and economic modernization at individual and community level in explaining the geographical differential in desired fertility in Egypt. Using 2000 Egyptian Demographic Health Survey and an up-to-date map of land cover in Egypt, this paper provides an application of an advanced methodology which uses a combination of the multilevel modeling and Geographical Information System techniques and shows how the GIS techniques facilitate the construction of several variables representing level of economic modernization as land use, road density and urbanization. This study also analyzes the effect of current family composition on desired fertility in Egypt and shows the desire of Egyptian society to have at least two children and at least one boy.	Angela	 Baschieri
2005	87	Comparative Perspectives on Population Growth, Fertility, and Contraception	China’s Uncertain Demographic Present and Future	This paper will apply methods of probabilistic population forecasting to assess the range of uncertainty of China’s future population trends. Unlike previous applications of probabilistic population projections that consider stochastic future fertility, mortality and migration, this paper will also account for the significant uncertainty of China’s current fertility level (with estimates ranging from 1.2 to 2.3) and the related uncertainties about the sex ratio at birth (with estimates from 1.06 to above 1.2) and the size of the youngest cohorts in the 2000 census. The model applied in this paper will be based on expert based uncertainty ranges for current conditions, in addition to the probabilistic treatment of future trends. Given the sheer size of China’s population, these significant uncertainties about current conditions are of high importance not only for the future population of China but also on a global scale.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Qiang	 Ren	Sergei	 Scherbov	Xiaoying	 Zheng
2005	87	Comparative Perspectives on Population Growth, Fertility, and Contraception	Fertility Decline in Brazil: A Different Tempo Effect with Strong Consequences	Brazil has experienced a steady fertility decline during the last thirty years. The Brazilian Census Bureau figures indicate a decline in TFR: 6.3 (1960) to 2.3 (2000). The median age is almost constant (22.5), and the relative distribution of period ASFRs is concentrated before 25 years of age. Preliminary estimations based on the reconstruction of birth histories from census data and the application of Kohler-Ortega methodology indicated that TFR was 2.2, while TFR adjusted for tempo effect was 1.3 in 2000. The Brazilian case may be considered a different paradigm, contrasting with the below replacement European cases. To the extent that this European pattern is linked to some sort of second demographic transition and/or high women’s education, one may foresee a pattern of low fertility in Brazil that could imply strong negative externalities. A replication of this methodology for women grouped by education can be insightful to the future.	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Vania	Candida da Silva	Adriana	 Miranda-Ribeiro	Jose	A. Ortega	Jose	Alberto M. de  Carvalho
2005	87	Comparative Perspectives on Population Growth, Fertility, and Contraception	Linking Intergenerational Associations of Status Attainment and Family Formation: The Early Transition to Adulthood among American Girls	To better estimate the effects of family structure and socioeconomic status for a woman’s early transition to adulthood, I simultaneously model her educational transitions and whether she has an early birth. Using a sample of non-Hispanic White and Black females from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988, I estimate bivariate probit models with correlated disturbances. The results demonstrate that family structure moderates the effects of parents’ socioeconomic status. For all family types, however, the effects of socioeconomic status are greater for a daughter’s education than for her fertility. In addition, parents’ expectations for the daughter’s education influence not only her educational transitions, but also her likelihood of having an early birth. Finally, unobserved heterogeneity influences both a daughter’s early fertility and her educational transitions.	Molly	A. Martin
2005	88	New Directions in Applied Demography	Population and Employment Forecast for 2030 by Quarter Section for the City of Chicago	For transportation planning, the City of Chicago has recently prepared population and employment forecasts by quarter section for 2030. The forecast includes a regional and citywide analysis of the components of population and housing change covering the 1970-2000 period. The citywide forecast uses the cohort component method by race and Hispanic origin. The quarter section population forecast uses a modified housing unit method while the employment forecast uses vacant land and zoning districts. Population and employment densities derived from the 2000 Census and from administrative data are projected into the future. Both the population and employment forecast rely on estimates of development potential made by local experts. The recording of expected developments was done with GIS software called Paint the Town. It streamlines the process of recording the proposed developments and constantly updates the quarter section forecasts.	Marie	V. Bousfield
2005	88	New Directions in Applied Demography	Small-Area Population Forecasting Using a Spatial Regression Approach	Existing demographic techniques do not work well for small-area population forecasts, because they generally ignore the effects of non-demographic (such as geophysical and socioeconomic) factors on population change. In this study we examine the ability of a spatial econometric forecasting approach for small-area population forecasting. In particular, a spatial lag model is applied to examine population change at the Minor Civil Division (MCD) level in Wisconsin since 1970. For each MCD, the population growth rate for 1980-1990 is regressed on its growth rate for 1970-1980, its various characteristics in 1980, and neighborhood characteristics in 1980 and growth rates for 1970-1980. The estimated coefficients (β’s) and spatial parameter (λ) are then used for projecting population in 2000. The accuracy is assessed by the Mean Algebraic Percent Error and Mean Absolute Percent Error. The capability of the spatial regression approach for small-area population forecasting can be seen.	Guangqing	 Chi	Paul	R. Voss
2005	88	New Directions in Applied Demography	Evaluating Evidence of Discrimination in Multi-Ethnic Housing Markets	This paper considers a question of growing importance – how to detect or rule out discrimination as the cause of ethnic residential separation in multi-ethnic housing markets. As housing markets diversify, accompanying spatial patterns can arouse perceptions of discrimination. How can we know if patterns of residential separation in the urban fabric are the outcomes of discriminatory practices? Clarifying what constitutes discrimination, and ascertaining evidence of unlawful discriminatory practices within these markets, poses new challenges for applied demographers. We examine an instance where an observed disparity viewed as a tell-tale sign of discrimination was instead the product of market forces. Our paper underscores the need for detailed analysis and careful interpretation of ethnic residential separation in multi-ethnic housing markets.	William	A.V. Clark	Peter	A. Morrison
2005	88	New Directions in Applied Demography	The Gap between Births and Census Counts of Children Born in California: Undercount or Transnational Movement?	The 2000 Census counts of children under age 1 born in California to foreign-born mothers fell short of recorded births by 19 percent. The gap is largest for children of non-Hispanic White and Asian/Pacific Islander women. Shortfalls of children living with native-born mothers are much smaller. Domestic migration accounts for a negligible fraction of the shortfall. In the absence of direct data, we use indirect indicators of where these children were living at the time of the Census. These suggest that many of the children were no longer in the U.S. One indication is the 16 thousand U.S.-born children under age one that were enumerated in the 2000 Mexican census. No information is available on state of birth, but California's share pro-rated based on the Mexican-born population in the U.S. is 6 thousand. This is in the range of the deficit we estimate for children of Mexican-born mothers in California.	John	 Pitkin	Julie	 Park
2005	89	Parents and Children	Are Families the New Safety Net? An Examination of the Receipt of Kin Support, Child Support and Welfare	As welfare reform reduced reliance on public transfers, families and communities were called upon to provide assistance to those in need. The central question we address is “to what degree do private transfers augment shrinking welfare benefits?” The answer to this question is crucial in an era of binding welfare constraints. In this paper we investigate the relationship between intergenerational family transfers and welfare.   	Using a sample from the PSID of families with children who have non-resident fathers, we examine the importance of income from child-support, kin-support and welfare between 1993 and 2001. Geographic identifiers in the PSID allow us to link these households with state policies regarding welfare eligibility and generosity and the efficacy of state child support collection efforts and allow us to determine the effect of these policies on income sources before and after welfare reform.	Laura	M. Argys	Elizabeth	 Peters
2005	89	Parents and Children	Risk and Household Structure: Another Look at the Determinants of Fertility	Most households in developing countries face significant income risks but at the same time have very few means of  mitigating these risks or responding to shocks. These households rely on self-insurance that may be suboptimal in the long run. A household may decide to have more children to command more labor when replanting is needed after a natural disaster, even though this leads to low average consumption and lower educational attainment for the children. Despite years of analyzing the determinants of fertility the effects of income risks on fertility have received little attention. Hence, this paper estimates the effects of the risks of various natural disasters on fertility and education using data from Guatemala.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2005	89	Parents and Children	Training, Trading or Taking? Parents’ Work, Children’s Work and Intergenerational Transfers	Research on parental employment and child well-being generally focuses on the relationship between parents’ work and available financial resources for parents to transfer to children. However, children of working parents may provide valuable resources to their households as well in the form of household labor including sibling care. Using child- and household-level data from families with 12-18-year-olds in the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health (Add Health) and the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, I examine the relationship between parental employment, children’s household work and transfers to children. I hypothesize that being in a household in which all parents work increases the likelihood that a child provides household labor and receives direct financial transfers in the form of allowances or pocket money. The relationship is stronger in households with younger siblings. Interactions with child gender are investigated and implications for child well-being are discussed.	Jennifer	L. Romich
2005	89	Parents and Children	Women’s Marital Expectations and Subsequent Union Outcomes among Fragile Families	We evaluate the association between men’s economic attributes and their partner’s views about marriage. Data are from unmarried couples in the Fragile Families Study, and multiple imputation techniques are used to account for men’s non-response. We focus on how men’s economic attributes – earnings, educational attainment, and employment – shape partners’ expectations regarding the likelihood of marriage, and whether relationships transition to cohabitation or marriage. Incorporating imputed values for missing data reduces men’s attainment levels. We use multivariate techniques to examine the relationship progression of new parents in the year following the initial interview; models corrected for missing information are compared to parallel analyzes performed on the sample affected by missing data. Preliminary results suggest that failure to account for selective data loss significantly overstates women’s marital expectations. The proportion entering into marriage does not alter greatly, as this was such an infrequent event in the unrepaired data.	Sharon	 Sassler	Soma	 Roy	Elizabeth	A. Stasny
2005	90	The Impacts of Neighborhoods and Communities	Exploring the Role of Preference and Policy in the Reduction of Racial Residential Segregation	This paper uses SimSeg, a segregation simulation computer program, to investigate a two-fold hypothesis. First we consider if ethnic preferences contribute to racial residential segregation, and second, given these findings, we question if pro-integration public policy has effectively targeted the most appropriate populations. We conclude that ethnic preferences do play a strong role in determining racial residential segregation and that this in turn influences how effective public policy has been in reducing segregation. We argue that public policy would be more effective in reducing segregation if it targeted white households for integration into predominantly black neighborhoods, rather than encouraging the movement of black households into white areas as is currently the trend.	Rachelle	J. Brunn	Faye	 Allard
2005	90	The Impacts of Neighborhoods and Communities	Residential Preferences: Do They Explain Persistent Segregation?	Debate raged in the 1990s about the causes of persistent racial residential segregation. Massey and Yinger contended that housing market discrimination maintained the American Apartheid system. The Thernstroms cited studies reporting that the overwhelming majority of whites were willing to live with blacks or move to neighborhoods where blacks lived. Those studies also found that most blacks wanted to reside with other blacks. Hence, the residential preferences of blacks sustain segregation. To understand preferences, studies were conducted in metropolitan Detroit and Chicago in 2004. Respondents were shown cards depicting neighborhoods with varying racial compositions and were asked whether they would feel comfortable living there or would consider moving there. Respondents were given blank neighborhood cards and told to draw their most preferred racial composition. We will summarize findings to test the hypothesis that preferences explain segregation.	Reynolds	 Farley	Mick	P. Couper
2005	90	The Impacts of Neighborhoods and Communities	How Socio-Economic Heterogeneity within Urban Slums Affects Educational Attainment: A Comparison of Egypt and India	This paper will examine the role of household and neighborhood poverty as determinants of children’s schooling in urban Egypt and India. We draw upon data recently collected by the Egyptian Demographic and Health Survey (EDHS), which provides detailed information on children’s schooling and includes a large supplementary sample of slum-dwellers in Cairo, and a census of slum-dwellers in 13 (of 143) slum districts of Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, collected by the Population Council. In the analysis, we consider a four-fold classification of families: poor families living in largely poor neighborhoods; poor families living in mixed neighborhoods; non-poor families living in poor neighborhoods; and non-poor families in mixed neighborhoods. The results will shed light on whether “slums” as defined in the Egyptian and Indian contexts provide an appropriate geographic basis for the targeting of educational investments.	Mark	R. Montgomery	Rania	 Roushdy	Monica	 Grant	Barbara	 Mensch
2005	90	The Impacts of Neighborhoods and Communities	Family and Neighborhood Effects on Children’s Well-Being	We examine the effects of family and neighborhood socioeconomic status on inequality in children’s well-being, including reading and math skills and behavioral problems. We use new data from Wave 1 of the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey and national data from the PSID Child Development Supplement. To describe inequality in children’s well-being, we borrow summary measures, such as Lorenz and concentration curves, from research on income inequality. These measures allow us to assess well-being inequality directly and comprehensively. Using these tools, we compare the proportion of well-being inequality attributable to inequality in family income, family wealth, mother’s schooling and reading skills, and to inequality in neighborhood income, both before and after controlling for other child, family, and neighborhood characteristics. Our analysis includes more complete information on family characteristics, which allows us to draw clearer conclusions about the net effects of family and neighborhood socioeconomic status on children’s well-being.	Anne	 Pebley	Narayan	 Sastry
2005	91	New Patterns of Migrant and Immigrant Settlement	Recent Trends in the Interprovincial Migration of Canadian Immigrants: An Analysis of Immigrant Resettlement during 1986 to 2001	Data from the 1991, 1996, and 2001 Censuses of Canada provide direct evidence on the migration experience of immigrant cohorts in the five years prior to the census. They also provide indirect evidence for the internal redistribution of those immigrants who arrived in Canada during the five years prior to each census. This paper shows that, although local mobility is common for all segments of Canadian society, including both native and foreign-born, interprovincial redistribution shifts are nonetheless significant. Shifts in provincial populations attributable to migration over five-year periods may exceed 10 percent, while the short-run impacts on recent immigrants may be even larger. Data on the foreign-born are compared to information about the internal migration patterns of the native-born. Analysis of the migratory behavior of recent immigrant cohorts provides evidence that there are distinct patterns of higher and lower migration for ethnic origin groups.	Barry	 Edmonston
2005	91	New Patterns of Migrant and Immigrant Settlement	Redrawing Spatial Color Lines: Hispanic Metropolitan Dispersal, Segregation, and Economic Opportunity	The geographic dispersion of Hispanics across the United States gained considerable momentum during the 1990s and is reshaping the urban landscape. We trace changes in segregation levels among the top 100 largest metropolitan areas using a typology developed by Suro and Singer (2002), comparing large and small, rapidly growing and stable Hispanic metro areas based on multi-group measures of metropolitan diversity. We find similarities between established Hispanic metros and fast growing Hispanic metros in their higher levels of diversity, linguistic isolation, isolation of the foreign born, and overall isolation of Hispanic residents. New destinations, on the other hand, tend to have much lower levels of linguistic isolation and overall Hispanic isolation. Finally, we find areas of growing Hispanic concentration have reduced levels of black segregation and greater overall residential contact between groups, which lends support to the idea that increasing Hispanic presence is reconfiguring spacial color lines.	Mary	J. Fischer
2005	91	New Patterns of Migrant and Immigrant Settlement	Immigrant Settlement Patterns in the United States in the 1990s: Can Existing Theories Explain the Changes?	Utilizing 1990 and 2000 5% PUMS files and recodes of PUMAs that provide consistent geographic coding for both censuses, this paper describes the extent and nature of the dispersal of the foreign born into a range of non-traditional destinations during the 1990s. The geographic recodes are based on the 1990 Labor Market Areas of the PUMS-L with necessary adjustments made to accommodate differences with PUMA coding and changes in PUMA coding between 1990 and 2000. The analysis examines the relative power of three theoretical frameworks to specify the most important forces driving this evolving settlement pattern. Models representing the spatial assimilation, spatial network, and economic perspectives will be estimated and evaluated. The analysis will be multilevel and focus on modeling the destination choices of foreign-born migrants in the 1990s as functions of individual human capital and acculturation status, origin and previous U.S. region of residence and LMR economic conditions.	Douglas	T. Gurak	Mary	M. Kritz
2005	91	New Patterns of Migrant and Immigrant Settlement	Pioneer and Settler Mexican Migration to New Destinations in the United States: Thirty Years of Development	During the 1990s, the Mexican origin population of the United States accelerated its transformation from a mostly regionally concentrated ethnic group to one that is more widely distributed around the country. Our first proposition is that in the U.S. case the very first Mexican-born internal migrants, who we term “pre-pioneer” migrants, are persons who migrate to new locales for much the same reasons as usual migrants (i.e., economic and family-based life course reasons). We theorize that these persons set the stage for subsequent pioneer migration, which in turn, eventually becomes supplanted by settler migration. We use statistical methods to identify the predominate characteristics of Mexican migration into new destinations across the past four decades and relate these to stages in the migration flows to show the potential for diverse incorporation outcomes of Mexicans in new destinations. We discuss the implications for migration and incorporation of theoretical frameworks, and for policy implications.	Mark	 Leach	Frank	D. Bean
2005	92	The Impact of Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	The Impact of Public Transfers on Household Resource Allocation: Evidence from a Supplementary School Feeding Program	Can public transfers improve the wellbeing of children or do they crowd out household resources and nullify the expected gains to the child? This paper draws upon a unique non experimental survey data to test the implication of the theory of altruism on intra household resource allocation by analyzing the impact of a school feeding program on a child’s daily nutrient intake in rural India. The results suggest that the school meal scheme raises nutrient consumption by a fraction of the transfer. To the extent that the nutrient intake of the child rises by less than the full amount of the transfer obtained from the school meal, the results provide evidence of reallocation of resources by the household to other members or goods. This result is robust to changes in specification of the empirical model which correct for possible endogeneity of program participation at the individual, school and community level.	Farzana	 Afridi
2005	92	The Impact of Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Malnutrition and India's ICDS: Evidence of a Program Effect?	Established in 1975, India’s Integrated Child Development Services program is the world's largest early child development program, and one of the most studied. Yet, the evidence of its effectiveness in achieving its primary objective of combating child malnutrition is contradictory. Using a new dataset of almost 12,000 children in Kerala, we estimate a series of reduced-form child health demand models to capture the association between access to the program and nutritional status. Our results suggest that (i) a failure to control for key potential confounding variables - specifically, how long the ICDS program has been established in the community - and (ii) an inability to model the actual participation of children, may explain the lack of program effect observed in some earlier studies.	Caryn	 Bredenkamp	John	S. Akin	Michele	 Gragnolati
2005	92	The Impact of Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Why Are Infant and Child Mortality Rates Lower in the MCH-FP Area of Matlab, Bangladesh? Are the Differences Due to Differences in Reproductive Patterns?	Infant and child mortality rates are significantly lower in the MCH-FP Area of Matlab, Bangladesh, than in the Comparison Area. The two areas are similar in terms of the socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of their populations, but the MCH-FP Area has better family planning (and maternal and child health) services than the Comparison Area and, as a result, has different reproductive patterns, including lower fertility rates and longer intervals between pregnancies. We use data from the Matlab Demographic Surveillance System on nearly 146,000 pregnancies that occurred between 1982 and 2002 to investigate the extent to which the different reproductive patterns in the MCH-FP Area explain why infant and child mortality rates are lower there. We show that adjusting for differences in reproductive patterns reduces the differences in infant and child mortality between the MCH-FP and Comparison Area, and the size of this reduction is larger in more recent years.	Lauren	 Hale	Julie	 DaVanzo	Abdur	 Razzaque	Mizanur	 Rahman
2005	92	The Impact of Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Measuring the Impact of a Maternal Survival Intervention in Guatemala	The maternal mortality ratio in Guatemala is one of the highest in Latin America (153 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in 2000). Although the major causes of maternal mortality in Guatemala such as hemorrhage (53%) are preventable, between 69% and 80% of women deliver at home where complications can lead to death. This study evaluates the impact of the Maternal and Neonatal Health (MNH) Program implemented in Guatemala from 1999 to 2004. Data were collected by two cross-sectional household surveys of women 15-49 years of age (baseline N=1008 and follow-up N=1098) in three departments in Western Guatemala. Results show significant improvements in knowledge, attitudes and practices for women exposed to program activities. After controlling for other covariates, women exposed to program activities had significantly higher odds (5.23, p	Fannie	 Fonseca-Becker	Catherine	 Schenck-Yglesias	Gwendolyn	 Bergen	Robert	 Ainslie
2005	93	Family Influences on Child Well Being	Youth Depressive Symptoms and Changes in Relationships with Parents and Peers	Research has shown that family, particularly parents, and peers can influence adolescent well-being. The National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY) is a survey designed to monitor the development and well-being of a representative sample of Canadian children. This report will use data from the NLSCY to analyze the link between adolescent depressive symptoms and changes in relationships with parents and peers. Specifically, this study will examine the relationships between youth and their mothers, fathers and friends, and how these relationships changed from when the adolescent was 14 to 15 years old (Time 1) to when the adolescent was 16 to 17 years old (Time 2). Sex differences will also be examined. Linear regression procedures will be used to assess how changes in these relationships over the two-year period were linked with depressive symptoms at Time 2.	Tracey	 Bushnik
2005	93	Family Influences on Child Well Being	Assessing the Effect of Parental Marital Conflict on Adult Child Relationship Outcomes: Does the Apple Fall Far from the Tree?	This research aims to better understand how parental relationship status and marital quality influence adult child relational outcomes. Specifically, we examine the effect of parent’s level of conflict and marital satisfaction on adult children’s current relationship with their own dating, cohabiting, or marital partner. We use waves 1 and 2 of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to capture our main predictor variables: level of conflict between parents and parental marital satisfaction. We also use these two waves to construct a history of parent relationship transitions and family structure, which should have a large effect on adult relational outcomes. We use NSFH3 to capture our main outcome variables, adult child reports of their relationship satisfaction and the level of disagreement with their current partner. In sum, we will examine the effect of parental relationship quality and/or discord during childhood on adult children’s relational outcomes.	Constance	T. Gager	Mary	H. Benin
2005	93	Family Influences on Child Well Being	Parental Investment in Childhood and Later Adult Well-Being: Can More Interested Parents Offset the Effects of Socioeconomic Disadvantage?	Parental involvement in their children’s lives can have a lasting impact on well-being. More involved parents convey to their children that they are interested in their development, and this in turn signals to the child that their future is valued. However, what happens in socioeconomically disadvantaged homes? Can the social capital produced by greater parental involvement counteract some of the harmful effects of less financial capital? The sample is drawn from the National Child Development Study, a longitudinal study of children born in Britain in 1958. Results on a sample of children raised in intact families suggest that father interest in education has a somewhat larger direct impact on later education than does mother interest. Moreover, parental involvement/interest at age 11 and 16 does reduce the impact of familial poverty at age 7 and 11 on educational attainment; however, the harmful effect of poverty still remains.	Darcy	W. Hango
2005	93	Family Influences on Child Well Being	Pre-Divorce Factors Related to Post-Divorce Father-Child Relationship Quality	Pre-divorce antecedents of change and stability in father-adolescent closeness following parental divorce were investigated using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Heath (Add Health). Examination of patterns of stability and change revealed that some relationships increased in closeness (16%), one third remained the same, and the majority (51%) of relationships declined. Parental marital quality, mother-adolescent affect, involvement in peer group activities, dislike of school, and a sense of well being predict post-divorce father-adolescent closeness. The overall pattern is that offspring with strong family and extra-familial ties, along with a robust sense of well-being, report a decline in father-adolescent closeness. On the other hand, those not doing as well with respect to these dimensions are more likely to report maintaining or increasing father-adolescent closeness. Adolescents with fewer social and individual resources may be motivated to overcome the barriers that result from a father’s departure to maintain or improve relationships with their fathers.	Mindy	E. Scott	Alan	 Booth
2005	94	The Migration of the Elderly	Elderly Mobility in Italy: An Interpretative Model	Elderly mobility has been often studied in Anglo-Saxon countries, where mobility rates are traditionally higher than in Europe and Italy. Europe (and especially Italy ) has now the most aged population in the world; national and international flows are going to different directions, compared to the past. Italy became a destination country for young people coming from Africa and Eastern Europe (mainly looking for a job), but also for elderly coming from Northern Europe and USA (looking for “amenity”). But still it is dominant the return migration among the elderly. This paper tries to distinguish this return migration from other types of elderly migrations, and to make hypotheses on the elderly mobility in Italy at the beginning of the new century. This study has been done using registry individual data (inscriptions/cancellations) and the origin/destination matrix approach.	Lorenzo	 Cassata	Cecilia	 Reynaud
2005	94	The Migration of the Elderly	Forty Years of 5-Years Ago Data: County Migration from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses	Using data from the residence five years ago questions from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses, this paper will examine county in-, out-, and net migration by age, particularly the movement of retirement-age persons. Geographic detail and a time series are necessary for proper statistical analysis. Migration is to or from a specific location within a state, not to or from the state as a whole. Since states are diverse places, it is necessary to have a more area-specific measure of migrant destination and origin. Unmeasured fixed effects can be accounted for only with time series data. The age structure of a local area can change over a short period of time, altering the desired bundle of public goods and services and changing the area’s character. The primary objectives of this research are to enumerate and to begin to assess the small area movement of the population over time.	Dan	 Mercer
2005	94	The Migration of the Elderly	Snowbirds and Sunbirds: Seasonal Migration of the Elderly in Florida	America is a nation of movers, but many moves go undetected because migration statistics typically focus on changes in permanent residence, or the place one lives and sleeps most of the time. Yet the impact of temporary moves such as the daily commute to work, short business trips, vacations, and seasonal migration may be substantial, both for the sending and receiving communities. In this paper, we analyze seasonal migration patterns of the elderly in Florida. Using household survey data, we examine the characteristics of elderly non-Floridians who spend part of the year in Florida and the characteristics of elderly Floridians who spend part of the year elsewhere. We attempt to determine the number, timing, and duration of seasonal moves and the origins, destinations, personal characteristics, and motivations of seasonal migrants. We believe this analysis will provide insights into several aspects of population mobility that cannot be achieved by focusing solely on changes in permanent residence.	Stanley	K. Smith	Mark	 House
2005	94	The Migration of the Elderly	The Effects of Independent and Facility Moves on Intergenerational Transfers of Wealth in the United States	Studies of elderly migration have focused on the age schedule of migration, common destinations, causes of migration, the relationship between migration and health, and the consequences of migration for the sending and receiving communities. From these studies we learn a great deal about the selectivities of elderly migration and the policy relevant consequences for the migrants themselves and for communities. In this paper, we expand our knowledge to cover the consequences of elderly migration for the families of migrants. Specifically, we explore the ways in which elderly migration affects intergenerational transfers of wealth while the migrant is still living using a variety of regression models with data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). We focus on independent moves and moves to different types of retirement facilities and estimate the effects of these moves on inter vivos transfers of wealth to children and grandchildren.	Leah	K. VanWey	Shelley	 Nelson
2005	95	Emerging Trends in the Health and Well-Being of Older Americans	Compression of Disability for Older Americans, 1992-2002	This study investigates the latest trends in functional disability among Americans 65 years and over, using two measures: age at first disability onset and disabled life expectancy. We fit a multi-state life table model to the 1992-2002 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. We classified persons into three disability states: active, moderately disabled and severely disabled. Years in active life and moderate disability rose along with total life expectancy, while expected years in severe disability fell. Men had greater improvement than women. Disability incidence remained steady for moderate disability and was postponed for severe disability, while recovery rates rose. These findings support Manton’s hypothesis of dynamic equilibrium. These patterns exist for all age groups and for two different disability definitions (1. difficulty with task, or 2. receipt of help or equipment use), an indication that the disability improvement was broad-based.	Liming	 Cai	James	 Lubitz
2005	95	Emerging Trends in the Health and Well-Being of Older Americans	Trends in Assistance with Daily Activities: Socioeconomic Disparities in the U.S. Older Population	Assistive technology has become increasingly important in facilitating independence among older Americans, and fewer older people are relying on personal care to assist with daily activities. It remains unclear, however, whether these trends have been experienced broadly. Using the 1992 to 2001 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, we provide evidence that among older people who have difficulty with daily activities, there has been: substantial increases in the independent use of assistive technology (without help), no significant changes in the proportion receiving any help, and declines in the proportion using neither help nor technology. Differentials in help by race/ethnicity, education, and income quartiles remain unchanged over this period. Increases in assistive technology use appear to be widespread; however, in one case—the use of only equipment for bathing—we find increases only for the most-educated. We discuss implications of findings for the study of late-life disability trends and in disparities therein.	Vicki	A. Freedman	Linda	G. Martin	Jennifer	C. Cornman	Emily	M. Agree	Bob	 Schoeni
2005	95	Emerging Trends in the Health and Well-Being of Older Americans	Trends in the Health of Older Americans Annual Summary: 2005	This paper brings together trend data on the health and health care of older Americans from many sources, presenting a complex picture of the health status of older Americans. Results from national surveys provide evidence that their general health and physical functioning is improving, although there remain important differences between the sexes and across racial and ethnic groups. Obesity and sedentary lifestyles, however, remain major health risks for seniors. In general, both utilization of health care services and overall health expenditures have risen. Inpatient care has evolved; the average length of stay in hospital for major chronic conditions continues to decline, and restorative procedures are becoming a significant part of inpatient care. Formal home health assistance has become an important component of the health care system. We discuss and integrate these results to present a unified picture of the health of the older population.	Harold	 Lentzner	Ellen	A. Kramarow	James	 Lubitz	Yelena	 Gorina
2005	95	Emerging Trends in the Health and Well-Being of Older Americans	How American Old-Age Mortality Does Since Medicare Implementation, as Compared to Some European Countries	In the sixties, Medicare, a new system of federal health insurance started in the US for older people. Did that event influence mortality trends ? Looking at US life tables series, it seems that increase in life expectancy at age 65 accelerated from the end of the sixties. Is it actually due to Medicare or only to the cardiovascular revolution that occurred in the same time almost everywhere in the industrialized countries ? A possible strategy to make the point clearer is to compare US mortality trends to those of some European countries, where the health system did not change. From this point of view, American trends are quite unfavorable, especially for females but before concluding that Medicare was unsuccessful, it is necessary to look at other possible explanations : data quality, impact of ethnic differentials, specific gender American issues or American failure at a new step of health transition.	France	 Meslé	Jacques	 Vallin
2005	95	Emerging Trends in the Health and Well-Being of Older Americans	Obesity in America, 1960-2000: Is it an Age, Period, or Cohort Phenomenon?	Increasing rates of obesity have sparked tremendous public concern because excess body weight is linked to a host of mortality, morbidity, and disability outcomes. Using five waves of data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), this project provides a four-decade picture of body weight trends among American adults age 20-74. Specifically, this paper asks whether some birth cohorts have been more affected by these secular changes than others. It then considers the implications of these trends on future health and mortality. A series of graphical approaches provide the necessary background to estimate an age-period-cohort model of these trends. Results suggest that the Obesity Epidemic emerged sometime after the late 1970s, that the prevalence of obesity increases throughout the various stages of the adult life course, and that those cohorts born after 1915 have successively higher rates of obesity at every stage of the life course.	Rebecca	 Utz
2005	96	Gender and Earnings	Changing Lifetime Earnings of Women: Implications for Economic Security	The purpose of this paper is to use lifetime earnings to study the economic security of women workers. Lifetime earnings provide a more complete picture of economic well-being than earnings at a point in time. We analyze a unique dataset on lifetime earnings (Social Security Administration's Continuous Work History Sample for 1983 and 1999) in which we separate workers into continuous and intermittent to evaluate the distinct gains made by workers with dissimilar attachment to the labor force. We compare growth in cross-sectional annual earnings with lifetime earnings of women workers, examine inequality in lifetime earnings, and study trends in male-female lifetime earnings ratios. We examine more closely the issue of who really are the low lifetime earners--are these women who are steady low wage workers or are these women who have several years of interruptions in their worklives? The answer could have important implications for Social Security reform.	Sharmila	 Choudhury
2005	96	Gender and Earnings	Are Gender Differences more Pronounced Across the Earnings Distribution?	This study examines gender differences in the earnings of young adults in the mid 1980s. We revisit this issue from a different perspective: we determine changes in the gender gap in the middle, the tails, and the variability of the earnings distribution. We employ data from a longitudinal, nationally probability sample of high school seniors: the National Longitudinal Study of high school seniors in 1972 and the 5th follow-up in 1986. We compute the average differences using effect size estimates expressed in standard deviation units. Differences in the tails and the variability are computed using number and variance ratios respectively. Our results indicate that there is a rather large and significant gender difference in earnings favoring males. The gender gap is more pronounce for Whites and Hispanics and less extreme for Blacks. Controlling for employment selection, education, occupation, marital status, family size, and hours of work we find that the gender gap in earnings closes somewhat. Nonetheless, the adjusted gender gap is still large and significant.	Amelie	 Constant	Spyros	 Konstantopoulos
2005	96	Gender and Earnings	Double Jeopardy or Compensating Disadvantage? The Interaction Effect of Gender and Race on Earnings in the U.S.	Most researchers agree that being a member of a racial minority group and being female both represent significant disadvantages in the U.S. labor market. It follows that the labor market outcomes of minority women, who are disadvantaged on both counts, warrant special concern. Much previous research has assumed that the effects of gender and race on earnings are additive, and that minority women suffer the full disadvantage of each status. Yet empirically, it has been demonstrated that for a few groups, the earnings of minority women are not as low as would be predicted based on their race and sex alone. We test the assumption of additivity of race and gender effects for a broad range of minority groups in the U.S. Preliminary results indicate that women of all minority groups in the U.S. suffer a smaller gender penalty than white women, and a smaller race penalty than same-group minority men.	Emily	 Greenman
2005	96	Gender and Earnings	She Earns, He Earns: Exploring Race and Class Variation in Wives’ Contributions to Couples’ Income	In recent years, academic and public debate has arisen over which earnings pattern most accurately characterizes the present and future of American couples. This paper contributes to this growing body of literature by examining race and class variation in wives’ contributions to couples' income. Using the 2000 wave of the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, I find that black wives are more likely to be co-providers or primary earners than are their white counterparts. While wives in high-earning couples are more likely to be co-providers than are less economically well-off women, women in couples in the lowest income quartile are more likely to be primary earners than are women in the top income quartile. The findings cast doubt on the accuracy of popular accounts characterizing superstar wives as high-powered, high-earning women; they also suggest caution in interpreting relative economic gains among women as signaling absolute progress toward eliminating inequality.	Sarah	 Winslow
2005	98	Low Fertility in Europe and Its Consequences	Assessing the Impact of National and Regional Financial Incentives for Childbearing in a Lowest-Low Fertility Setting	Italy has been, together with Spain, the first country that has reached the threshold of so-called “lowest-low” fertility (Kohler et al., 2003), below 1.3 children per woman, during the early 1990s. Within Italy, some regions have even lower fertility levels, as a high heterogeneity exists between regions. In 2003, regional-level TFR data indicated that Friuli-Venezia Giulia, a Region endowed with special autonomy levels in the North-East, had a TFR of 1.16 (against the national level having reached 1.29). In this paper we present an assessment of policies that help families with children at two levels (national level and regional level, focusing on Friuli-Venezia Giulia for the latter).	Gianpiero	 Dalla Zuanna	Loghi	 Marzia
2005	98	Low Fertility in Europe and Its Consequences	Low Fertility and Population Aging: Causes, Consequences, and Policy Options	The study assesses which policies can prevent or mitigate the adverse consequences of current low fertility and population ageing in Europe. A framework highlights the interrelationships among government policies, macro-level conditions and household-level demographic behavior. Guided by this framework, the research literature is reviewed; European demographic data are examined; and case studies of five countries are conducted. Policy packages most likely to slow or reverse fertility declines in the European contexts are identified and discussed.	William	 Butz	Jonathan	 Grant	Stijn	 Hoorens	Suja	 Sivadasan	Mirjam	 van het Loo	Julie	 DaVanzo	Lauren	 Hale	Shawna	 Gibson
2005	98	Low Fertility in Europe and Its Consequences	Immigration and Ethnic Change in Low-Fertility Countries – Towards a New Demographic Transition?	This paper presents a comparative analysis of the likely future effects of immigration on the ethnic or foreign-origin composition of the developed world, using projections from European countries and the US, with new projections for the United Kingdom. On conservative assumptions, the foreign-origin proportions rise to between 18 and 33% by mid-century with almost linear rates of change. Variant migration assumptions are more important than fertility assumptions. Interethnic unions, incorporated only in the UK projections, reduce the size of low-fertility immigrant populations while generating complex rapidly growing mixed origin populations which may defy categorisation. The rapid growth of non-Western minorities in many receiving countries, allied to the persistent desire for arranged marriage among some groups, indicates that marriage migration will underwrite future immigration flows for some time. Finally a model under development will show the likely political consequences of inflows, employing data on voting entitlements and propensities of immigrant-origin populations.	David	A. Coleman	Sergei	 Scherbov
2005	98	Low Fertility in Europe and Its Consequences	Childless Societies? Trends and Projections of Childlessness in Europe and the United States	Using period and cohort fertility data for 17 European countries and the United States, this paper analyzes and projects trends in final childlessness among women born between 1940 and 1975. Two basic scenarios of lifetime childlessness are presented for women born after 1955. Both of these scenarios combine the most recent set of exposure-based indicators of age-specific fertility with the data on age-parity composition of the female population. The presented scenarios reveal that lifetime childlessness will increase gradually in almost all industrialised countries, although the timing and the magnitude of this change varies across countries. The scenarios for the United States indicate a slight decline in final childlessness, deviating from the projected trend in other countries. In the high-childlessness regions—West Germany, Austria, and England and Wales—final childlessness among women born after 1970 is likely to come close to 25%, and will almost certainly remain below 30%.	Tomas	 Sobotka
2005	99	Intergenerational Exchanges and Relationships	Old Age Pensions and the Well-Being of Children and Grandchildren: New Evidence from South Africa	The Old Age Pension in South Africa is a large public cash transfer which has been shown to benefit children and young adults. This paper re-assesses that evidence. Using data from the 2000 Income and Expenditure Survey and the 1998 Demographic and Health Survey, we evaluate two key assumptions that underlie the estimation strategy adopted in the literature. First, take-up of the pension is assumed to be universal. We show that it is not universal and that estimated effects of pension income turn on whether take-up is modeled. Treating take-up as endogenous, we find that pension income is treated no differently from any other income in the household. Second, household composition is treated as given. We provide suggestive evidence that household composition is related to take up of the pension suggesting models of pension income and resource allocation need to treat household composition as endogenous.	Amar	A. Hamoudi	Duncan	 Thomas
2005	99	Intergenerational Exchanges and Relationships	Government Spending on Children and Equality of Opportunity	In this paper we use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the U.S. Census of Governments as well as population estimates from the U.S. Bureau of the Census to assess whether the elasticity of children’s income, measured when they were adults, with respect to parents’ income, measured when their children were growing up, is related to how much states in the United States spend per child on redistribution. We take the intergenerational elasticity as a proxy for equality of opportunity and state spending as a measure of government investment in children. We hypothesize that states that spend more on children purchase more fundamental human capital, such as education, making parental resources less important to children’s economic success as adults. We find support for this hypothesis with high-spending states having greater intergenerational mobility compared to low-spending states.	Susan	 Mayer	Leonard	M. Lopoo
2005	99	Intergenerational Exchanges and Relationships	Long-Term Care of the Disabled Elderly: Spouses, Children, and Stepchildren	How do adult children affect the care that their elderly parents provide to each other? We develop two models in which children act as an incentive for elderly parents to provide more care to their disabled spouses than they otherwise would. Our first model is based on a demonstration effect -- adult children learn from a parent's example that family caregiving is appropriate behavior. Our second model is based on a punishment effect -- if the nondisabled spouse fails to provide care for the disabled spouse, then the children may retaliate in the future by not providing care for the nondisabled spouse. Both models predict that spouses in couples without children, as well as those in couples without joint children, will be less likely to provide care for each other than spouses with joint children. Results based on AHEAD data provide support for the latter prediction.	Liliana	E. Pezzin	Robert	A. Pollak	Barbara	 Schone
2005	99	Intergenerational Exchanges and Relationships	Dynamics of Intergenerational Assistance in Middle- and Old-Age in Mexico	We use data from the New Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS/ENASEM) 2001 and 2003, to describe the changes in time of the patterns of private inter-vivos transfers of population aged 50+ in Mexico. In a previous paper, we described patterns of transfers using the 2001 baseline. This paper extends that work with a description of the 2-year changes, using descriptive as well as multivariate techniques. We focus on transfers to- and from-children, of two different types: monetary and in-time, and make emphasis on living arrangements. We pay particular attention to whether the dynamics of transfers respond more to health needs or to economic ability. This focus is particularly relevant in the context of developing countries; like many societies, Mexico is characterized by scarce or inactive financial markets and limited institutional support for old age. We draw conclusions and make comparisons with the literature regarding the dynamics of transfers in developed countries.	Rebeca	 Wong	Monica	 Espinoza
2005	100	Population and Poverty	Fertility and Poverty in Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis for Albania, Ethiopia, Indonesia and Vietnam	We report a comparative analysis of fertility and poverty, using household panel data from four developing countries: Albania, Ethiopia, Indonesia and Vietnam. We use a sequential conditioning approach to analyze the initial distribution of household characteristics in terms of demographic composition, economic activity and economic welfare; and then the pattern of change over time. We will use various statistical methods, including non-parametric estimation and hazard rate analysis. The four countries differ greatly in their history, average income, social structure, economic institutions and demographic features and we consider whether it is possible to discern a common pattern in this apparent diversity.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Francesca	 Francavilla	Abbi	 Kedir	Jungho	 Kim	Alessandra	 Mattei	Fabrizia	 Mealli	Letizia	 Mencarini	Laura	 Neri	Stephen	 Pudney
2005	100	Population and Poverty	Poverty, Risk Perception and Childbearing	This paper explores how perceptions of risk and vulnerability affect fertility, and in particular how they affect the propensity for fertility. The paper draws on two established strains in the existing literature that have not been effectively incorporated in research on poverty and population processes. The first is the theory of risk and fertility put forward by Mead Cain (1983). The paper expands the scope and applicability of Cain’s work by drawing on more recent theory about social influence and social interaction. In particular, we explore how social networks provide social resources to households that reduce risk and perceptions of vulnerability, and how social networks facilitate the adoption of innovative behaviors, in so doing conditioning the effects of poverty on decisions about childbearing. Although this paper examines fertility, the argument advanced applies to other demographic outcomes. The argument is illustrated with data from Bangladesh and Egypt.	Sajeda	 Amin	John	B. Casterline
2005	100	Population and Poverty	Disaster, Population and Poverty Dynamics among Bangladeshi Household	Common shocks such as floods are experienced by everyone in the population. However, some households or individuals are affected more than others. South Asia has the largest concentration of the worlds’ poor and nearly half of Bangladesh’s population lives below the poverty line. Bangladesh is also one of the most disaster-prone countries in the world. The study first proposes to disaggregate the population into never, persistent and transient poor following the 1998 floods in Bangladesh using longitudinal household data. The second objective of the paper is to determine the differences between those among the poor who are able to eventually escape poverty following the flood (the transient poor) versus those unable to leave poverty (the chronic poor). Such an analysis would help in targeting the vulnerable and widen our knowledge of as to why some households within a population perform better than others in terms of recovering from a shock.	Anuja	 Jayaraman	Jill	L. Findeis
2005	100	Population and Poverty	Social Vulnerability in the Metropolitan Context: The Case of Campinas	One of the consequences of socio-demographic and economic changes in Brazil in recent decades is the diversity of population movements and of human settlements, as well as the consolidation of a pattern of urban expansion characterized by social, demographic, economic and environmental differentiation and segmentation, low quality of urban life and territorial sprawl, with phenomena such as conurbation, demographic deconcentration and peripheralization.   In this paper we present a new form of analysis of the spatial heterogeneity of the families and households of the municipality of Campinas. From the perspective of the concept of social vulnerability, we seek to understand the sources of individual and family differentiation in terms of the inability to respond and adapt to daily risks. A division of the city in “vulnerability zones” is presented, based on the Brazilian Census of 2000, which permits us to identify how inhabitants mobilize non-material resources to respond to risk	Jose	Marcos  Pinto da Cunha	Alberto	A.E. Jakob	Daniel	Joseph  Hogan	Roberto	L. Carmo
2005	101	Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Reasons U.S. Women Choose Abortion	Little recent national-level information has been collected on the reasons women give for choosing to terminate their pregnancies, and as the abortion rate has declined over the past 15 years, a new examination of these reasons may help to develop policies and programs to improve women’s ability to prevent unplanned pregnancy. In 2003, we surveyed 1,209 women at 11 abortion providers and completed in-depth interviews with 38 women. The most common reasons given for having an abortion were “Having a baby would dramatically change my life” (74% of respondents) and “I can’t afford a baby now” (73%). The frequency with which women gave common reasons was similar to that in a 1987 survey on the same topics. A factor analysis identified several key dimensions of women’s decision-making. Additional analyzes to be completed include examination of the qualitative data collected and the relationship between reasons given and reported difficulties obtaining abortions.	Lawrence	B. Finer	Lori	 Frohwirth	Lindsay	 Dauphinee
2005	101	Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Explaining Trends in Contraceptive Use among Teen Females, 1995-2002	This study examines trends in contraceptive use among teen females, using data from the 1995 and 2002 NSFG. We assess family, individual, relationship and partner factors associated with contraceptive use at most recent sexual intercourse and assess whether changes in family, individual, relationship and partner characteristics of sexually active teens help explain historical trends in contraceptive experiences. We hypothesize historical increases in contraceptive use at most recent sex, and that improvements in family environments (increases in family SES), individual characteristics (increased access to sex education and improved educational attainment), and relationship and partner characteristics (fewer sexual partners) will be associated with improvements in contraceptive use. However, these improvements may be offset by increased proportions of teens living in single-parent families, an increased focus on abstinence education, and potential increases in “hang out” sex.	Jennifer	 Manlove	Elizabeth	 Terry-Humen	Erum	N. Ikramullah
2005	101	Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Prenatal Drug Use and the Production of Infant Health	The purpose of our study is to examine the effect of maternal illegal drug use on one important birth outcome: birth weight. We improve on previous studies in two ways. First, we use a large multi-site data set that includes self-reports of drug use during pregnancy, medical records during pregnancy and delivery, extensive demographic information on the mother and the father, and information about the city where the mother resides. Second, we adopt a strategy to try to reduce the potential confounding effects of unobserved factors.   We use survey data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study that has been linked to information from the respondents’ medical records and city-level data on drug prices, arrest rates for drug-related offenses, availability of prenatal services, and labor market characteristics. We estimate our equations using the cases (approximately 2100) in 12 cities in 9 states for which medical records data are available.	Kelly	 Noonan	Nancy	E. Reichman	Hope	 Corman	Dhaval	 Dave
2005	101	Reproductive Health in Developed Countries	Unhealthy Sex: Discomfort with Sexuality and Sexually Transmitted Infections in the United States	Numerous authors have attributed higher sexually transmitted infection (STI) rates in the United States (US) compared to other developed countries to a pervasive discomfort with sexuality, which is manifested as a culture of secrecy surrounding sexuality and reproductive health. In this study, I explore this hypothesis by using longitudinal data from the Add Health survey to analyze the extent to which discomfort with sexuality is associated among adolescents and young adults with STI risk in the US. Using theory to guide my selection of variables, I then explore possible mediating mechanisms through which discomfort operates to affect STI risk. I also test whether relationships are robust to controls for access to healthcare and other factors shown to affect STI risk in the US.	Kirsten	 Smith
2005	102	The Impact of Population Aging on Social Security	The Cost of Population Aging. Forecasting Future Hospital Expenses in Germany	Forecasts are always wrong. Still, forecasts show future possibilities and give reason for policy decisions today. Population aging has become a hot political topic. The paper aims at gauging the effect of population aging on hospital expenses in Germany. Our probabilistic forecast model comprises a stochastic demographic component, that exploits historical mortality trends, a stochastic cost component based on life-course typical hospital costs, and a quality measure of medical progress, which builds on past advances in hospital treatment. Our scenarios yield 3 important results. First, there is an increase in overall hospital expenditures until the German baby boomers will die out in 2040 to 2050. Second, this increase is comparably moderate, because the average individual costs are likely to decline as the health of the elderly improves and as medical progress has an ambiguous influence on hospital expenditures. Finally, the cost increase varies significantly by gender and disease.	Hilke	 Brockmann	Jutta	 Gampe
2005	102	The Impact of Population Aging on Social Security	Economic Well-Being of the Aged Population in the 1990s, 2025, and 2060: an Analysis of Social Security Benefits and Retirement Income	Most projections considering the impact of the aging population on the Social Security Trust Funds and Social Security benefits consider the population as a whole projected over the next 75 years. This study provides a detailed analysis of the economic well-being of the aged population in the years 2065, 2025, and the early 1990s by level of income, gender, marital status, level of education, and race/ethnicity. This analysis will estimate the impact of the expected Social Security Trust Fund changes on subgroups of the aged population. The data source for the estimates is the Census Bureau’s Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) exactly matched to the Social Security Administration’s records of annual earnings, benefits and mortality through 1999, and the Modeling in the Near Term (MINT). MINT is a micro-simulation model developed to estimate the distributional effects of proposed social security policy alternatives on current and future beneficiaries’ retirement income.	Howard	 Iams	Barbara	A. Butrica	Cori	 Uccello
2005	102	The Impact of Population Aging on Social Security	Population Aging and Intergenerational Transfers: Introducing Age into National Accounts	In all societies intergenerational transfers are large and have an enormous influence on inequality and growth. The development of each generation of youth depends on the resources that productive members of society devote to their health, education, and sustenance. The well-being of the elderly depends on familial support and a variety of social programs. The National Transfer Accounts (NTA) system provides a comprehensive approach to measuring all inter-age transfers at the aggregate level. It encompasses reallocations achieved through capital accumulation and transfers, distinguishing those mediated by public institutions from those relying on private institutions.    This paper introduces the methodology and presents preliminary results emphasizing economic support systems in Taiwan and the United States. As the two economies differ in their demographic configuration, their level of development, and their old-age support systems, a comparison of the two will shed light on the macroeconomic implications of alternative institutional approaches to population aging.	Andrew	 Mason	An-Chi	 Tung	Mun	Sim  Lai
2005	102	The Impact of Population Aging on Social Security	How Does Differential Mortality Affect Social Security Progressivity and System Finances?	The Social Security system is facing an impending financial crisis as the baby boom cohorts approach retirement.  A reform proposal put forth by Diamond and Orzag (2004) identifies mortality differences by income as a significant contributor to the system’s financial imbalance.  Although the program redistributes income from high-earning households to low-earning households, largely through a progressive benefit formula, differential mortality patterns may erode much of this progressivity when examined from a “money’s worth” perspective.  When aggregated, these micro-level progressivity effects translate into macro-level system finance effects.  Individuals collecting higher benefits for longer periods of time because of mortality patterns will negatively impact the financial balance of the Social Security system.  Using the Congressional Budget Office’s Long-Term (CBOLT) model, a microsimulation model with stochastic capabilities, this paper examines the degree to which differential mortality reduces progressivity in Social Security and the effect differential mortality patterns have on system finances.	John	E. Sabelhaus
2005	103	Authors Meet Critics:  "Life Under Pressure: Mortality and Living Standards in Europe and Asia, 1700 to 1900" by Tommy Bengtsson, Cameron Campbell, and James Z. Lee	Authors		Tommy	 Bengtsson	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	 Lee
2005	104	Demography and Business Decision Making	Retail Sales Estimates and Business Improvement Districts		Warren	A. Brown
2005	104	Demography and Business Decision Making	Savvy Employers Ready Themselves for Demographic Change, the Military First and Foremost	Labor-intensive employers are aware that demographic changes are transforming the workforce. As an employer of primarily young people, the All Volunteer Force is moving now to understand two important demographic changes: a population of young adults that is relatively stable in terms of size, but rapidly changing in terms of racial and ethnic diversity. The stable population size suggests more competition with other employers for young adults, as well as from such alternative life choices as more higher education. The increasingly diverse population suggests more work group conflict/less work group cohesion without specific management attention. This paper focuses on the interaction between employer requirements and demographic changes.	Martha	 Farnsworth Riche
2005	104	Demography and Business Decision Making	Building Association Membership with Demographics	Since 1988, Decision Demographics has been working with the National Education Association to help them understand and serve the fastest-growing segment of their membership—the Education Support Professionals, including teacher’s aides, janitors, and school bus drivers. Lacking ESP about the ESP, we do it the hard way: by isolating the ESP in Census Bureau microdata as well as many other federal datasets. Everything that can be learned about ESP from the CPS, the decennial census, and now the American Community Survey, we pursue: demographic and socioeconomic profiles, maps for recruiting, earnings updates for calculating dues, etc. Now, with the help of a Small Business Innovation Research grant from the NICHD, we are building on this model to serve a broader group of professions. This paper describes some of the challenges inherent to doing this kind of work, and presents plans for enhancing and expanding this approach to multiple professions.	Stephen	J. Tordella	Tom	E. Godfrey
2005	104	Demography and Business Decision Making	Regional Projection of Households and Income Distributions by Race in the United States	Using ProFamy new method/software, this paper presents projections of households and income distribution from 2000 to 2050 by race for the Northeast, South, West, and Midwest regions in the U.S. Results show that the growth rate of number of households is higher than that of population for each region. The average household size in each region will steadily decline, and the regional differentials in dynamic changes of household sizes and types are substantial. The household of the West and South are relatively stable as compared to the other two regions. Very large increase in two-person and one-person households causes substantial increases in number of middle-income households. Although the patterns of dynamic changes in number of households by income across regions are not the same, the discrepancies are relatively small. We also discuss useful potential of households and income distribution projections in forecasting household consumption, such as vehicles, energy, and housing.	Yi	 Zeng	Zhenglian	 Wang	Danan	 Gu
2005	105	Asian Immigration	Earnings and English Language : Asian Indians, Chinese and Japanese Men in the United States, 2000	Past research shows that knowing the language of the receiving country is a crucial variable in determining the extent of economic assimilation and subsequently the earnings of the immigrants. There have not been however, studies comparing the Asian Indians, Chinese and Japanese in this regard who constitute a major component of immigrants to the US in general, and from Asia in particular. Additionally, the three groups provide an interesting mix in terms of their language ability, level of development of their respective sending countries and historical presence in the United States. This paper using the 2000 United States Census data examines the relation between English language ability and the earnings for Asian Indians, Chinese and Japanese men. The dependent variable is; per capita per hourly income. The independent variable is English language ability with controls being age at entry, education, years of stay, martial status, occupation.	Veena	 Kulkarni
2005	105	Asian Immigration	Poverty Trends for Southeast Asian Immigrants in the United States, 1990 to 2000	This paper will focus the dynamics of poverty for the Southeast Asian population. Southeast Asians have been among the fastest growing groups in the past two decades within the U.S. Asian population and they have challenged conventional thinking about Asians as a homogeneous, “model minority” group. Beyond a static snapshot of poverty rates, the double cohort method will be used for a nuanced, longitudinal analysis based on the 1990 and 2000 census. This method allows for the examination of poverty trajectories of immigrant arrival cohorts along with birth cohorts nested within them to gain insights about what happens as immigrants age, and their duration in the U.S. increases. Within the Southeast Asian group, there are different ethnic groups as well as distinct waves of migration to the U.S. that warrants separate analysis. Furthermore, this approach allows for the examination of poverty for the 1.5 generation as they come of age.	Julie	 Park
2005	105	Asian Immigration	Asian Immigrant Children's School Performance: The Influences of Neighborhoods and Schools	Using data from the Adolescent Health Survey, we examine if neighborhood and school characteristics can explain Asian immigrant youth’s educational advantage. Although we found no significant SES disadvantage of foreign-born Asian students, and third-generation Whites are more likely than second-generation Asians to live in low SES neighborhoods and to attend low SES schools, immigrant Asian students are more likely than are native White students to live in neighborhoods with greater concentration of minorities, and with higher proportions of female-headed households and of women working full time. Foreign-born Asian students reported more negative school climate and larger class size. An advantage all Asian students have is that they are more likely to have school peers with high GPAs. These racial differences in neighborhoods and schools taken together, however, do not account for the performance gap between native Whites and Asian students of immigrants.	Suet-ling	 Pong
2005	105	Asian Immigration	Asian Immigrant Women in the U.S. Labor Market: A Comparison of Migrant and Nonmigrant Koreans	This paper examines the determinants of labor force participation for Asian immigrant women in the United States by comparing the Korean immigrant women with other Asian immigrant women in the United States and also with the nonmigrant women in South Korea. The results from the analysis using the U.S. and South Korean data sets show that migrant and nonmigrant women have different patterns of labor force participation, suggesting that the social, economic, and contextual factors that surround a woman have a significant influence on her decision to work in the labor market. The similarities and differences among Asian immigrant groups highlight the influence of the U.S. institutions and the adaptation of each immigrant group. Finally, the results show that factors unique to the immigrant’s experiences, such as citizenship, length of stay in the U.S., and ethnic community, explain a great part of the immigrant women’s labor force participation.	Taek-Jin	 Shin
2005	105	Asian Immigration	The Economic Assimilation of Asian Immigrants: A Longitudinal Study	This paper examines the relationship between the timing of immigration and the earnings trajectories of Asian immigrants using data from the National Survey of College Graduates. The results show that the popular idea that immigrants experience lower initial earnings but faster growth so that they will eventually catch up with native workers requires some qualifications. First of all, the phenomenon of immigrant economic assimilation is not universal: Asian immigrants who completed education in America experience earnings trajectories similar to those of native workers. The earnings trajectories of Asian immigrants who completed education prior to immigration fall into the characterization of assimilation. And the earlier the migration in the life course, the better economic prospects they face in the U.S. However, even in the best scenario where immigration occurred immediately after graduation, foreign-educated Asian immigrants will only attain earnings parity with natives toward the end of their working lives.	Zhen	 Zeng
2005	106	Educational Experiences of Immigrant Youth	Why Educational Attainment is Lower among Children of Immigrants in Denmark: A Dynamic Analysis of Educational Progression	Recent studies show that the educational attainment of children of immigrants in Denmark is much lower than the educational attainment of native Danish children. The purpose of this paper is to determine at what stages of their educational careers ethnic minority youth fall behind their native Danish peers and the magnitude of intergenerational transmission. A dynamic discrete model of educational progression from grade school to either completion of a qualifying upper secondary education or enrollment at the tertiary level is formulated and estimated, controlling for individual, family background, and neighborhood characteristics as well as unobserved heterogeneity. The analyzes show that high dropout rates particularly from vocational upper secondary educations are an important reason for the observed differences in educational attainment. Interestingly, family background and neighborhood characteristics do not significantly affect dropout rates from vocational upper secondary educations for any of the ethnic minority groups.	Bjorg	 Colding
2005	106	Educational Experiences of Immigrant Youth	School Enrollment of Recently Arrived Immigrant Youth: A Reflection of Educational Progress before Migration	Recently arrived immigrant adolescents are much less likely to be enrolled in high school than their foreign-born peers that arrived early in childhood or native-born adolescents. The wider literature on school dropping out shows that prior educational difficulties strongly predict current dropout status. I document the overwhelming importance of educational difficulties prior to migration in understanding the high dropout rates of recently arrived immigrant youth. About 6% of foreign-born youth are recently arrived immigrants that lagged in school before they migrated. Yet such youth account for nearly 40% of all young foreign-born high school dropouts. Recently arrived immigrant youth that were “on grade” before departing for the U.S. are just as likely as early arrivals to be in high school. The high nonenrollment rates of recently arrived immigrant adolescents with educational difficulties before migration are strongly related to employment activity. Teen motherhood has little bearing on dropping out among these youth.	Richard	A. Fry
2005	106	Educational Experiences of Immigrant Youth	Making it in America: High School and GED Completion among Immigrant Youth	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), we find that high school completion decreases across immigrant generations and comes to resemble completion rates within the dominant native-born population. Among immigrants, those of Hispanic origin are more at risk of dropping out than immigrants of other ethnic heritages. Asian immigrants are the least likely to drop out. Immigrants who do drop out are much less likely than their 2nd and 3rd generation counterparts to subsequently complete a GED. Adjustments for individual, family, and neighborhood-level covariates diminish differences between ethnic groups but magnify differences between immigrant generations.	Krista	 Perreira	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Dohoon	 Lee
2005	106	Educational Experiences of Immigrant Youth	Ethnic Segregation and Educational Outcomes in Swedish Comprehensive Schools: A Multilevel Analysis	We ask whether ethnic segregation in Swedish comprehensive schools, fueled by increased residential segregation and increased immigration during the 1990s, are associated with depressed educational outcomes. We compare immigrant children and Swedish-born pupils with foreign-born parents with those of Swedish ancestry (the reference group). The data are based on two entire cohorts who graduated from comprehensive school in 1998 and 1999 (188,000 pupils and 1,043 schools), linking educational information from schools with Census data on socioeconomic characteristics of parents. Using multilevel analysis we find grade differences to the advantage of the reference group. For second generation immigrants, but not immigrant children, these are accounted for by socioeconomic characteristics of the family of origin and of the composite socioeconomic status in schools. We argue that differences in school quality are unlikely to produce these results.	Ryszard	 Szulkin	Jan	O. Jonsson
2005	107	Biodemography and Population Genetics	Maternal Age at Conception. Effects on Intrauterine Development, Disease Predisposition and Gene Frequencies	Besides a reduction of fertility below replacement level, “fertility transition” in Western Nations is associated to a delay in age at initiation of childbearing. In this note we review data by our group showing that delay of childbearing has important effect on fetal development, predisposition to type 1 diabetes and gene frequencies. Gestational age decreases while birth weight (percentile) increases with maternal age. Bivariate correlation among birth weight, placental weight and gestational age decreases with maternal age (data on 5454 newborns). Susceptibility to type 1 diabetes increases with maternal age at birth of newborn (data on 187 children with type 1 diabetes and on 5454 control newborns). Gene frequency of Haptoglobin*1 decreases with maternal age ( data on 679 puerperae) and haplotype frequency of PGM1*1/Rh*C increases with maternal age (data on 222 puerperae).	Fulvia	 Gloria-Bottini	Erich	 Cosmi	Gian	Franco  Meloni	Ermelando	Vinicio  Cosmi	Egidio	 Bottini
2005	107	Biodemography and Population Genetics	Subjective Well-Being, Fertility and Partnerships: A Biodemographic Perspective	We propose comparative behavior genetic analyzes of subjective well-being, fertility and partnerships from a biodemographic perspective using the 2002 Danish twin omnibus survey and the U.S. National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY). Our preliminary analyzes of the Danish data suggest a systematic positive association between the genetic components of variation in subjective well-being and of variation in fertility/partnership behaviors. For males, for instance, genetic dispositions that tend to increase subjective well-being are associated with a higher number of partnerships, a higher probability of being currently in a partnership, and a larger number of children. The analyzes of the NLSY will augment these analyzes in two dimensions: first, the analyzes reveal whether the results vary across socioeconomic contexts (the U.S. versus Denmark), and second, the longitudinal data in the NLSY allow analyzes of changes in happiness, fertility and partnerships over time, which is impossible in the cross-sectional twin data.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler	Joseph	Lee  Rodgers	Axel	 Skytthe
2005	107	Biodemography and Population Genetics	The European Challenge for Healthy Ageing (ECHA): Children and Nephews of Long Living	In the framework of the European Challenge for Healthy Ageing (2002-2004), we have collected data on 752 children and nephews of oldest old women (98 years +) or men (95 years +) in three European countries (Denmark, France, Italy). The child constitutes with his first cousin a concordant pair when his cousin also has or has had a long living parent. Otherwise he constitutes a discordant pair where the parents of the cousin died before the age of 80 years. Using various data collected through survey questionnaires and cognitive and physical tests, we built several indicators of robustness/frailty to disentangle robust from frail children. One of our assumptions is that great longevity and especially healthy longevity is in part the result of previous robustness. Therefore we hypothesize that the children of long living parents present higher robustness than their first cousins whose parents died before the age of 80 years.	Jean-Marie	 Robine	Bernard	 Jeune	Giovanna	 de Benedictis
2005	107	Biodemography and Population Genetics	Genetics of Aging, Health, Disability and Longevity: A Statistical Modeling Perspective	In this paper we review methods and approaches, which can be used in the analysis of genetic data collected in bio-demographical studies of aging and longevity. In particular, we are interesting in methods of evaluation of genetic influence on aging and aging-related processes. We show that for such analyzes methods of quantitative genetics have to be merged with approaches used in survival analysis and biostatistics. We also show that addressing these questions will benefit from combining genetic data with demographic and epidemiological information, as well as with data collected in longitudinal studies of aging. We show that combining genetic data with morbidity, disability and longevity data requires development of new statistical methods. In particular, traditional methods of heterogeneity analysis, focused on the analysis of effects of individual differences in mortality, must be extended to describe heterogeneity in incidence and fatality rates. The results of application of new approaches are discussed.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Hai	 Huang	Edward	 Hanson
2005	108	Long Term Effects of Early Childhood Interventions	When I’m 104: The Determinants of Healthy Longevity among the Oldest-Old in China	This study uses the China Healthy Longevity Survey of Oldest-Old to investigate the health status of the oldest-old in China. We found that the different measures of health collected in the survey were only moderately related. That is, there is not a single construct called “health”. We found that work history was modestly related to some measures of health. We also found that childhood health and socioeconomic status were correlated with health even at advanced ages. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to examine this connection in developing countries and at such advanced ages.	Dennis	A. Ahlburg	Eric	R. Jensen	Ruyan	 Liao
2005	108	Long Term Effects of Early Childhood Interventions	Who Does the ICDS Nutrition Program Reach, and What Effect Does It Have?	Levels of child malnutrition in India have fallen only slowly during the 1990s, despite significant economic growth and much spent on the ICDS, a large supplementary feeding program. Gains in nutrition status are evident largely amongst the upper socio-economic groups, and amongst boys. We assess the program’s placement and its outcomes, using NFHS data from 1992 and 1998. We find that program placement is clearly regressive across states. The states with the greatest need for the program, ¾ the low-income Northern states with high levels of child malnutrition and nearly half India’s population, ¾ have the lowest program coverage, and the lowest budgetary allocations from the central government. Program placement within a state is more progressive: poorer and larger villages have a higher probability of having an ICDS centre, as do those with other development programs or community associations. We find little evidence of program impact on child nutrition status.	Monica	 Das Gupta	Michael	 Lokshin	Oleksiy	 Ivaschenko
2005	108	Long Term Effects of Early Childhood Interventions	Evaluating the Early Childhood Development Program in the Philippines	In recent years increasing attention and resources have been devoted to early childhood development (ECD) in low to middle income countries. There are few rigorous studies on the effectiveness of ECD related programs for improving children’s cognitive skills and nutritional status in the developing world. We evaluate an important ECD initiative of the Philippine government using data collected over three years on a cohort of 7,188 children age 0-4 at baseline in two “treatment” regions that received the ECD program and a “control” region that did not receive the intervention. The main method we use to estimate the program impact is propensity score based matching of children in the treatment and control regions. In addition to the main effects, we consider whether the ECD program effects differ by the human or social capital of the family, health service providers, and community leaders as well as community socioeconomic characteristics.	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Jere	 Behrman	Paulita	L. Duazo	Socorro	 Gultiano	Elizabeth	 King	Nanette	 Lee
2005	108	Long Term Effects of Early Childhood Interventions	Exploring the Relationship between Childhood Economic Status  and Mid-Life Health Using a Long Panel Survey of Americans	In this paper, we examine the relationship between family income in childhood and health in mid-life. We attempt to sort out the direct effects of childhood economic status on child health that carries through into adulthood and indirect effects via adult socioeconomic status. We explore the relationship between low birth weight and subsequent health status over the life course to investigate potential long-run effects of an early life health shock. We examine the role of the timing of economic deprivation during childhood, especially poverty very early in life. The data allow us to examine income at various points in childhood—the infant years, the toddler years, through adolescence and beyond. Moreover, the analysis examines the extent to which the relationship between childhood family income and mid-life health is driven by persistently low income, as well as the extent to which large fluctuations in income in childhood have detrimental effects in adulthood.	Rucker	C. Johnson	Robert	 Schoeni
2005	109	Immigration and Diversity	Academic Achievements of Children in Immigrant Families	This paper examines the associations between children’s immigrant generation status and academic achievements in the kindergarten and first-grade years for approximately 17,000 children from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey-Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K). The empirical results indicate that, compared to the third and later generations non-Hispanic white children, first- and/or second generation children from regions in Russia/Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa had significantly higher reading and math scores, while first- and/or second-generation children from Latin-America had significantly lower scores. The differences in academic achievements are largely explained by parental and family characteristics, although the neighborhood and school environments, and to a lesser extent, home environment, matter as well for some groups of first- and second-generation children (e.g., Mexico). There is also evidence that, despite lower overall scores, second-generation children from Mexico acquired math skills faster than did third and later generations non-Hispanic white children during the kindergarten and first-grade years.	Wen-Jui	 Han
2005	109	Immigration and Diversity	The Changing Profile of Arab Peoples in the U.S.: New Evidence from the 2000 Census	We assess the demographic and socio-economic characteristics of Arab Americans by nativity and ancestry over the last three decennial censuses using 5% PUMS data. We also compare these characteristics with the total U.S. population over the same period. We define Arab Americans by ancestry and birthplace. Over 1980-2000, the Arab American population doubled in size to about 1.4 million and became more diverse, dominated less by Lebanese/Syrian ancestries. In the 1980s and 1990s, Arab Americans tended to be younger and had more intact family structures than the US population overall. They also tended to be more educated and to earn higher incomes, although foreign-born women had notably poorer labor force outcomes. We will examine if these trends hold true for 2000 as well and if overall, Arab Americans continue to fare well on many indicators of socio-economic assimilation.	Andrzej	 Kulczycki	A.	Peter  Lobo
2005	109	Immigration and Diversity	Naturalization of U.S. Immigrants before Reforms in the 1990s	The influences of gender, origin, and admission criteria are examined in the timing of naturalization for all lawfully admitted adult immigrants of 1978-1991. Individuals entering as spouses may especially seek to naturalize to give visa opportunities to their family members living abroad. Prior research suggests origin differences in completed naturalization levels for foreign-born persons in the census, controlling for duration of residence. Cox regression models are discussed, including sex-specific models with dummy variables for region of origin. Asian origin immigrants show the greatest naturalization propensity and Latin American immigrants show the least naturalization propensity. Immigrants were more likely to naturalize if they were admitted in categories suggesting lower social capital or higher human capital, such as employment-sponsored categories, spouses of aliens, and spouses of citizens.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield	Xiaohe	 Xu	Thomas	M. Kersen	Bunnak	 Poch
2005	109	Immigration and Diversity	African Immigrants: Patterns of Assimilation – Past Research and New Findings	Africans, one of the post-1965 groups of immigrants from less developed countries, differ from pre-1965 European immigrants in their assimilation pattern. This paper explores applicable assimilation models to African immigrants by reviewing the literature on black immigrants and analyzing the PUMS data. It finds that, compared to other immigrants, African immigrants’ high level of human resources does not translate into equivalent level of socio-economic well-being in the U.S. Findings from the analysis suggest that race is an important individual and structural variable in the socio-economic location of African immigrants in the U.S.	Yetty	 Shobo
2005	110	Infant Mortality and Social Inequality	A Birth Weight by Gestational Age View of the Pediatric Paradox	The pediatric paradox, lower African American infant mortality at low birth weights, is traditionally viewed from the marginal distribution of birth weight. Similar findings have not been reported based on the marginal distribution of gestational age. This paper examines the pediatric paradox in terms of birth weight by gestational age, using covariate density defined mixtures of logistic regressions, fitted to New York State birth cohorts 1985-88. The results indicate that the pediatric paradox is isolated in a subpopulation of births accounting for less then 20% of the total birth cohort. The phenomenon is not limited to low birth weight births as is usually reported. It also occurs at normal birth weights with low gestational ages. Finally, the results are consistent with the hypotheses that higher fetal losses may be responsible for the pediatric paradox and African American/European American infant mortality differentials are underestimated.	Timothy	B. Gage	Fu	 Fang	Howard	 Stratton
2005	110	Infant Mortality and Social Inequality	Widening Social Inequalities in Sudden Infant Death Syndrome	Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) is the leading cause of postneonatal infant mortality in the US. Studies have generally found social inequalities and race disparities in risk of SIDS. In 1994, the US Public Health Service launched the “Back to Sleep” campaign, promoting supine sleep position for infants to prevent SIDS. This study asks whether a public health campaign promoting an effective, easy and free intervention reduced social class inequalities. The associations between social class (measured by maternal education) are compared before and after the “Back to Sleep” campaign using the national Linked Birth/Infant Death Data Sets for 1989-1991 and 1996-1998. Although SIDS rates declined (OR=0.57 for 1996-1998 compared to 1989-1991), social inequalities did not decline. In fact, odds ratios for risk of SIDS associated with less maternal education were significantly greater in 1996-1998 than in 1989-1991. The race disparity also increased.	Diane	S. Lauderdale	Kate	 Pickett	Ye	 Luo
2005	110	Infant Mortality and Social Inequality	Correlated Mortality Risks of Siblings in Kenya: An Examination of the Concept of Death Clustering and a Model for Analysis	This paper uses the 1998 Kenya DHS to examine the correlation of mortality risks across siblings. The random-effect parameter in the random model has previously been interpreted in terms of unmeasured and unmeasurable factors, suggesting the presence of death clustering. This is essentially problematic because the concept of unobserved heterogeneity is not the same as death clustering. This paper attempts to clarify the concept of death clustering and demonstrates that the concept needs to be closely associated, and therefore examined, with the sequence of births and deaths in a family. Earlier approaches have been insensitive to sequencing both in the clarification of the concept and in the analytical methods used to examine the presence and extent of death clustering. Using binary sequence models that also incorporate unobserved heterogeneity, we show that the parameter for death clustering is conceptually distinct from the parameter usually obtained for unobserved heterogeneity.	Walter	D. Omariba	Fernando	 Rajulton	Roderic	 Beaujot
2005	110	Infant Mortality and Social Inequality	Infant Mortality and Socioeconomic Status: New Bottle, Same Old Wine	This paper presents results of an ecological analysis of the relationship between infant mortality and economic status in metropolitan Ohio for the period 1960-2000. The data examined are centered on the five censuses undertaken during this 40 year period. The most important conclusion to be drawn from the data is that in spite of some very remarkable declines in infant mortality at all class levels since 1960, there continues to be a very clear and pronounced inverse association between income status and infant mortality. Indeed, the evidence indicates that the relationship has become stronger over the years. These observations are applicable for both sexes, for whites and nonwhites, for neonatal and postneonatal deaths, and for both major cause of death groups. It is concluded that while public health programs are important, any progress in narrowing this long standing differential is unlikely unless ways can be found to enhance the economic well being of the lower socioeconomic groups.	Edward	 Stockwell	Franklin	 Goza	Kelly	 Balistreri
2005	111	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis II	Mapping Social Influence on Fertility: A Mix-Method Approach to Data Collection and Analysis	Mix-method research designs are still a rarely met  challenge in demographic research. This paper draws on insights from a comparative study on the role of informal social networks on fertility behavior in East and West Germany to illustrate the advantages of employing a multi-method research strategy in this field. Theoretical propositions on the importance of social effects due to informal interaction for fertility change, are not yet supported by systematic empirical evidence. Major problems are the correct identification of the relevant informal relationships and the comparability of social networks across population subgroups. We use a combination of in-depth interviewing, network charts and network grids to elicit the map of individual personal relationships and their influence on respondents’ fertility. We collect parallel information from respondents themselves and from members of their social network. We discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this method for the validity and the comparability of the data.	Laura	 Bernardi	Holger	 Von der Lippe	Sylvia	 Keim
2005	111	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis II	Data Archiving and the Implementation of Web-Based Statistical Analysis	Today there are growing concerns and calls for protecting the privacy of individuals and the confidentiality of research data. “HIPAA Compliance” will be the watchword for years to come as data providers struggle to meet new federal guidelines for security and confidentiality. The traditional mechanisms of providing access to data are being called into question, and data producers are beginning to refuse requests for data that one or two years ago would have been considered routine. Data producers, data archivists, and researchers are struggling to find innovative ways to meet state and federal laws, and still allow researchers to conduct well-founded, methodologically valid research.    In response to this need, we have developed OASIS, the Online Analysis and Statistical Information System. OASIS is an innovative web-based program that delivers powerful data analysis capabilities without the need for statistical software on local computers, giving users unparalleled access to data and statistics.	Mark	A. Carrozza	Ronald	 Freyberg	Jonathan	 Kopke	Shiloh	 Turner
2005	111	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis II	Statistical Modeling of Social Networks: Practical Advances and Results	Network modeling is becoming an increasingly important area of research in the social sciences with demographic applications in the population impacts of HIV/AIDS, contraceptive adoption, and chain migration. Statistical modeling of network data has been a challenge, due to sampling and dependence issues. This paper presents some recent advances in statistical network analysis, based on exponential random graph models. The models allow researchers to parameterize structural features of networks, such as degree distributions, assortative mixing, and network configurations like cycles and paths. These features have important practical implications for network sampling, and the methods represent a fundamental advance in network analysis. The methods are demonstrated with a comparative analysis of the friendship networks from 59 schools in the AddHealth study. Across this heterogeneous sample, the best-fitting models included qualitatively similar patterns of assortative mixing on individual attributes (sex, race, grade) and of triadic effects (a friend’s friend is a friend).	Steven	M. Goodreau	Martina	 Morris	Mark	S. Handcock
2005	111	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis II	Comparability in Population Based Surveys: Concepts, Methods and Analysis	This paper examines the problem of cross-population comparability in national health surveys, introduces a framework for conceptualizing the issue, and outlines a strategy for correction.  Reported findings from the literature are used to illustrate that self-reported health measures may give misleading results in the absence of adjustments.  The problem is conceptualized as shifts in response category boundaries across populations when responding to categorical self-report questions.  For instruments to have a common metric in different populations where the same response corresponds to the same level of health, we suggest the use of new survey instruments that incorporate anchoring vignettes and a new statistical model for data analysis, the categorical hierarchical ordered probit (CHOPIT) model.  We use data from 71 countries in the 2002 World Health Survey (WHS) to examine the success of implementation of vignettes in these countries and to compare CHOPIT adjusted results with unadjusted results.	Emre	 Ozaltin	Christopher	J.L. Murray	Ajay	 Tandon
2005	112	Urbanization in Developing Countries	Urban Growth by City and Town Size in India	Urban size is an important attribute influencing urban population growth. The small and intermediate towns are expected to grow slowly compared to large cities in the early phases of urbanization. The study on urban growth by size class of towns would help us to understand the stages of urban development and the changes in the urban structure of a country.  The new economic policy launched in 1991 was expected to generate higher economic growth and increased urbanization. But this is not found to be true, as urban growth has further slowed down in 1991-2001 after a significant reduction in growth rate in 1981-91. Given the increased role of large cities in a globalised environment, it is expected further that the cities will grow faster than the small, medium and large towns. Keeping this in mind, an attempt has been made to analyze urban growth by size, class of towns, and cities in India for the period 1991-2001.	Ram	B. Bhagat
2005	112	Urbanization in Developing Countries	Growth of Slums, Availability of Infrastructure and Demographic Outcomes in Slums: Evidence from India	India’s National Slum Policy was recently formulated against the backdrop of inadequate infrastructure availability in Indian slums. Using a unique nationwide dataset on housing conditions and slum infrastructure from India we shed light on how different the rural, urban poor are from the poor households residing in the slums. We find considerable variations in access to services and credit across MPCE classes. The level of service provision in the slums is between the conditions in the rest of urban areas and rural regions. We also analyze the services available in the slums and examine the improvements in the slum conditions over the last five years. We find that the government is active in initiating most of the slum improvements with the NGOs, and resident associations active primarily in the water – sanitation sector. We find that improvements in the living conditions in the slums have left a lot to be desired.	S.	 Chandrasekhar
2005	112	Urbanization in Developing Countries	Urban Growth in Pre- and Post-Reform Vietnam: Patterns and Components of Growth, the 1979-1989 and 1989-1999 Inter-Censal Periods	In this study, I analyze patterns and components of urban growth in pre- and post-reform Viet Nam, using Shryock’s method based on survival rates and age structures by sex of observed urban population across the consecutive 1979, 1989, and 1999 censuses. The results show that urban growth was low in the 1979-1989 period but increased rapidly in the 1989-1999 period. Natural increase was the most important component that accounted for the urban growth in the two periods, but the contribution of net migration increased significantly in the 1989-1999 period as a result of economic progress in cities supported by reform policies. These empirical results lend strong evidence to support the hypotheses that urban growth in the pre-reform era reflects the socialist urbanization thesis, while urban growth in the post-reform era reflects aspects of the modernization model.	Sang	Thanh Le
2005	112	Urbanization in Developing Countries	Multi-Level and Multi-Group Spatial Segregation in Latin American Mega-Cities: An Analysis of Lima, Peru	The urban structures of Latin American mega-cities are recognised to be unique and intimately related to the economic and social instabilities that have typified countries in the region. Widespread social and economic inequality and highly segregated development patterns have contributed to a socially and culturally fragmented urban environment. Measures of segregation developed for measuring minority and majority interactions capture only certain aspects of segregation and ignore spatial interaction possibilities and physical geographic influences. As such, conventional measures of segregation advocated in the literature need to be reworked to accurately capture important aspects of urban structure and development patterns. This paper utilizes Peruvian census data to analyze segregation patterns in Lima, Peru using adjusted spatial measures to gain a deeper understanding of social interaction processes within the urban environment.	Paul	A. Peters	Emily	 Skop
2005	113	Confidentiality and Spatially Explicit Data	Data Display and Disclosure Risk	At what scale can geographic locations associated with social survey respondents be displayed on maps? Threats to disclosure depend, in part, on the scale of the presentation. This issue will be discussed with specific reference to the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health. Add Health began as a highly clustered school-based design. Information that might identify schools and tie respondents to them is a security threat. Thus, for Add Health, it important to know at what scale of presentation particular schools risk being identified. This risk will be estimated based on the degree of error associated with different scales of presentation relative to the distribution of sampling units, i.e., schools. Of particular interest is regional variability. Threats to data security at a given scale will be greater for rural areas, where schools are more dispersed, than for suburban and urban areas.	Barbara	 Entwisle
2005	113	Confidentiality and Spatially Explicit Data	Providing Spatial Data for Secondary Analysis: Issues and Current Practices	Spatially explicit data pose a series of opportunities and challenges for all the actors involved in providing data for long-term preservation and secondary analysis -- the data producer, the data archive, and the data user. We report on opportunities and challenges for each of the three players, and then turn to a summary of current thinking about how best to prepare, archive, disseminate, and make use of social science data that have spatially explicit identification. The core issue that runs through the paper is the risk of the disclosure of the identity of respondents. If we know where they live, where they work, or where they own property, it is possible to find out who they are. Those involved in collecting, archiving, and using data need to be aware of the risks of disclosure and become familiar with best practices to avoid disclosures that will be harmful to respondents.	Myron	P. Gutmann	Kristine	 Witkowski	Corey	 Colyer	JoAnne	McFarland  O'Rourke	James	W. McNally
2005	113	Confidentiality and Spatially Explicit Data	Household Level Research Combining Remotely Sensed Data and Household Surveys: The Challenge of Protecting Confidentiality		Leah	K. VanWey	Emilio	F. Moran	Alvaro	O. D'Antona
2005	114	Maternal Health in Developing Countries	Maternal Mortality: A New Estimate for Pernambuco	This study examines female death data in five meso-regions of Pernambuco (Brazil) for 2003 in order to identify misclassification of maternal deaths based on the RAMOS method, and then, to compare the 2003 data with 1994 mortality maternal data. A total of 1240 deaths for women aged 10-49 were studied during 2004. Preliminary results show that 50 maternal deaths were identified compared to 23 based on the death certificate reports. Thus, the official reports are almost 120% low. While the level of maternal mortality was much lower than that reported in 1994, the ratio of underreporting remained roughly the same. This represents an underreporting of both the maternal mortality level and the distribution of cause specific-mortality. The higher proportion of misclassification was for indirect maternal deaths (cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases). Eclampsias and cardiovascular diseases were the most common cause of deaths, and violence-related deaths accounted for 11.5% of maternal deaths.	Sandra	 Valongueiro
2005	114	Maternal Health in Developing Countries	Do Women Respond to Expansions in Reproductive Health Care?	One of the cornerstones of progress in improving the health outcomes of women in developing countries is improving the quality and availability of health care that women receive while pregnant and during delivery. In this paper we examine the relationship between access to health services and women’s use of prenatal and delivery care. In the 1990s Indonesia trained and posted some 54,000 nurse-midwives to underserved communities in Indonesia. We show that after the introduction of these midwives, women were more likely to receive early prenatal care, the quality of the care they received was higher, and they were less likely to deliver at home with a traditional birth attendant. These effects are robust to the inclusion of a community-level fixed effect that controls for unobserved aspects of the communities that may determine both program placement and women’s use of care.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg
2005	114	Maternal Health in Developing Countries	Trends and Inequalities in Access to Reproductive Health Services in Developing Countries: Which Services Are Reaching the Poor?	This paper presents an analysis of time trends in average levels and inequalities in the provision of antenatal care and skilled birth attendance, using 61 surveys conducted in 18 Demographic and Health Surveys since 1985. The three main questions explored in the analysis are: (1)What are the trends in average levels and, more importantly, inequalities in delivering antenatal care and skilled birth attendance to women in low income countries over the past two decades? (2)Why are some countries more efficient than others at delivering maternal health interventions to poor populations? (3)Which countries have been more effective at reducing urban-rural inequalities in reproductive health services? A detailed analysis of similarities and differences of socioeconomic gradients of maternal health interventions both within and between countries is presented. This is an important step in considering how economic status may interact with other factors, such as geography, to affect maternal health and pregnancy outcomes.	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Cecilia	 Vidal	Margaret	 Hogan	Angelica	 Sousa	Brian	 Chin
2005	114	Maternal Health in Developing Countries	Health Systems Challenges for Achieving the Millennium Development Goal for Maternal Health: Selected Indian States	Maternal mortality ratio is alarmingly high, and appears to have increased in India. The objectives of this study are to identify the association of core individual, household, community and health systems indicators on care during child birth, and to suggest critical policy and program options for accelerating progress towards Millennium Development Goal for maternal health by the selected Indian states including Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. Data from National Family Health Surveys are used in this analysis. Multivariate logistic regression analysis results show a strong association of women’s education, household wealth, women’s ability to take decisions, use of antenatal care and access to health services with the likelihood of delivery by medically trained provider. Study results emphasize the need for appropriate behavior change communication strategies, social safety nets, enhancing core skills of auxiliary nurse midwives and provider incentives to reduce maternal mortality.	Hafizur	 Rahman	G.	N. V.  Ramana	Eduard	 Bos
2005	115	The Second Generation in New York	Slaves of New York: How Real Estate Structures the Transition to Adulthood for Native Born and Second Generation Youth		Jennifer	 Holdaway
2005	115	The Second Generation in New York	The Second Generation in Metropolitan New York: An Overview of Findings		Philip	 Kasinitz	John	 Mollenkopf	Mary	 Waters
2005	115	The Second Generation in New York	Neighborhood Effects on Second Generation Immigrant Outcomes in New York City	Most multi-level datasets have too few second generation immigrant respondents to permit the analysis of contextual effects on individual-level outcomes. The Immigrant Second Generation in Metropolitan New York survey remedies this situation, as data on the 55 sub-boroughs of New York City can be linked to the responses of 1615 second generation immigrants and 647 native-born respondents between the ages of 18 and 32. Some notable results include the impact of living in a majority-black neighborhood on college attendance: the effect is negative for every group except West Indians, for whom the effect is positive, net of individual-level controls. In addition, native-born black men are the group most likely to report experiencing prejudice while looking for work, although growing up in a poor neighborhood increases the likelihood of experiencing prejudice for all groups.	Monica	 McDermott
2005	115	The Second Generation in New York	The Second Generation's Labor Market Incorporation	Both social science and everyday observation suggest that immigrants and their ‘ethnic’ descendants tend to congregate in particular industries and occupations. However, the centrality of race and ethnicity as organizing principles of labor market trajectories of immigrants and their children, and the mechanisms that produce these concentrations -- are subjects of much debate in the immigration literature. Using data from the Second Generation in Metropolitan New York project and the Current Population Survey, this study examines patterns of ethnic and racial concentration in the local labor market, among several groups of young New Yorkers. By utilizing two different measures of ethnic concentration in the labor market, I argue that: race and ethnicity have a significant role in shaping labor market experiences of the studied groups; that patterns of labor market concentration vary across groups and industries; and that we cannot assume co-ethnic employment on the basis of ethnic representation measures.	Aviva	 Zeltzer-Zubida
2005	116	Population and Development	Revisiting the Kuznets Curve: Development and Inequality in Nang Rong, Thailand	In this paper, we use information on household asset ownership to examine patterns of inequality over a sixteen-year period in Nang Rong, a relatively poor agrarian district in Northeastern Thailand in the midst of the development process. Drawing on theories predicting increases in inequality at early stages of development, particularly Kuznets’ ‘inverted-U’ shaped relationship between income inequality and economic development, we hypothesize that inequality has increased over this period, partly due to shifts in demographic behavior in the region, particularly migration. Using information on household asset ownership in 1984, 1994, and 2000, we create an index of household wealth that allows us to investigate this hypothesis at the village and district level using a variety of measures of inequality (the Gini coefficient, the Thiel index, and the coefficient of variation). We finally explore some of the determinants of household shifts in relative status over the period studied.	Jeffrey	 Edmeades	Varachai	 Thongthai
2005	116	Population and Development	The Effects of Adult Longevity on Saving	Many countries experienced a remarkable increase in life expectancy during the 20th century, but the development implications have received only modest attention. We analyze steady state and out-of-steady-state effects of the transition in adult longevity on the national saving rate using an overlapping generations model. We show that the national saving rate depends on both the level and rate of change in adult survival. Countries with rapid transitions have particularly elevated saving rates. Analysis using world panel data supports the hypothesis that countries with higher adult survival have higher saving rates. The rate of change in adult survival has an additional effect on saving, as hypothesized, in Western and high-performing East Asian countries. Further support for the model is found in the long-term historical experience of countries for which data covering more than one-hundred years are available.	Tomoko	 Kinugasa	Andrew	 Mason
2005	116	Population and Development	Poverty Reduction: Does Reproductive Health Matter?	Although common sense suggests that poor reproductive health outcomes adversely affect the chances of poor women and their families to escape poverty, the evidence base to support this argument at the household level is thin. Disease advocates have done a much better job than their reproductive health counterparts in demonstrating the links between poor health and poverty, the emphasis of current funding priorities.    This paper reviews and assesses existing research on the links between reproductive health outcomes — adolescent pregnancy, unintended pregnancy including abortion, high and excess fertility, and poorly managed obstetric complications — and poverty, particularly at the individual and household levels. We examine the specific causal mechanisms — education, productivity and earnings, household savings and income, and health feedbacks — linking each outcome to poverty. This evidence on the reproductive health-poverty linkages could be used to direct resources toward poor women to improve their reproductive health and help them and their families escape poverty.	Tom	 Merrick	Margaret	 Greene
2005	116	Population and Development	The Measurement and Prevalence of Developmental Thinking about the Family: Evidence from Nepal	This paper evaluates the theory presented by Thornton (2001, forthcoming) that the interrelated ideas of societal development and modernity are understood and believed by ordinary people. Using qualitative and quantitative data collected in Nepal we examine the knowledge and beliefs of ordinary people, asking the extent to which they understand the ideas of development and modernity and use these ideas in evaluating the world around them. An important outcome of this study is its confirmation of the ability to measure the concepts of development in a survey conducted with a broad spectrum of people in Nepal. There is also evidence supporting the contention that developmental thinking has been disseminated widely in Nepal, with large fractions of people understanding and endorsing developmental models. This evidence is consistent with the expectation that developmental thinking has been widely disseminated around the world and is related to people’s beliefs and values about family life.	Arland	 Thornton	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	Colter	 Mitchell
2005	117	Adolescent Relationships and Sexual Behavior	The Qualities of Adolescent Romantic Relationships and Sexual Behavior: Reciprocal Effects	Adolescent sexual and reproductive behaviors typically occur within a relationship context. Nonetheless, beyond rather schematic representations of relationships (e.g., casual vs. main partner; duration of the relationship), little is known about how relationship qualities influence sexual decision-making. The purpose of this analysis is to investigate how specific features of the relationship influence the decision to have sex within that relationship, as well as to explore how the experience of sexual intimacy influences subsequent relationship quality. We rely on the first two waves of interview data collected in connection with the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study. The stratified, random sampling design of the TARS study resulted in interviews with over 1300 adolescents, including oversamples of Hispanic and African American adolescents. In-depth relationship history narratives elicited from 100 of these respondents add depth to the developing portrait of ways in which relationships influence sexual decisions, and sexual intimacy influences or changes perceptions of relationship qualities and dynamics.	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore
2005	117	Adolescent Relationships and Sexual Behavior	The Influence of Relationship Context on Relationship-Specific Contraceptive Behavior Among Youth	A substantial body of literature has informed our understanding of individual-level sociodemographic and psychosocial characteristics associated with sexual activity and protective practices among adolescents and young adults. Far less, however, is known about relationship-specific sexual behavior, despite the growing number of studies that indicate that sexual activity and protective practices occur within a relational context. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), this paper seeks to explain variation in the type of contraceptive method used within adolescent and young adult sexual relationships by examining the influences of both individual and relationship factors. We exploit the longitudinal aspect of Add Health to construct comprehensive sexual histories from adolescence to young adulthood and provide a detailed description of the ways in which these relationships unfold over the life course. We utilize a multilevel approach to investigate the influences of individual and relationship factors on relationship-specific contraceptive behavior.	Yasamin	 Kusunoki	Dawn	 Upchurch
2005	117	Adolescent Relationships and Sexual Behavior	Contraceptive Use Patterns across Female Teens’ Sexual Relationships	Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we examine how characteristics of girls' current and previous sexual relationships and partners are associated with contraceptive consistency across their sexual relationships. By sequentially ordering all of girls’ sexual relationships, from first to most recent, we have a wealth of information about previous relationships that we examine to see how they influence subsequent relationships. Our sample includes 2,414 female adolescents who reported a total of 5,344 sexual relationships. We find that characteristics of current and previous sexual relationships and partners, as well as individual and family background factors, are associated with contraceptive consistency across girls' sexual relationships. analyzes control for unobserved individual-level factors that may be associated with sexual and contraceptive use histories and current contraceptive consistency.	Jennifer	 Manlove	Suzanne	 Ryan	Kerry	 Franzetta
2005	117	Adolescent Relationships and Sexual Behavior	Before First Sex: Emotional Relationships and Physical Behaviors among Adolescents in the Philippines	In developing countries, most studies concerning early sexual activity focus on the age at first sex with little focus on the patterns of emotional relationships and sexual behaviors leading up to first sex. These patterns could help identify factors that lead to delayed first intercourse and subsequent sexual risk behaviors. The precoital activities of 2,051 adolescents ages 17 to 19 in the Philippines are examined using data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey. Only 25% of the sample is sexually active, but most are engaging in dating, courting, romantic relationships, hand-holding, and kissing. Analysis of the timing of these activities reveals that adolescents who progress through them quickly are at significantly greater risk of having sex sooner. Among this sample the adolescents have sex several years after they begin courting, romantic relationships, and dating, providing an opportunity to ensure they are making informed choices about their sexual behavior.	Ushma	D. Upadhyay	Michelle	J. Hindin
2005	118	African American Mortality and Health	Advances in Perinatal Care and Increasing Race/Ethnic Disparity in Infant Mortality	Although substantial declines in infant mortality rates have occurred across race/ethnic groups, there has been a marked increase in relative disparity in risk of infant death. The objective is to gain insight into the reasons for growing race/ethnic inequality based on cause-of-death specific data from linked birth/infant death cohort files for 1989-1991 and 1995-1998. We are particularly interested in widening disparities which followed in the wake of advances in perinatal care. We find that the relative gap between non-Hispanic white (NHW) infants and infants born to both non-Hispanic black (NHB) and Mexican American mothers increased when innovations in health care occur in a continuing context of social inequality. Models of absolute change demonstrate that, among low weight births, absolute declines in mortality from some leading causes were greater for NHW infants than for infants born to NHB and Mexican American women. However, these findings do not hold for infants born to Mexican immigrants.	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song	Daniel	A. Powers
2005	118	African American Mortality and Health	Race, Socioeconomic Status, and the Perceived Importance of Positive Self-Presentation in Health Care	Hundreds of studies have documented disparities in medical treatment in the US. These findings have generated research and initiatives intended to understand and ameliorate such disparities. Most approaches implicitly assume that disadvantaged patients’ beliefs and attitudes toward healthcare are at odds with the healthcare system, failing to consider whether patients use particular strategies to overcome providers’ potentially negative perceptions of them and/or obtain quality medical care. In this paper, we examine positive self-presentation as a strategy that may be used by disadvantaged groups to improve their medical treatment. Analysis of survey data suggests that both African Americans and lower socioeconomic status persons are more likely than whites or higher socioeconomic status persons to report that positive self-presentation is important for their getting the best medical care. Based on these findings, we suggest several routes for future research that will advance our understanding of patients’ everyday strategies for getting the best healthcare.	Jennifer	R. Malat	Michelle	 van Ryn	David	 Purcell
2005	118	African American Mortality and Health	The Impact of Income, Education, and Family Structure Distributions on Black-White Disparities in Child Health	Black children fare worse than White children on many, if not most, indicators of health status and health care access. While it is widely acknowledged that the lower family incomes, lower parental education and fewer two-parent households of black children contribute to their poorer health profiles, there have been few attempts to assess the relative contributions of these social factors on Black-White child health disparities. This paper uses data collected by the National Health Interview Survey during 1998-2002 to assess the impact of differences in income, education and family structure distributions on twelve measures of children’s health status and access to health care. Our results show that differences in income distributions between Whites and Blacks generally have a larger impact on child health indicators than either differences in parental education or family structure. Multiple adjustment for all three social factors produces relatively small additional reductions in Black-White child health disparities.	Elsie	R. Pamuk	Gloria	 Wheatcroft	Jennifer	 Parker
2005	118	African American Mortality and Health	Race and Mortality: The Role of Socioeconomic Status in Determining Racial Differentials in Age-Specific Mortality	Two of the most popular topics in contemporary demography are the mortality differentials across race and socioeconomic groups. The general findings of this body of research indicates that blacks suffer from higher mortality than whites, and individuals with low socioeconomic status are subject to higher mortality risks than their high socioeconomic status counterparts. Although the proximate determinants of these differentials remain vague, there is a clear interconnection between the mortality differentials across racial groups and those across socioeconomic groups. Specifically, race differences in socioeconomic status are associated with a significant portion of racial differentials in health and mortality. It is unclear, however, if the role of socioeconomic status in producing racial mortality differentials varies across the life course. In this paper I analyze the role of socioeconomic status in explaining racial differentials in age-specific mortality. I find that the explanatory power of socioeconomic status systematically varies across working ages.	Quincy	 Stewart
2005	119	Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage - A Historical Perspective	The Dynamics of the Marriage Market: A Historical Examination of the Impact of Forces of Attraction and Supply on Marriage in the United States	Whether and how individuals shift their marriage market in response to the relative availability of partners is a largely unaddressed issue in the literature on marriage markets and assortative mating. A historical investigation into this issue can shed considerable light not only on our understanding of marital behavior but also on the lingering racial differences in the propensity to marry. This paper will utilize a method developed by Qian and Preston (1993) to decompose age, race and education-specific marriage groups into the proportion due to supply within groups and attraction within a group. This two-sex model has the distinct advantage of being able to include not just married partners, but also the supply of available mates. Using weighted least squares regression, I will then examine the extent to which black and white women shift their marriage choices in response to supply of men.	Audrey	N. Beck
2005	119	Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage - A Historical Perspective	Finding the Right Partner Rural Homogamy in Nineteenth-Century Sweden	Choosing a marriage partner was a crucial process in pre-industrial society, especially for the landowning classes. This study focuses on social aspects of mate selection in five rural parishes in southern Sweden 1829-1894. We use an individual level database containing information on a large number of marriages and the social origin of the marrying couple, regardless of whether they were born in the parish or not. The data makes it possible to study homogamy, without introducing possible selection biases by only studying the non-migrating population, which is of considerable importance in a society characterized by very high levels of geographical mobility. The results show a community characterized by quite strong homogamy, but also with pronounced differences in homogamy between social groups. Landholding peasants were most homogamous, while the semi-landless were least homogamous. The pattern of homogamy also remained fairly constant over time despite fundamental economic and social change.	Martin	 Dribe	Christer	 Lundh
2005	119	Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage - A Historical Perspective	Decision-Making Context and the Risk of Marital Dissolution	The empirical literature on the determinants of divorce emphasizes individual and couple variables, such as income, employment, education, age at marriage, presence of children and family background. In contrast to the literature on the marriage, relatively little research considers the ways in which the social-structural environment affects marital dissolution. We argue that a contextual view provides a more complete picture of the determinants of divorce. In this paper, we assess the effects of several contextual variables on the risk of marital dissolution. Specifically, we examine three factors: the cost of homeownership, opportunities for work, and the availability of alternative partners. We use data drawn from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics merged with data characterizing the county of residence of sample members. We examine the impact of these contextual variables, the ways in which they interact with gender and race/ethnicity, and whether or not the effects have changed over time.	Rebecca	 Dunning
2005	119	Marriage, Divorce, and Remarriage - A Historical Perspective	The Effects of Socio-Cultural and Labour Market Conditions on Marital Separation During the Early Democratic Period in Spain	In this paper, we examine the socio-cultural conditions and labor market participation correlates of marital separation in transition Spain. The reason is that it has been clearly shown that these factors are much more strongly related to divorce in Spain and other Mediterranean countries than in other parts of the Western world. We focus our attention on differences between men and women and use some theoretical frameworks that explain divorce rates in industrialised countries. We especially include “modernisation” in aiming to explain divorce in Spain during its early period of integration in contemporary Europe. One feature of this work is that “modernisation” is captured not only on an individual but also on a contextual level. This dual approach is especially relevant in a country such as Spain, i.e. where regional heterogeneity in economic and socio-cultural spheres is large and the influence of the family and local community is still strong.	Rene	 Houle
2005	120	Methodological Research on Fertility and Family Planning	Attitudes, Subjective Norms and Perceived Behavioral Control as Predictors of Fertility Intentions	We study the importance of proximate determinants of fertility intentions with the purpose to understand deeper the childbearing decision-making process. We focus on parity-specific and time-specific intentions (i.e. the intention to have a child or an additional child within the next two years) and on how they depend on 1) attitudes towards childbearing; 2) perceived normative pressure by relevant others; 3) perceived behavioral control. We use data from a survey held in 2002 in Bulgaria. Information is consistently collected within a framework based in the theory of planned behavior. Our findings show that attitudes and norms have an effect on childbearing intentions for first and second birth, while perceived behavioral control has an effect only on the transition to second birth. We finally argue for the importance of including questions related to these approaches in standard demographic surveys.	Dimiter	 Philipov
2005	120	Methodological Research on Fertility and Family Planning	The Estimation of Unwanted Fertility	The estimation of unwanted fertility is a major objective of demographic surveys, including the Demographic and Health Surveys [DHS]. Levels and trends in unwanted fertility are important input to the formulation of population policy and the evaluation of family planning programs. Yet the existing methods, by common agreement, inaccurately estimate unwanted fertility. We first reviews methods currently available for estimating unwanted fertility, assessing their strengths and limitations. We then present a new method for the estimation of unwanted fertility that in most settings will suffer from less bias than existing methods. The new method makes use of the standard item desire for another birth. The method is simple to apply and makes minimal data demands. We illustrate the method with DHS data from Bangladesh and Egypt. In both, the new method yields estimates of the percentage of births unwanted that differ from standard estimates by as much as one-third.	John	B. Casterline	Laila	 El-Zeini
2005	120	Methodological Research on Fertility and Family Planning	A Pooled Time-Series Analysis on the Relation Between Fertility and Female Employment Over Space and Time	Various authors find that in OECD countries the cross-country correlation between fertility and female employment turned from a negative value before the 1980s to a positive value thereafter. In this paper we try to combine methodological and substantial reasons for model selection and specification to analyze unmeasured country and time heterogeneity with respect to female employment. Using data of 22 OECD countries from 1960-2000 we estimate pooled time series models of fertility and female employment by applying random and fixed effects panel models as well as Prais-Winston regressions with panel-corrected standard errors and autoregressive errors. Our empirical findings reveal substantial differences across countries and time periods in the effects of female employment on fertility. Initial increases in female employment strongly lowers fertility, but continued increases have a progressively less negative effect. The country heterogeneity in the effect of female employment can also be confirmed for different regions as well as for varying welfare and gender regimes.	Henriette	 Engelhardt	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz
2005	120	Methodological Research on Fertility and Family Planning	Constructing Fertility Measures with the Own-Children Technique: Old Methods for New Data	Own-children measures can be used when direct information on fertility is not available. Although a wealth of fertility information is collected in the United States, many existing data sources are not suitable for addressing important questions because the sample sizes are too small (e.g. origin-specific immigrant subgroups) or they lack information on key covariates. Although the decennial Census no longer collects fertility information, own-children techniques applied to the 2000 PUMS files offer a potential remedy to this fundamental problem. Here we outline a protocol for constructing own-children measures for PUMS data and examine the reliability of the measures using several external comparisons. Our initial assessments suggest that the approach yields reasonable aggregate level estimates for many subgroups. We also investigate instances where the estimates appear to be less reliable. Lastly we examine the extent to which the measures can be employed to estimate individual level models of fertility behavior.	Michael	 Sobczak	Gray	 Swicegood	Carl	P. Schmertmann
2005	121	Adolescent Fertility in Developing Countries	Increasing Adolescent and Youth Fertility in Brazil: A New Trend or a One-Time Event?	The objective of this paper is to analyze the increase in fertility rates among adolescent and young women in Brazil in the last decade, by utilizing census data and the household survey data, in order to set the scenario where this increase has happened and to hypothesize about the trends for the next decade. The results have shown that adolescent or youth fertility, those understood as the population aged 15-19 years old, has increased while age specific fertility rates for all other age groups has decreased. Additionally, the 2000 census data show that the largest increases were among the less educated women, the poorest and living in urban areas. These results indicate that although this is a general trend in the population, the public health system must put attention to this fact, since the increase is much larger among the poorest in the population.	Suzana	M Cavenaghi	Elza	 Berquó
2005	121	Adolescent Fertility in Developing Countries	Regional Variation in Age at First Birth among the Adolescents in Nigeria	This study examines the regional variation and correlates of socio-economic and demographic variables of age at first birth among adolescents in Nigeria. We use data from the baseline survey of the VISION Project in 15 local government areas of three states from the three major regions in Nigeria. Adolescents were identified as individuals between 10-19 years. Within this age group, 768 (12.2% males, and 87.8% females) reported first birth at the mean age of 16.3 years (15.9 years in Bauchi, 16.7 years in Enugu and 17.2 in Oyo). Ages were re-grouped into three categories; less than 14 years, 14-16 and 17-19 years. The highest concentration of births is in the age group 14-16 years in Bauchi (53.2), 17-19 years in Enugu (55.3%) and Oyo State (70.4%). We correlate socio-economic variables including educational status, work status, marital status, ever use and current use of family planning methods, and fertility intention.	Opeyemi	 Fadeyibi	Alfred	 Adewuyi
2005	121	Adolescent Fertility in Developing Countries	Adolescent Fertility in India: Levels, Differentials and Determinants	This paper examines the fertility pattern, the differentials and the factors associated with fertility among married adolescents in India and its states. Information from Sample Registration System and the NFHS 2 data are utilized for the purpose; the paper uses bi-variate and multi-variate analyzes for this purpose.     Adolescent fertility in India has declined by about 39 percent during 1971-99; among the states, it ranges from 21 in Goa to 142 in Madhya Pradesh. Contribution of 15-19 age group to total fertility has declined only marginally during the past three decades. The high share of adolescent fertility in some of the states having relatively low fertility is disturbing. The significance of age at marriage, place of residence, education, standard of living, decision making power, experience of domestic violence and use of contraception is established through the multi-variate analysis. The paper subsequently discusses the implications of these and other findings.	K.	 Anilkumar
2005	121	Adolescent Fertility in Developing Countries	Tradition and Change: The Transition to Adulthood among Ethiopian Women	Demographic decompositions of recent fertility decline in urban Ethiopia indicate that a major component of the decline is delayed marriage among recent cohorts of women. Studies conducted in other African countries suggest that as age at marriage increases, premarital sex becomes increasingly common. However, in Ethiopia the rise in age at marriage has not been accompanied by a rise in premarital fertility. This paper examines the social determinants of age at first intercourse, first marriage, and first birth among several cohorts of Ethiopian women to test alternative theories of change in the timing of early life course transitions. The study is based on data from the 2000 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey. Results of discrete-time hazards models indicate that education plays a major role in delaying the start of sexual activity, entry into marriage, and the start of childbearing in Ethiopia.	David	P. Lindstrom	Gebre-Egziabher	 Kiros	Dennis	 Hogan
2005	122	Demography of Political Conflict and Violence	Demographics and Security in Maritime Southeast Asia	With a population of 325 million, Maritime Southeast Asia is an area of significant economic and security interests for the United States. Demographically, the significance of the region is increasing, with a current rate of population growth exceeding that for the rest of the world. The region is also home to one of the largest Muslim populations in the world, 200 million. The prominence of the Muslim population makes the relationship between Islam and the state an important part of regional politics. Other demographic characteristics also merit consideration for analysis of regional politics and conflict. This paper will review several demographic variables, including urbanization, differential growth rates, population dispersion, migration, and population age structure and review their implications for regional conflict and security.	Brian	 Nichiporuk	Clifford	 Grammich
2005	122	Demography of Political Conflict and Violence	Demographic Change and the Balance of Power in Europe -- Will Population Trends Translate into New Political Conflicts?	While many European studies deal with the consequences of population aging on the policy-level (e.g. social security), remarkably little attention has been paid to the politics-level. However, demographic change makes European countries not only age; it also affects their population sizes; the majority of them will shrink to a greater (e.g. Italy) or lesser extent (e.g. Germany). On the other hand, some countries will grow in population size (e.g. France). The question is, whether these different developments are going to affect the balance of power in European Union institutions. Using UN data on all 28 member and candidate countries of the EU we will give a comparative perspective on the demographic developments until 2050 to analyze how the distribution of votes will be affected and if new lines of political conflict (in addition to the traditional ones, e.g. big vs. small or North vs. South) are likely to emerge.	Harald	 Wilkoszewski	Ursula	M. Muench
2005	122	Demography of Political Conflict and Violence	Losing Ground: The Interaction between Demography, Land-Use Policy, Ethnic Conflict and Environment in Israel	This research examines the role of ethnic conflict on the environment in Israel as it is mediated by demographics and land-use policies. We contextualize the impact of population growth on the environment – a relationship that is filtered through land-use policies. These policies, in turn, are influenced by ideological, political and security concerns – all of which have ethnic/demographic dimensions. As such, land-use policy is used explicitly as a tool for spatial control in which the Jewish population is encouraged, through various incentives, to live in particular locals in low-density communities. Simultaneously, limits are placed on non-Jewish mobility within the country and on the physical expansion of non-Jewish communities. A direct result of these policies is increased ethnic tension, which feeds back to policy formulation. By approaching the issue from an environmental perspective, we suggest that environmental quality is an unintended victim of this demographically driven policy-ethnic tension feedback loop.	Daniel	E. Orenstein	Steven	P. Hamburg
2005	122	Demography of Political Conflict and Violence	Various Causes of the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda with Emphasis on the Role of Population Pressure	First, revised data are presented on demographic rates in Rwanda in 1960-2000. These figures are more accurate than the existing ones, because they take better into account of the effects of various episodes of violence that occurred in 1959-1994. Next, we review the various analyzes that have been carried out aiming to explain why the genocide took place. Use is hereby made of views expressed by demographers, other social scientists and historians. Next, we provide a broad definition of population pressure and an operational definition. It is defined as extent of (im)balance between population size, agricultural production and land. Then we determine how important population pressure was in Rwanda in 1960-2000 and compared to other countries. We conclude, in the final section, that in Rwanda population pressure was very high and continuously present in 1960-2000 and that it was one of the two main groups of causes of the genocide.	Jeroen	 van Ginneken	Margreet	 Wiegers
2005	123	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	“Mamma” and the Diffusion of Cohabitation: The Italian Case	In this paper we explore the role of parental attitudes in the likelihood to start cohabiting in Italy. The Italian context is characterized by a low prevalence of cohabitation, and by the presence of particularly strong ties between parents and children. Following Rosina and Fraboni (2004) we hypothesize that the limited diffusion of cohabitation in Italy is not so much due to the limited interest of the Italian youth towards this type of union, but most of all to the convenience of the children in the “familistic” Italian society to avoid choices which are openly clashing with the values of parents. To test this hypothesis, we use data from a new survey on Italian youth and their mothers and model the likelihood to start cohabiting. Our preliminary results (on women only) document the importance of the societal context (i.e. the area of residence) but also of the perceived parental attitude.	Alessandro	 Rosina
2005	123	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Cohabitation among Immigrants versus Natives in the U.S.	The growing literature on U.S. cohabitation has largely ignored immigrants’ cohabitation experiences. This omission is consequential not only because immigrants comprise an increasing share of the U.S. population, but also because they are socioeconomically disadvantaged, placing them at greater risk for cohabitation. We use data from the 2000-2004 March CPS to examine the factors associated with cohabitation by generational status across race-ethnic groups, with an emphasis on socioeconomic characteristics (e.g., education and employment). This descriptive analysis will reveal the extent to which immigrant and native cohabitors possess similar characteristics. We also will model the factors related to (1) being in a union and (2) union type (i.e., cohabitation versus marriage). Both models will test for an interaction between generational status and education to evaluate whether the negative effects of education attenuate across generations. These analyzes will facilitate comparisons between cohabitors and marrieds for immigrants versus natives.	Susan	L. Brown	Jennifer	E. Glick
2005	123	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Changes in the Relationship between the Outcomes of Cohabiting Partnerships and Fertility in Britain: Evidence from the 1958 and 1970 Birth Cohort Studies	We investigate the relationship between the presence and characteristics of children and the outcomes of nonmarital unions among two cohorts of British women. We compare the effect of having children on the risk of partnership dissolution and on the odds that cohabitation is converted to marriage for women born in 1958 and 1970. The analysis uses a multilevel competing risks model to allow for multiple partnerships and births, and to distinguish between two outcomes of cohabiting unions (separation and marriage). We also use a multiprocess model, in which the outcomes of cohabitation are modeled simultaneously with fertility, to allow for the potential joint determination of partnership and childbearing decisions. The analysis is based on partnership and birth histories between the ages of 16 and 30 from the National Child Development Study and the 1970 British Birth Cohort Study.	Fiona	 Steele	Constantinos	 Kallis	Harvey	 Goldstein	Heather	 Joshi
2005	123	International Perspectives on Cohabitation	Living with a Man: Cohabitation in Africa	African DHS surveys generally distinguish between cohabitation and marriage through a question that distinguishes “being married” from “living with a man.” The answer is left to respondents; no criterion is proposed to help in the choice. In most instances, the distinction is made either on the basis of a ceremony or of payment of bridewealth, the second being by far the most important except in Muslim populations of the region. Islamic marriage deserves special consideration, because it typically occurs before-- often several years before—cohabitation. Correspondingly, many DHS in the Sahel region do not ask the “living with a man” question, and instead probe on consummation of the union. In this paper, we consider the wide variety of questions on marital status in African DHS and attempt to account for the diversity of proportions of cohabitations among unions by considering traditional bridewealth customs and rules regulating the attribution of paternity rights.	Etienne	 van de Walle	Solene	 Lardoux
2005	124	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Income Differentials on Body Mass Index in the U.S. (1971-2002): A Complex Pattern of Consistency and Change within Race-Sex Groups	In this study, we examine income differentials on BMI using a series of comparable, nationally representative samples of U.S. adults, and we consider whether or not differentials have changed over a three decade period from 1971 to 2002. We also consider the varying nature of this association between race-sex groups, and we employ a more flexible modeling strategy than has been used in past studies to more accurately represent the relationship between BMI and income. We find significant non-linear relationships between BMI and income that have changed for some groups and remained consistent for others despite large increases with time in mean BMI along the entire income continuum. Moreover, these findings suggest that previous generalizations about the association between income and weight status may have been hampered by a mis-specification of the relationship, particularly among men and blacks, where it is often concluded that there is no association.	Virginia	W. Chang	Diane	S. Lauderdale
2005	124	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Estimates and Projections of Prevalence of Type Two Diabetes Mellitus in the US 2001, 2011, 2021: The Role of Demographic Factors in T2DM	Objectives: The goals of this project are to 1) estimate the US’ prevalence of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus for 2001 to 2021 and 2) compare demographic contributions with those made by changes in the population’s Body Mass Index. Research Design and Methods: Component projections for four racial/ethnic groups were made through 2021. Age- sex-, -ethnic group-specific prevalence of diabetes was generated from the NHIS and NHANES surveys of 1999-2000 and applied to the estimates of the U.S. population. Several scenarios of BMI change per group were generated. Sensitivity analysis assessed the relative contribution of population growth, demographic change, and BMI change. Results: Evaluation of a range of scenarios shows that change in BMI affects overall prevalence through demographic composition. Conclusion: While both demographic factors of growth and composition contribute to changing T2DM prevalence; composition plays the major role. As these are intrinsic factors, preventative and therapeutic interventions are required.	Sharon	W. Kirmeyer	Susan	C. Eaton
2005	124	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Age, Period and Cohort Effects on Overweight and Obesity in a Nationally Representative Sample of Adults	Although “epidemic” is a technically correct description of rapidly increasing obesity rates in the U.S., it is premature to conflate the obesity epidemic with secular trends (i.e., period effects), since no study to date has disentangled period effects from age and birth cohort effects. This study estimated the relative importance of age, period and cohort (APC) effects by utilizing data from 1.6 million adults in the National Health Interview Survey, 1976-2002. Both logistic and continuous APC models supported the assumption that period effects are primarily responsible for the obesity epidemic. For instance, net of education, age and cohort, the odds of class II obesity in 2002 were 5.3 times greater than in 1976. Models stratified by race and sex revealed many similarities but some differences; e.g., unlike white male cohorts, white female and all black cohorts born after 1955 exhibited increasing risks of obesity. Implications of these results are discussed.	Eric	N. Reither
2005	124	Obesity, Health, and Mortality	Does China's One-Child Policy Generate Childhood Obesity in the 1990s?	Drawing on prospective data from the 1993, 1997 and 2000 China Health and Nutrition Survey, this analysis investigates the relationship between the one-child policy and obesity among children age 0-5 at baseline. The policy is measured directly as policy strength and indirectly as sibship composition. Cross-sectional and longitudinal findings from multilevel models suggest that, first, obesity among preschoolers and primary school children increases in the 1990s with a slower pace than that found in other studies in China. Second, single children and those in strong policy communities do not differ from sibling children and children in weak policy communities, after adjusting for household and contextual characteristics. Thus, the policy does not seem to bear a relation to childhood obesity directly or indirectly, and this study provides little evidence to support the public perception that the one-child policy is associated with the rising epidemic of obesity in transitional China.	Juhua	 Yang
2005	125	Migration, Migrants, and Places	Occupational Disparity in a Migrant Metropolis: A Case Study of Atlanta	As the populations of immigrant and migrant groups swell in Atlanta, Georgia, the nature of race and ethnic relations in the metropolis, once historically dominated by a black-white dichotomy, is changing. We use the 2000 Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) for the Atlanta metropolitan area to study the occupational distribution of immigrants, return migrants, primary migrants, and non-migrants. The results indicate that white return, primary, and non-migrants are more likely to work in a professional job than members of all other groups, that black return and primary migrants are over-represented in office and administrative occupations, that foreign-born Asians are more likely to work in professional occupations than foreign-born Hispanics, and that foreign-born Hispanics are very over-represented in construction jobs. By comparing different types of migrant groups, including non-migrants, and by taking into account race, ethnicity, and nativity, we more clearly delineate economic stratification, and economic adaptation, in the Atlanta metropolitan region.	Robert	M. Adelman	Hui-shien	 Tsao
2005	125	Migration, Migrants, and Places	Selectivity Patterns in Puerto Rican Migration	In the year 2000, 42 percent of the population over the age of 18 born in Puerto Rico was living in the United States. Census data suggest that Puerto Rico loses about 5 percent of its adult population to the United States in a five year period. This paper analyzes the skills, demographics and wages of Puerto Rican migrants and stayers using 2000 Census data. A pattern of negative selection is found. Puerto Rican migrants are less educated than non-migrants although they also have a higher labor force participation. Returns to education are higher in Puerto Rico than in U.S. for the better educated but lower for the least educated. The less skilled also stand to gain the most relative wages from out-migration.	Maria	E. Enchautegui
2005	125	Migration, Migrants, and Places	Diaspora: An Important and Neglected Dimension of Australia's Demography	Although Australia is best known as a country of immigration, around one million Australians currently live outside of their homeland on a permanent or long term basis. This paper uses quantitative and qualitative data sources to assess the extent to which Australia’s expatriate community fulfils the five defining criteria of contemporary diasporas by Butler (2001). These criteria include being a scattering of two or more destinations, a relationship to an actual or imagined homeland, awareness of one’s group identity, making allowances for multiple identities and existence over at least two generations. It finds that the Australian expatriate community qualifies on the basis of at least four of those criteria. It is argued that Australia’s diaspora constitutes a meaningful and distinctive group and represents an important subject. It is a significant but neglected part of Australia’s demography, reflected in the Australian Senate setting up an Inquiry into the Australian expatriate community.	Graeme	J. Hugo
2005	125	Migration, Migrants, and Places	The Impact of Ebbing Immigration in Los Angeles: New Insights from an Established Gateway	Los Angeles was once a premier immigrant gateway. In 1990, the state of California was home to 38% of all recent immigrant arrivals in the U.S., half of those living in Los Angeles county alone. But there was a significant slowdown after 1990, and other states and metros have drawn attention as emerging new immigrant destinations (Singer 2004). What has been neglected is the substantial change occurring in established gateway concentrations-on the backside-as immigrants spread out to new destinations.    During the 1990s, new arrivals declined by 20% in Los Angeles. More than half million immigrants who arrived in the 1970s and 80s also were lost from California, 5/6 of those from Los Angeles. The paper explores what types of immigrants have departed, in terms of race/ethnicity, age cohorts, and education levels, and it addresses the impact of the changing mix on falling regional poverty rates and rising homeownership.	Dowell	 Myers
2005	126	Dilemmas of Demographic Data in China	Province-Specific Mortality in China, 1990-2000	This paper uses data from the two most recent population censuses of the People’s Republic of China to estimate province-specific mortality levels and trends from 1990 to 2000. I estimate completeness of death reporting at the province level by modifying the General Growth Balance method to account for inter-province migration flows, which have increasingly affected Chinese provinces in the last decade. These estimates permit calculating adjusted life tables by province for the intercensal period 1990-2000 as well as for the period 1999-2000. The results of the analysis suggest significant provincial variation in the declining trend of mortality that China as a whole has experienced since the late 1960s.	Simona	 Bignami
2005	126	Dilemmas of Demographic Data in China	Assessing Fertility Levels in China Using Variable-r Method	Many scholars believe that the fertility levels reported in China since its 1990 census are too low to be true. They attribute the reported low fertility to the deterioration of Chinese statistical system, arguing that a large number of births, particularly those out-of-plan births were underreported in the official enumerations. The variable-r method is applied to Chinese population enumerations from 1989 to 2002 to assess the data quality and to estimate the nature reproductive rates, assuming that the underreporting is a systematic problem over time. The estimated fertility levels are close to what have been reported. It indicates that Chinese fertility has indeed reached a very low level in 1990s. This exercise also suggests that Chinese population enumeration data, although with many systematic problems, still provide relatively good base for calculating demographic estimates.	Yong	 Cai
2005	126	Dilemmas of Demographic Data in China	Underreporting of Births: The Cause of the Chaos of the National Population Statistics in China	Due to the impact of national family planning policy, since 1980s, especially after 1990 census, the birth rates obtained by annual surveys were remarkably low, so that the Statistical Bureau had to adjust the birth rate upward every year, totally about 200 million births added into the national population, without any empirical evidence. People expected to get a consistent number of total populations to the published total populations before in the 2000 census. Unfortunately, the enumerated number of total population was as low as before, which made the National Census Office adjust the census data in terms of the birth rate and the total number of population upward as well. The objective of the paper is to reveal what kinds of data problems exist in current China, how low in birth and total population is the directly enumerated data, and how the statistical agency manipulated the published data.	Xiaochun	 Qiao
2005	126	Dilemmas of Demographic Data in China	Searching for the Answer for China’s Fertility Puzzle: Data Collection and Data Use in the Last Two Decades	China’s fertility level has become a matter of considerable debate since the early 1990s. This is largely related to the under-registration problem that has been frequently found in fertility data. Despite the widespread concern, however, a recent literature review has revealed that there has been a lack of systematic examination of major fertility data in terms of their collection, specific problems, and use in demographic research. Based on this analysis, this paper first examines five major fertility data sources, and then identifies a number of problems in producing and using fertility data and further discusses their implications. Finally, it addresses some issues relating to China’s controversial 2000 census results and the extremely low fertility. The paper concludes that the prevalent uncertainty about fertility level is not only related to the problem of data quality, but also a result of misusing fertility data and exaggerating the problem of under-registration.	Guangyu	 Zhang	Zhongwei	 Zhao
2005	127	Demography of Rural America	Nonmetropolitan Status and Kindergarteners’ Early Literacy Skills: Is There a Rural Disadvantage?	This study seeks to discover whether beginning kindergarteners vary in early literacy readiness according to their metro/nonmetropolitan status, net controls for family structure, socioeconomic status, parent-child interaction, educational resources, preschool childcare, and county-level economic characteristics. The restricted-use Early Childhood Longitudinal Study of Kindergarteners provides student-level family and reading assessment data, as well as county identifiers that can be matched with county economic data from the Economic Research Service. A two-level hierarchical linear model will be conducted to test the relationship between family characteristics, county-level characteristics, and early literacy ability. Initial results show that there is a net effect of living in a nonmetropolitan area on reading readiness when children enter kindergarten.	Rachel	E. Durham	P.	Johnelle  Smith
2005	127	Demography of Rural America	Migration of Recent College Graduates: Rurality of Destination and Reason for Move	This research examines the effects of education, employment, and background characteristics on the migration of recent bachelor degree recipients. The Baccalaureate and Beyond (B&B:2000/2001) data are used to answer the following questions: Are recent college graduates migrating to rural or urban areas? Are they citing employment or quality of life reasons for migrating? Approximately one-half of the sample had migrated. Those who migrated live, on average, about 450 miles from where they lived during high school. Recent graduates tend to migrate to metropolitan areas, although certain characteristics (e.g., older graduates, those who are married, have children, and those raised in a rural area or small town) are associated with migration to nonmetropolitan areas. Two-thirds cited employment reasons for migrating, although those in certain high demand fields, those currently enrolled, singles, males, and those raised in nonmetropolitan areas were more likely than their counterparts to cite quality of life reasons.	Ruth	E. Heuer
2005	127	Demography of Rural America	The Rising Incidence of Natural Decrease in Nonmetropolitan American Counties	In 2002, more American counties experienced natural decrease than at any time in the nation's history. Natural decrease is most common in rural areas remote from metropolitan centers. Regional concentrations exist in the Great Plains, Corn Belt and East Texas, with scattered pockets in the Ozark Ouachita Uplands, Upper Great Lakes and Florida. Natural decrease is the consequence of a complex interaction between fertility, mortality and migration over a protracted period and is symptomatic of fundamental changes in the demographic structure of an area. Age structure distortion resulting from protracted, age specific migration is the primary cause of most natural decrease. Temporal variations in fertility also contribute, but it is not due to below average fertility in an area.	Kenneth	M. Johnson
2005	127	Demography of Rural America	Hispanic Population Growth and Labor Force Reception in New Rural Destinations of the United States	Substantial rural Hispanic population growth in the past two decades raises questions about linkages with rural economic structural change and patterns of economic and social incorporation of the Hispanic population into rural communities. This analysis examines changes in the “economic context of reception” for Hispanic residents in nonmetropolitan counties between the two relatively similar business cycles of 1991-93 and 2001-2003. We employ restricted CPS Earnings Files data that contain county identifiers and link them to Census and other county-level data. We analyze how economic and labor market conditions in recent Hispanic nonmetro destinations in the Midwest and the Southeast differ from those of established Hispanic nonmetro settlement areas in the Southwest and how these conditions have changed since 1990. We use multivariate regression to estimate their impacts on the likelihood of Hispanic employment and logged wages in both periods.	William	A. Kandel	Robert	 Gibbs
2005	128	Historical Census Statistics for the United States	Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition -- A Preview	The Historical Statistics of the United States has been an essential reference work for many years.  The first edition appeared in 1945, the second edition in 1957, and the Bicentennial Edition in 1975.   Previous editions were compiled and edited by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.  That agency no longer plans to continue that work.  In response, a group of scholars (Professors Richard Sutch and Susan Carter at the University of California at Riverside; Alan Olmstead and Scott Gartner at the University of California at Davis; Gavin Wright at Stanford University; and Michael Haines at Colgate University) undertook to revise and expand the Bicentennial Edition.  The publisher is Cambridge University Press.  Most existing series have been updated until a recent date, and many new series have been added.  Several new chapters have also been added.  The Millennial Edition will appear as four or five printed volumes as well as an on-line electronic edition available via subscription.  The chapters have been compiled and edited by a wide variety of scholars and specialists.  The Millennial Edition is scheduled to appear in 2005.  This presentation will highlight some of the features of this new edition.	Michael	R. Haines
2005	128	Historical Census Statistics for the United States	The Historical Census Files Project at the U.S. Census Bureau	The goal of the Historical Census Files Project at the U.S. Census Bureau is to construct a time series of easy-to-use, anonymized historical decennial census files and make these files available to researchers within the Census Bureau and to qualified researchers through the Census Bureau's Research Data Centers. In the first phase of the project, all of the microdata from the 1960, 1970, and 1980 decennial censuses were migrated from mainframe tapes to a UNIX environment and verified. These data files are currently available within the Census Bureau in ASCII and SAS formats with web-based documentation. The current phase of the project is to harmonize the historical files with microdata from the 1990 and 2000 censuses and create an integrated set of documentation for the entire database. Working in association with the Minnesota Population Center, this project follows the model of the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).	Todd	K. Gardner
2005	128	Historical Census Statistics for the United States	The Rise of Cohabitation in the United States: New Historical Estimates	This paper presents new census-based estimates of opposite sex unmarried partners in the United States for the period from 1950 to 2000, including numbers of cohabiting couples and descriptive characteristics of these cohabiters. The 1990 and 2000 censuses included specific responses for “unmarried partner” in the relationship question; previous censuses classified these individuals in the broader “partner/roommate” or “partner/friend” categories making them more difficult to identify. Using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), we provide estimates of cohabitation that improve on previous methods. Instead of devising a simple set of rules to distinguish cohabiters, we develop models based on the 1990 and 2000 censuses to identify the best predictors of cohabitation. These models are then applied to earlier census years to estimate predicted probabilities of cohabitation.	Catherine	A. Fitch	Ron	 Goeken	Steven	 Ruggles
2005	128	Historical Census Statistics for the United States	From Native to Immigrant and Back Again: A Historical and Prospective Analysis of Generational Changes in the Hispanic Population, 1960–2030	Historical demographic analysis of the Latino and total U.S. population for 1960–2000 finds that both immigration and net movement from Puerto Rico are severely understated in official population estimates. We incorporate higher levels of immigration into a 5-generation projection model to analyze changes in generational and age composition of the Latino population over the last 4 decades. With the fitted model, we decompose changes into contributions of various waves of immigrants and the initial population. We also determine the degree to which the 3rd-and-higher generation consists of grandchildren of immigrants (3rd generation) and higher-order descendants. Based on the historical results, we project the population (with high levels of immigration) that shows continued rapid growth of Latinos to 2030. Generational shifts in place by 2000 are expected to continue as the generations take on distinctive age structures. Finally, implications of such changes for the future influence of Latinos are discussed.	Jeffrey	S. Passel	Marta	 Tienda
2005	129	The Legacy of Otis Dudley Duncan	Ecology and the Environment		Stanley	 Lieberson	Halliman	H. Winsborough
2005	129	The Legacy of Otis Dudley Duncan	Social Stratification		Michael	 Hout
2005	129	The Legacy of Otis Dudley Duncan	Social Psychology		David	 Featherman	Archibald	O. Haller
2005	129	The Legacy of Otis Dudley Duncan	The Demographic Approach to Quantitative Reasoning in Social Science		Yu	 Xie
2005	130	Fertility Preferences	Do the More-Educated Prefer Smaller Families?	This paper investigates whether the negative relationship between fertility and education in more developed countries is due to a similar relation between desired fertility and education. Using rich individual-level data from the 1988 and 1994/95 wave of the DJI Familiensurvey we find that more-educated West German men and women are significantly more likely to desire three or more children and less likely to favor childlessness or the one child family compared to less educated individuals. Using individual-level data from the EU-15 countries in 2001 we provide evidence that this relationship holds not only in West Germany but more broadly in Western Europe. The existence of substantial unmet  demand for children among the better-educated suggest that this group faces particularly difficult tradeoffs between career and family. Policies that favor the compatibility between career and family may be particularly effective in narrowing the gap between desired and realized family size for this expanding group.	Frank	 Heiland	Warren	C. Sanderson
2005	130	Fertility Preferences	Class and Education Differences in Planned and Unplanned Fertility	Class and education differentials in levels of fertility are longstanding. In recent decades, class and education differentials in the timing of fertility have widened, with higher status women increasing age at first birth much more than lower status women. In this paper, we examine three potential factors explaining socioeconomic differences in fertility: 1) the value women place on children; 2) opportunity costs; and 3) contraceptive efficacy. Using data from over twenty years of the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), we describe patterns of planned and unplanned childbearing among women from different class backgrounds and with varying levels of own education. We use competing hazard models to examine the role of socioeconomic status in planned and unplanned fertility, and we explore the extent to which the association between socioeconomic status and fertility is mediated by childbearing ideals, opportunity costs, and consistency of contraceptive use.	Kelly	 Musick	Paula	S. England
2005	130	Fertility Preferences	Declining Ideal Family Size in Europe: The Influence of Actual Fertility Context	The persistence of the two-child family ideal is no longer universally widespread in Europe (Goldstein et al. 2003), but the reasons why people prefer a given number of children have not yet been systematically investigated.  We examine the individual and regional factors of ideal family size by taking into account the unobservable similarities of people sharing the same demographic and socio-economic environment.  Multilevel binary and ordered logistic regression models are implemented, by using 2001 Eurobarometer data. The hierarchical structure is defined by respondents embedded within regions of the 15 European Union countries.  The main result is that the context of actual fertility of the older generations influences the preferences of the younger cohorts: the lower, on average, the past actual childbearing in the region, the higher is the individual probability of people in reproductive ages to prefer smaller families.	Maria	Rita  Testa	Leonardo	 Grilli
2005	130	Fertility Preferences	Continuity and Change in Young Women's Family Size Preferences, 1955-1995	U.S. family life has changed dramatically in recent decades, including delayed marriage, smaller families, and a rise in single parenthood. Attitudes have also become more accepting of these family changes, although young adults still want to marry and have children. We examine trends in the number of children young women say they would ideally like to have for the period 1955-1995. We investigate both levels and variation in personal family size ideals and ask if change in women’s demographic characteristics explain these trends. We use data from ten national surveys. Because early fertility surveys sampled only married women, we conduct two analyzes. The first examines trends in married women’s personal ideal family size. The second examines trends for all women regardless of marital status. The latter is restricted to data since 1982, but it is important because changes in marriage formation and dissolution are likely to affect fertility preferences.	Anita	H. Yuan	Judith	A. Seltzer
2005	131	Immigrant Health: Selection and Acculturation	Maternal and Infant Health of the Mexican-Origin Population in the United States: Acculturation, Duration, and Selection	In this paper we investigate the role of acculturation and return-migration selection on the health of the Mexican-origin population in the United States by examining the finding that the healthy birth outcomes of Mexican women living in the United States deteriorate with increased duration in the U.S. Two competing hypotheses explaining this ‘paradox’ are tested: the cultural hypothesis, which posits that acculturation affects birth outcomes through sociocultural and behavioral factors common among Mexican women, and the return-migration selection hypothesis, which posits that immigrants who return to Mexico select on health characteristics. Data on maternal and infant health, migration history, and socioeconomic characteristics of Mexican women living in two predominantly Mexican communities in the U.S. is analyzed and compared with a national sample of U.S. women. analyzes of birth outcomes of first generation Mexican women provide results consistent with the selection hypothesis.	Miguel	 Ceballos
2005	131	Immigrant Health: Selection and Acculturation	Could “Acculturation” Effects be Explained by Latent Health Disadvantages among Mexican Immigrants?	In this study, we propose to investigate the culpability of latent health disadvantage in producing spurious relationships between duration (years in the US) and health declines among Mexican-origin immigrants in the United States. Using biological markers, self-reported morbidities, and objective physician health ratings—we seek to determine whether immigrants, although ostensibly healthier than respective native-borns, might exhibit higher rates of latent health disadvantages due to residence in Mexico. Using data from the 3rd National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III), we utilize biological measures of allostatic load to determine whether immigrants—while symptomatically healthier than native borns—might actually exhibit higher levels of cumulative system dysregulation that will ultimately manifest itself in terms of health declines with duration in the US. Thus, later-life health declines that are the result of early life wear and tear in Mexico might by spuriously attributed to duration and/or acculturation effects.	Brian	K. Finch
2005	131	Immigrant Health: Selection and Acculturation	Another Hispanic Paradox? How Socioeconomic Gradients in Health Differ for Whites and Latinos	Differentials in health by socioeconomic status have been identified in a myriad of studies, some dating as far back as the 1800s. With few exceptions, these studies have found that persons of higher SES experience lower rates of morbidity and mortality than their counterparts. These associations have been identified across time, place, gender and age as well as for a broad range of outcome variables. This paper examines differences in these SES health gradients for non-Hispanic whites and Latinos using data from both the Los Angeles Families and Neighborhoods Survey (LAFANS) and the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Survey. Findings to date demonstrate that gradients by education in health and health behaviors are absent for the Latino population. In contrast, findings for non-Hispanic whites are consistent with expectation: persons with more education have better health outcomes and healthier behaviors. We explore possible hypotheses for these differences in health gradients.	Noreen	 Goldman	Rachel	T. Kimbro	Cassio	M. Turra	Anne	 Pebley
2005	131	Immigrant Health: Selection and Acculturation	Is There Really a Salmon-Bias Effect? Evidence of Selective Emigration among Primary Social Security Beneficiaries in the United States	Estimates of adult mortality have documented lower mortality for Hispanics than for NH-whites. A great deal of research has focused on the factors that may explain this puzzle. In the category of migration selection effects, one hypothesis that has been frequently offered is the salmon-bias effect. However, there is still no direct evidence that return migration is a determinant of the Hispanic mortality advantage. In this paper we use information on residential status and death records for primary Social Security beneficiaries to examine how mortality of elderly Hispanics and NH-whites residing abroad differs from those living in the U.S. We also look at how net migration rates differ among these population subgroups. Although our results provide evidence of higher mortality rates for Hispanics living abroad than for Hispanics living in the U.S., we found only small variations in the Hispanic mortality advantage when mortality rates for both groups were combined.	Cassio	M. Turra	Bert	 Kestenbaum	Betty	R. Ferguson
2005	132	Gender and Health in Developing Countries	Gender Differences in Transitions in Functional Disability among Older Singaporeans: 1995 - 1999	Older ages are often associated with an increase in functional disability and a general decline in health status. Females typically experience higher rates of morbidity compared to males and this is true in both Western and Asian settings. While this gender difference in rates has been documented, gender differences in the factors determining the onset of, or recovery from, disability have not been extensively studied. I examine changes in prevalence rates of functional disability among older Singaporeans, by gender, and estimate transition rates in functional disability controlling for gender and select compositional characteristics. I use panel data on 1,977 individuals aged 55 and above in 1995. Preliminary results suggest no gender differences in change in prevalence rates over time and in the probability of transiting into a disabled state. However, older males are more likely to recover from a disabled state by the second survey wave compared to older females.	Angelique	 Chan
2005	132	Gender and Health in Developing Countries	The Gender Division of Labor, Indoor Air Pollution and Adult and Child Health	In rural Bangladesh, biomass fuel provides more than 90 percent of household energy so that indoor air pollution (IAP) is a serious health problem. If exposure to IAP is greatest in areas where combustion occurs, primarily the kitchen, IAP will mostly affect the women who cook and the children whom they supervise. Using a 2000-2003 survey of 1638 rural households with information on detailed person-specific time allocation, we investigate the extent to which the division of household responsibilities, household structure, and the dimensions and location of kitchen facilities, causally affect the health of women and children. We estimate a number of different statistical models that take into account the possibility that time allocation may be endogenous. We exploit as identification restrictions both allocative norms and biological relationships. The results suggest that proximity to stoves adversely affects the respiratory health of women and the young children they supervise.	Mark	M. Pitt	Mark	 Rosenzweig	Nazmul	 Hassan
2005	132	Gender and Health in Developing Countries	Influence of Women’s Autonomy and Access to Health Services on Maternal Health Care Utilization in Rural India	The study examined whether the influence of women’s autonomy is moderated by health service access in influencing maternal health care utilization in rural India. The association between women’s autonomy, access to health facilities, and the interaction between women’s autonomy and health facility access on maternal health care utilization was tested. Multi-level logistic regression models were used to test the hypotheses. The findings show that higher levels of women’s autonomy increased the odds of seeking antenatal care, postnatal care, and delivering in a health facility. A higher level of access to a health facility increased odds of women receiving antenatal care, postnatal care and delivering in a health facility. The interaction between health service access and autonomy was complementary. High access to facilities and high women’s autonomy (relative to low access and low autonomy) was associated with increased odds for all outcomes.	Mona	 Sharan	Saifuddin	 Ahmed	Donna	 Strobino
2005	132	Gender and Health in Developing Countries	Gender Differentials in Cognitive Impairment of the Oldest Old in China	Cognitive impairment is a major health problem associated with old age. Research in China found that females are significantly disadvantaged in cognitive functioning in old age. We address two questions in our paper: 1) Are there gender differentials in both prevalence and incidence of cognitive impairment among the oldest old in China? 2) Do SES, social support, physical health, and leisure activities explain the gender gap in cognitive impairment? We draw on two waves (1998-2000) of the Chinese Healthy Longevity Survey in our study. Preliminary results have shown that gender has a significant effect on both the prevalence and incidence of cognitive impairment among the oldest old, controlling for age. Adding SES substantially reduced the gender differentials, suggesting that the lower SES of females in China contributed substantially to their poor cognitive impairment at old age. Adding social support, health, and leisure activities further narrows the gender differentials.	Zhenmei	 Zhang	Cheryl	 Lero
2005	133	Ethnicity, Race, and Demographic Change among Latinos	The Case of the Disappearing Mexican Americans: An Ethnic-Identity Mystery?	In this paper, we examine the issue of identification stability for U.S.-born Mexican Americans, by far the largest of the ethnic groups growing as a result of contemporary immigration. We demonstrate that, throughout the period 1980-2000, most birth cohorts of Mexican Americans declined substantially more than can be accounted for by mortality or overall shifts in census coverage. To be sure, the identification of Mexicans and other Hispanic groups in Census 2000 was made problematic to some extent by a wording shift in the Hispanic-origin question. However, we show that the exit of some members from the Mexican group was apparent even in the 1990 Census, though it was accentuated in 2000. We show also that this exit is selective, so that a comparison of the characteristics of U.S.-born members over time is affected by changing patterns of identification with the group.	Richard	D. Alba	Tariqul	 Islam
2005	133	Ethnicity, Race, and Demographic Change among Latinos	The Interaction of Latino and Racial Identification	Most large datasets solicit “Hispanic/Latino” identification and “racial” identification in separate questions. This makes it difficult to study multiracial identification in the Latino population, since it is not clear whether individuals who identify as Hispanic and choose a racial category are indicating a multiracial heritage. Using the May 1995 Race and Ethnicity Supplement to the Current Population Survey, we test whether individuals who chose a Hispanic and a racial identity consider themselves multiracial when given a combined question about their ethnic origins. We find that most individuals who chose a Hispanic and a racial identity do not choose a multiracial option when given the choice; the most popular choice on a combined question is a monoracial Hispanic identification, followed by a white identification. Using a multinomial logit model, we identify social factors that have significant relationships with these identification choices, and discuss implications for using combined race/ethnicity questions on surveys.	Mary	E. Campbell	Christabel	 Rogalin
2005	133	Ethnicity, Race, and Demographic Change among Latinos	Who is Hispanic? Hispanic Ethnic Identity among African Americans, Asian Americans, and Whites	Hispanics are now the largest minority group in America and their presence is likely to continue to expand. We investigate the role of racial identification on Hispanic ethnicity using the Current Population Surveys from 1994 to 2002. Despite a considerable history of Asian presence in Latin America, our results indicate that persons of Asian racial origins are substantially less likely than whites to identify as Hispanic even after controlling for relevant demographic characteristics such as Latin American nativity and parental Latin American nativity. By contrast, persons of African racial origins are usually similar to whites in their propensities to identify as Hispanic. These results may be interpreted in terms of differences in the social stratification of these racial groups and in terms of social psychological processes---including the looking-glass self, the presentational self, and segmented assimilation theory---that are involved in development and maintenance of ethnic identity in modern America.	Kate	H. Choi	Arthur	 Sakamoto
2005	133	Ethnicity, Race, and Demographic Change among Latinos	Ethnic Classification among the Mexican American People	Abstract: For Mexican Americans, the largest immigrant group throughout the fifty years with the longest continuing history of immigration, sociologists disagree about the extent of ethnic persistence. In this paper, we predict strong persistence of ethnic identification into the third and fourth generations among Mexican Americans. We examine the extent to which respondents identify as Mexican or Mexican American and one behavioral indicator of ethnicity, Spanish proficiency, by generational status. We use a 35-year longitudinal and inter-generational data set of Mexican Americans (from the original survey conducted in Los Angeles and San Antonio as part of the Mexican American People). We find that identifying as Mexican American persists strongly into the fourth generation. This is coupled with high levels of being Spanish proficient, even in the fourth generation.	Vilma	 Ortiz	Edward	E. Telles
2005	134	Problems of International Demographic Data	Under-Registration of Births in Latin America: Diagnosis of Problem and Mapping for Solutions	Approximately 14% of births are unregistered in Latin America according to UN estimates. Lack of documentation impedes the ability to fully participate in society including access to school, social services, voting, and banking. Using DHS data we examine the magnitude and associated characteristics of birth under-registration in Brazil, Colombia, and the Dominican Republic.   Additionally, we create a disaggregated “mapping” of under-registration in Brazil by matching the 1996 DHS and 2000 census. This innovative technique takes survey data rich in demographic and health information but not representative for small areas and combines it with census data rich in geographic detail. By restricting the explanatory variables to those that are found in both datasets, data from DHS are used to estimate a model of birth under-registration. Using the parameter estimates from this model, the expected level of birth under-registration for small areas is imputed using census data and the same explanatory variables.	Suzanne	 Duryea	Analia	 Olgiati	Leslie	F. Stone
2005	134	Problems of International Demographic Data	Problems with Mortality Data in Russia	The mortality crisis in Russia has been discussed extensively scientific literature. However, little attention has been paid to the problem of deteriorating mortality data in Russia.  During the first half of the 1990s mortality from such causes as injuries undetermined whether accidentally or purposely inflicted grew with particularly rapid pace. In this study we tested the hypothesis that mortality from violent causes of death (particularly in middle-aged men from marginal social groups) is concealed using death codes from the class “Symptoms, signs and ill-defined conditions” (ICD-9). Mortality from this group of causes increased 6-fold for males and 9-fold for females in 1989-2002. This hypothesis was confirmed using case study of death certificates from the Kirov region of Russia. It is likely that mortality from violent causes of death in Russia is significantly underestimated by the official statistics.	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Victoria	G. Semyonova	Galina	N. Evdokushkina	Alla	E. Ivanova
2005	134	Problems of International Demographic Data	Ethnic Classification in International Context: A Cross-National Comparison of 1995-2004 Census Items	Many national censuses categorize their populations by race, ethnicity, and/or origins; according to unpublished United Nations research, 65 percent of the countries surveyed enumerated their populations by national or ethnic group in the 1995-2004 census round. This paper analyzes a unique U.N. data set of 135 national census questionnaires, surveying the variety of approaches to ethnic enumeration taken and identifying several dimensions along which classification practices vary. This large-scale overview suggests several factors—historical, demographic and political—that merit attention when accounting for the evolution of ethnic categorization practices. Although the diversity of ethnic enumeration strategies poses problems for international data comparability, it also offers demographers a wealth of approaches to consider when revisiting their own national census schedules. I include a case study of the United States as an example of the ways in which international comparison highlights unusual national practices and offers models for future innovations in census-taking.	Ann	 Morning
2005	134	Problems of International Demographic Data	Methodological Issues in Data Collection from the Youth and Adolescents	According to 2001 census, about 22 percent of the Indian population comprises the younger age group 10-19. In this paper an attempt has been made to raise some methodological issues. These issues were identified from two different surveys, which are conducted in two parts of the country, as the part of two adolescent action oriented programs. Data collected from these two areas have raised many issues. The emerging issues were coverage of adolescents- prone to school going population, unmarried girls, less coverage of boys, non availability of unemployed youths- quality of responses- low level of knowledge on SRH issues, cultural barriers in contacting adolescents alone, and mental block in participating in the interviews and programs. These barriers were further aggravated by the heterogeneity of the group, age, sex, gender, marital status, religion, caste, region/ state and economic milieu. This paper tries to provide suggestions for the policy implications and intervention strategies.	Ponnambala	 Thiagarajan	A.	A. Jayachandran
2005	135	Paternity Establishment and Father's Investments in Children	Who Gets a Paternity Test? Results from Maryland Child Support Offices	We interviewed 250 individuals who were having paternity tests conducted in Maryland pursuant to a state determination of a child support order. The interviews were conducted from Sept 2003 to August 2004 and focused on the relationship between the mother and the man in question as well as the level of contact between the man and the child. We also obtained permission to obtain results of the genetic tests from the research subject. The survey indicated that women expressed higher degrees of confidence than the men that the tests would prove the man’s paternity. Men who eventually tested negative for paternity had lower baseline levels of contact with the child.	David	 Bishai	Nan	M. Astone
2005	135	Paternity Establishment and Father's Investments in Children	What Do Daddies Do? A More Complete Father Involvement Measure for Married, Cohabiting and Nonresidential Men	Most fatherhood studies use simplistic measures of parenting or are modeled on a concept of father involvement that translates poorly to unmarried fathers. This study seeks to develop a more inclusive measure of father involvement, to describe distinct types of fathers, and to compare the ways that nonresidential, cohabiting and married fathers parent. Aspects of parenting include paternity acknowledgment, financial support, and frequency of father-child interaction. Using Latent Class Analysis, unmarried, nonresidential men fell into three different categories: highly involved fathers, men that behave like many divorced fathers, and men that are largely uninvolved. Both cohabiting and married fathers had the same pattern of parenting. About half of the men avoided great deals of direct interaction. The other half of married/cohabiting fathers participated in all aspects of parenting. This study concludes that few men are deadbeat dads and that cohabiting and married fathers do not differ in parenting styles.	Allison	P. Deschamps
2005	135	Paternity Establishment and Father's Investments in Children	Do Unmarried, Non-Resident, Low-Income Fathers Provide Support for Their Children? Evidence from a Low-Income Inner-City Population	In this paper, we examine the types of support unmarried, non-resident, low-income fathers provide to their children’s mothers. We use prospective, longitudinal data from an inner city population to (1) describe the types of support these fathers provide; (2) examine factors associated with the provision of different types of support; and (3) explore changes in the level and type of paternal involvement and support through the first two years of the child’s life. We contribute to the literature on father involvement by incorporating measures of prenatal expectations of paternal involvement and by analyzing the impact of the presence of maternal kin on fathers’ involvement with their children. Preliminary findings indicate that relationship status, father’s employment status, and mother’s prenatal expectations are key determinants of paternal support and suggest that the presence of maternal kin in the household may reduce father involvement.	Irma	T. Elo	Laryssa	 Mykyta	Jennifer	 Culhane
2005	135	Paternity Establishment and Father's Investments in Children	Addressing Internal Reliability and Predictive Validity Concerns of Survey Reports of Father Involvement	This study assesses measurement issues in survey reports of father involvement. analyzes assessed the internal reliability and predictive validity of a multi-dimensional measure of father involvement, reported separately by fathers and mothers (N = 227). Reliable composites of father involvement were structurally similar across father versus mother reports and across resident versus nonresident and African American versus Latino fathers. Both father and mother reports, as well as a combined reporter composite, showed significant relations to children's cognitive achievement and, less consistently, to children’s behavioral functioning. Multiple group structural equation models indicated invariance in the predictive validity of father versus mother reports. Results suggest that relatively simple survey questions can be used to create reliable and valid measures of father involvement.	Daphne	 Hernandez	Rebekah	 Levine Coley
2005	136	Should Public Policy Promote Marriage?  How Can It?	Can We Promote Child Well-Being by Promoting Marriage?	Advocates for marriage promotion policies argue that child well-being could be improved by increasing marriage rates. Although children tend to fare better in married parent families, it may be unreasonable to expect that children in “marriage promoted” families will fare as well as their counterparts already living with married parents (even holding parental characteristics constant) because these “promoted” marriages may be of lower quality. Using data from the NLSY79’s Mother-Child files, this paper measures the quality of parental relationships by examining the future status of parental unions. It distinguishes between children living with parents who will remain married (good marriage) from those living with parents who will divorce in the future (bad marriage). I find that children living in bad marriage families fare worse across a host of indicators (test scores, BPI) than children living in good marriage families, but they still fare better than those living with single mothers.	Gregory	 Acs
2005	136	Should Public Policy Promote Marriage?  How Can It?	Links between Premarital Cohabitation and Subsequent Marital Quality, Stability, and Divorce: A Comparison of Covenant versus Standard Marriages	We explore whether covenant marriage, above and beyond selection effects associated with it, provides a social context for couples to attain greater marital stability, despite their cohabitation experiences. The lawmakers who created covenant marriage believe that a covenant is a way for couples with “knocks against them” to wipe the slate clean at the start of marriage and provide a risk-reducing bond to survive the turmoil of the early years of marriage. If cohabitation is associated with greater likelihood of divorce, can a covenant rather than standard marriage weaken or eradicate this effect? We use three waves of data collected from covenant and standard married newlyweds in Louisiana to explore the mediating and moderating effects of covenant marriage on cohabitation experience, to reduce the negative effects of cohabitation on perceived chances of divorce, hostile conflict resolution strategies, and actual divorce rates.	Susan	L. Brown	Laura	A. Sanchez	Steven	 Nock	James	D. Wright
2005	136	Should Public Policy Promote Marriage?  How Can It?	How Can Public Policy Promote Healthy Marriage?: The Couples' Perspective	Recent policy initiatives have focused on promoting healthy marriage with the goal of improving adult and child well-being. Building on an extensive review of research studies and measures used in databases, a conceptual model for healthy marriage was developed and a protocol was designed and tested using semi-structured cognitive interviews with low-income couples in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area. This paper explores couples’ thoughts about what is a healthy marriage and how policies efforts to promote healthy marriage can best serve couples and families. Initial interviews indicate a preference for programs that focus on communication, conflict resolution, parenting and financial management skills, as well as elements of family planning. Preliminary interviews also suggest a need for programs to incorporate both couple and individual counseling sessions. While initial interviews indicate that couples would most benefit from such programs prior to marriage, couples seem open to programs at all family stages.	Lina	 Guzman	Kristin	 Moore	Gregory	 Matthews	Zakia	 Redd	Susan	 Jekielek	Jacinta	M.H. Bronte-Tinkew	Suzanne	 Ryan
2005	136	Should Public Policy Promote Marriage?  How Can It?	We Got Married, Now What? Family Dynamics and Economic Well-Being after Marriage	Supporters of marriage promotion policies argue that marriage entry will result in social and economic benefits for low-income women and their children. Critics counter that women may see few economic gains to marrying poor men and that incidences of domestic violence may increase. Additionally, we know little about the male partner’s role in the family, and how his role and influence varies depending on his biological ties to children within and outside the household. These issues are examined using a mixed-method quantitative-qualitative design that includes panel survey data from the Women’s Employment Study (WES) and qualitative data gathered from a sub-sample of WES respondents. We begin by examining what “new” families look like after recent union transitions—whether the resulting family is a biological two-parent, blended, step, or other family type. Next, we examine the implications of these family types for family dynamics, economic and social resources, and child well-being.	Rukmalie	 Jayakody	Kristin	 Seefeldt
2005	137	Internal Migration in Central Cities and Suburbs	Limited Exposure: The Importance of Activities and Services for Children on Housing Mobility and Neighborhood Effects	Housing mobility programs attempt to move poor families from concentrated poverty into affluent neighborhoods so that they will benefit from the employment opportunities, social networks and higher quality schools and services available in these new areas. Many families move back, or “regress” to higher poverty neighborhoods, therefore limiting the exposure necessary for neighborhood effects. Using qualitative data from the Gautreaux Two housing mobility program, I follow participants who moved, looking at what programs and activities poor families use for their children. I explore whether there are differences in access to or participation in activities between public housing and low-poverty neighborhoods; and look for differences among families who make subsequent moves. Preliminary analysis shows that many families have children participate in activities and programs in public housing communities, but also express concern about safety and quality. In affluent neighborhoods, some mothers report more activities while others having trouble accessing activities.	Anita	 Zuberi
2005	137	Internal Migration in Central Cities and Suburbs	How Much Does Income Matter in Neighborhood Choice	There is a substantial literature on the residential mobility process itself but less on the factors that dictate the neighborhood choices that households make. Much of the neighborhood choice research has been on the impact of poverty neighborhoods rather than on the choice process. In this paper we examine the role of income in white and minority neighborhood choice. We use the detailed data from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Study (LAFANS) to investigate the residential mobility and residential choices of white and Hispanic households in the Los Angeles metropolitan area. We show that both white and Hispanic households respond to higher incomes by choosing more white neighborhoods in the case of whites and less Hispanic neighborhoods in the case of Hispanics.	William	A.V. Clark	Valerie	 Ledwith
2005	137	Internal Migration in Central Cities and Suburbs	Race, Wealth, and Inter-Neighborhood Migration	Racial differences in wealth have long been thought to underlie racial differences in residential segregation and neighborhood attainment, but research supporting this claim is limited. We use data from the 1988-2001 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), in conjunction with tract-level decennial census data, to examine the effects of household and parental wealth on the migration of black and white families between neighborhoods comprised of varying percentages of anglos (i.e., non-Hispanic whites). We find generally modest effects of wealth on these patterns of inter-neighborhood migration. Consistent with the weak version of the place stratification model, the effects of both family and parental wealth are stronger among black households than among white households. However, racial differences in the levels and effects of wealth can account for only a small portion of the pronounced racial difference in migration into neighborhoods containing large percentages of anglo residents.	Scott	J. South	Kyle	D. Crowder	Erick	 Chavez
2005	137	Internal Migration in Central Cities and Suburbs	Perceptions of School Quality and Their Impact on Residential Mobility Decisions	Researchers who study migration have long recognized that residential satisfaction influences residents’ desires and motivations to move. One under-studied component of residential satisfaction, particularly for parents with children, is the perception of local school quality. In this research, we use the Philadelphia Area Survey, a unique data set that links information about residents, their local schools, and their neighborhoods, to investigate the extent to which perceptions of local school quality influence the desire and the motivation of residents to move. Further, we consider whether or not the characteristics of local schools affect residents’ desires to move, above and beyond perceived school quality. Finally, we investigate whether race and parents’ education influence the impact of perceived school quality on the desire and motivation to move, and whether or not school characteristics like racial composition have more influence on the desires and motivations of whites to move compared to Blacks.	Joshua	 Freely	Kimberly	 Goyette
2005	138	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis	Does Audio-Casi Improve Reports of Risk Behavior? Evidence from a Randomized Field Trial among Male Youth in Urban India	This study compares the effectiveness of audio computer-assisted self interviewing (Audio-CASI) with face-to-face interviews and self-administered questionnaires in collecting sensitive information on sexual and other risk behaviors among male youth in urban India. A randomized study design compared collected data from 900 male college students and 600 male youth residing in slums. For college youth, the reported prevalence of risk behaviors was higher for young men interviewed through the Audio-CASI approach than with face-to-face interviews; self-administered questionnaires failed to yield significantly higher estimates than face-to-face interviews. For slum youth, the results were more mixed, with the Audio-CASI approach failing to yield consistently higher responses for many risk behaviors compared to the face-to-face interview mode. Our results demonstrate that while Audio-CASI appears to yield higher estimates of youth risk behavior among college-educated, computer-literate populations of young men, the efficacy of this approach among less educated and less computer-literate populations appears doubtful.	Rukmini	 Potdar
2005	138	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis	Improving the Quality and Lowering Costs of Household Survey Data Using Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs): An Application for Costa Rica	Population data in developing countries comes mostly from household visits. Armies of interviewers collect those data using paper and pencil (the PAPI method). But that information is infested with nonrandom errors. Newly developed “computer aided interviewing” techniques (CAPI for personal interviews) are an important advance over PAPI in terms of reducing errors and shortening time lags for data availability. But CAPI has proved to be difficult to implement in developing countries because of the ergonomics, costs, and delinquency restrictions of laptops. In response, we developed a CAPI system for PDAs that may revolutionize the way data is gathered, by reducing fraud, errors and costs and by opening opportunities for collecting complex information. At the core of our PDA-CAPI is an “electronic questionnaire markup language” (EQML) we developed after analyzing thousands of existing questions. We are using a PDA-CAPI prototype in our complex longitudinal study of elderly Costa Ricans.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Jeisson	 Hidalgo	Daniel	 Antich
2005	138	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis	Lessons from a Pilot Study for a National Probability Sample Survey of Chinese Adults Focusing on Internal Migration	Doing survey research in China has become increasingly problematic due to large scale social change. Surveys in China conventionally have sampled from population registers. But a combination of large scale internal migration and massive replacement of housing in urban areas has resulted in a large fraction of the population not living where they are registered and thus not being included in survey samples. This paper reports the results of a pilot study designed to test the feasibility and effectiveness of an alternative sampling method—sampling small areas through conventional multi-stage procedures but then doing a complete enumeration of individuals in each small area and sampling from the enumeration list. Effective enumeration is difficult, for reasons discussed in the paper, but is nonetheless a viable strategy for achieving full coverage of the Chinese population.	Donald	J. Treiman	Yi	 Pan	Yaqiang	 Qi	Shige	 Song
2005	138	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis	Sample Vital Registration with Verbal Autopsy: A New Approach for Collecting Mortality Data	Data on both the number and causes of death in developing countries are virtually nonexistent. Mortality estimates are patched together and modeled from limited sources of data (surveys, censuses, and demographic surveillance sites). Sample Vital Registration with Verbal Autopsy (SAVVY) is a system that the U.S. Census Bureau and Measure Evaluation are developing, which is designed to collect nationally representative data on mortality by broad age groups and by broad causes. The foundation of SAVVY is demographic surveillance. Following an initial census of SAVVY sites to determine resident populations, a network of supervised lay reporters would continue to enumerate all births, deaths, and migrations through annual or semi-annual ‘census’-update rounds. An active death reporting will run in parallel to the census system in which all deaths will be followed up at the household with a verbal autopsy interview implemented by trained staff.	Victoria	 Velkoff	Philip	W. Setel
2005	139	Social Context and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Self-Identified Multiracials and Sexual Debut: A Move Toward Explanations	Multiracial youth in the U.S. are believed to undergo struggles to attain a singular, isolate identity. This internal conflict is said to be related to deviant behavior, including early sexual debut. Yet explanations for why these patterns occur are known. Using three waves from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, I use discrete time analysis to control for individual characteristics and parental influences and elucidate pathways for trends. Three findings are particularly salient. First, individual-level variables are chief predictors for first intercourse for Blacks, Native Americans, and Black-White multiracials. Second, I find that mixed-race adolescents tend to have earlier sexual debut relative to their single race counterparts, net of all controls. Lastly, physical attractiveness has independent effects in increasing the odds of first intercourse; however it does not explain racial differences. My results suggest that early sexual activity may indicate something more than deviant behavior for multiracial youth.	Jamie	Mihoko  Doyle
2005	139	Social Context and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	Race, Religion, and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	A paradox in the area of adolescent sexual behavior involves the intersection of religion, race, and sex. African-American youth tend to be more religiously devout than white youth. They also – especially boys – are more likely to report having early intercourse and more sexual partners. Since religious involvement is typically associated with delayed sexual practice and fewer partners, what accounts for this anomaly? This study explores possible explanations for this paradox by evaluating a conceptual model about mediated and contingent religious effects on sexual behavior – effects that are thought to be subject to both personal attitudes about sex as well as school “climates” about normative sexual behavior – using data from the Add Health study, supplemented by both survey and in-person interview data from the National Study of Youth and Religion.	Mark	 Regnerus
2005	139	Social Context and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	The Role of Family Structure, Family Processes, and Family Content in Predicting Adolescent Sexual Activity	Past research on adolescent sexual activity has focused mostly on how family structure affects adolescents’ sexual activity. However, besides family structure, there are also family processes that may influence adolescents’ sexual behavior. The current study uses the Toledo Adolescent Relationship Study (n=1307) to understand how family processes and family content affect adolescent sexual activity. Specifically we examine two issues. First, are dating specific measures of family processes better predictors than general family processes in determining adolescents’ sexual activity? Second, do parents’ past and present behaviors and values affect the likelihood that adolescents are sexually active? While primarily research has examined general family processes in relation to adolescents’ sexual activity, this research extends prior research by including dating specific family processes and measures of parental behavior and beliefs. Our findings indicate the importance of examining dating specific family processes and content variables as key predictors of adolescent sexual activity.	Abbey	 Fruth	Monica	A. Longmore	Peggy	C. Giordano
2005	139	Social Context and Adolescent Sexual Behavior	The Role of High School Math and Science Course Taking in the Transition to First Birth	Previous research suggests negative consequences of an early transition to motherhood. The causes of early fertility are debatable, with the most predominant explanation being neoclassical economic theory that argues that increased human capital delays fertility. In contrast, other research suggests that college provides a  normative climate which stalls the transition to motherhood until post-graduation. We extend this line of research by using Add Health and the linked AHAA transcript study to investigate the association between high school math and science course taking and fertility among a sample of women ages 18-26. Preliminary results indicate a negative association between persistence in math  and science and early transition to motherhood and suggest postsecondary education as a mediator. Further analyzes will attempt to test competing theories of early transition to motherhood using more nuanced measures of labor  force participation and educational trajectories.	Sarah	R. Crissey	Lindsey	 Wilkinson
2005	140	Social Inequalities and Health: Program and Policy Interventions	Communities Count: Engaging Local Communities to Develop and Document Social and Health Indicators	This session presents results of a collaborative project, Communities Count: Social and Health Indicators Across King County; sharing the mission, values and methods of this county-level endeavor that offers a common set of social and health indicators for use by local governments, public agencies, funders, non-profit and community-based organizations, and residents. We will discuss key roles of citizen participation in developing indicators, and efforts made to include perspectives of low income people, immigrants and refugees, and people of color through data collection partnerships with community-based agencies; with particular attention given to being inclusive of county-level ethnic and geographic diversity in developing indicators, and in reporting on disparities based on age, race, income and gender. We will discuss methods used for gathering indicator information from groups that are difficult to reach through surveys, including developing local agency partnerships to collect information from non-English speakers, low income people, and people of color.	Ann	 Glusker	Kathryn	 Horsley	Alison	 Eisinger
2005	140	Social Inequalities and Health: Program and Policy Interventions	The Impact of Insurance on Prevalence, Diagnosis and Management of Disease in Mexico	Health insurance is often cited as a policy instrument with the capacity to improve health status by decreasing cost and increasing access to medical care. However, research investigating the impact of insurance on health status in developing countries is limited. The objective of this paper is to examine the impact of insurance on adult morbidity in Mexico using diabetes and hypertension as examples. The effect of insurance on prevalence, diagnosis and management of disease will be analyzed using data from the Mexican National Health Survey 2000. Existing research is limited by disease measures and failure to test and control for the potential endogeneity of insurance. This study offers two contributions: 1) the use of unique data including individual’s knowledge of disease status and measures of blood glucose and blood pressure and 2) the testing and attempt to control for the potential endogeneity of insurance through the use of instrumental variables.	Kristy	 Gonzalez
2005	140	Social Inequalities and Health: Program and Policy Interventions	Participatory Approaches and Reproductive Health among Disadvantaged Youth in Nepal	Expanding social inequalities in developing countries like Nepal are reflected in the poor health care and system access by disadvantaged communities. How can community members be equipped to use their resources and authority for maximum communal benefit? Participatory programs that involve and engage the beneficiaries might be important channels for reducing advantage-based differentials - empowerment and accountability. In this paper, we present findings from a community-based quasi-experimental study testing the effectiveness of participatory approaches in improving reproductive health outcomes for disadvantaged youth in Nepal. We examine social and economic disadvantage and how they interact and impact on three key dependent variables for reproductive health, especially for young people: prenatal care, institutional delivery, and knowledge of HIV and AIDS. Our results indicate that as compared to the non-participatory approach, participation and involvement of the community and beneficiaries was more successful in reducing advantage-based differentials in youth reproductive health outcomes.	Anju	 Malhotra	Sanyukta	 Mathur
2005	140	Social Inequalities and Health: Program and Policy Interventions	Does Health Insurance Coverage Mitigate or Exacerbate Socioeconomic Inequities in Health in the U.S.?	This paper examines the institutional impact of health insurance coverage on the pathways leading from status attainment to adult health. Using data from the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, the analyzes consist of structural equation models of sibling resemblance (Hauser 1988).   	Results suggest that the cumulative effects of income are partially mediated by the effects of health insurance. More specifically, these analyzes indicate that health insurance and the source of coverage contribute to social inequities in health through very different pathways: first, the number of years privately insured was found to compound the positive sibling-specific effects of status attainment on health when contrasted with the lack of insurance; second, public insurance was not found to differ in its effects on health from private insurance; and third, public insurance may have the potential to reduce socioeconomic inequities from the family of origin when lack of insurance is the alternative.	Amélie	 Quesnel-Vallée
2005	141	Condom Use in High HIV-Prevalence Areas	Condom Knowledge, Perceptions and Covariates of Use among Adolescents in Sub-Saharan Africa	HIV/AIDS is increasingly affecting youth in Sub-Saharan Africa. For young people who are sexually active, the condom, when used correctly and consistently, is the only method that offers protection against HIV. Despite extensive efforts in promoting condom use, young people still engage in risky sexual behaviors and condom use remains low. Using quantitative and qualitative data collected in 2003-2004 among 12-19 year olds in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Uganda and Malawi, we examine: 1) condom knowledge and use, including the consistency of use and problems experienced; 2) covariates of condom use (including alcohol use, relationship duration and transactional sex); and 3) how young people’s perceptions about condoms may impede or promote the actual use of condoms. Given the increasing vulnerability of young people to HIV, it is of program and policy relevance to better understand young people’s protective behaviors in order to help young people lead healthy sexual and reproductive lives.	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Stella	 Neema	Alister	 Munthali	Christine	 Ouedraogo	Vanessa	 Woog
2005	141	Condom Use in High HIV-Prevalence Areas	Barriers to Use of Condoms among Nigerian Men: Attitude, Cost and Physical Access	This study sought to identify barriers to male condom use in Nigeria. Three categories of barriers were examined: attitude, cost, and physical access. Male data from the 2003 Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) and service availability data from the 1999 NDHS were analyzed using a logistic regression model. The hypothesis that cost might determine condom use was not supported. Instead, the main barrier in Nigeria appears to be male attitude towards contraception and several widespread misconceptions about condoms. Lack of proximity to pharmacies that offer family planning, the outlet that is by far the most popular among men, also constitutes a barrier to the use of condoms. Ensuring that pharmacies stock condoms could advance the government’s goal of increasing condom use to stem HIV infections. Additionally, social marketing could be further honed to address specific gaps in knowledge and barriers of attitude.	Nathan	 Heard	Adebola	A. Adedimeji	Tisha	 Mitsunaga
2005	141	Condom Use in High HIV-Prevalence Areas	Power, Self-Efficacy, and Condom Use among Female Young Adults in Zimbabwe	UNAIDS reported in 2002 that Zimbabwe had an adult HIV/AIDS rate of 34%, unprotected sex being the primary mode of infection. Traditional gender roles and lack of women's empowerment are seen by many as important contributors to HIV transmission in Africa. We use data from the Zimbabwe Young Adult Survey of 2001-2002 to study the association between empowerment and self-efficacy of condom use and condom use in sexual relations of young women in Zimbabwe. Other variables in the analysis include age, marital status, residence, socioeconomic status, attitudes towards condoms, and perception of HIV risk. Data for the current study comprises 2676 sexually experienced females 15-29 years of age. Bivariate results indicate 34% used condoms in their last sexual contact and that self-efficacy and empowerment have significant associations with condom use.   Multivariate results are obtained using logistic regression models.	Constance	I. Mugalla	Joan	M. Herold	Nancy	J. Thompson
2005	141	Condom Use in High HIV-Prevalence Areas	Communicating Contraceptive Effectiveness	Only with accurate understanding of risk of contraceptive failure can people make informed contraceptive choices. The main objective of this research study is to evaluate how well three simplified approaches of communicating contraceptive effectiveness increase understanding for women in two developing countries (Jamaica and India), and to compare the approaches. In each country, 450 subjects will be randomly assigned to receive one of three simplified charts presenting contraceptive effectiveness:(1) methods ranked on a continuum, (2) methods grouped by average effectiveness, and (3) methods grouped by average and “best-case” effectiveness. Secondary objectives include but are not limited to: (1) determining the importance of method effectiveness relative to other factors in deciding which contraceptive method to use, (2) determining the importance of provider counseling about contraceptive effectiveness on subsequent understanding of these concepts, and (3) evaluating how well women understand the effectiveness of barrier methods for STI/HIV protection.	Markus	 Steiner	James	 Trussell	Neha	 Mehta	Sean	 Condon	Sumathi	 Subramaniam	Maxine	 Wedderburn
2005	142	Economic Integration of Immigrants	An Analysis of the Determinants of the Economic Integration of Immigrants: A Multi-Dimensional Approach	One of the key issues surrounding international migration is the prospect of economic integration for migrants in their destination communities. Previous research tends to focus on a single outcome variable such as employment status or earnings. However, this paper contends that a multi-faceted approach may be preferable. By considering five different outcome variables (employment status, poverty status, socio-economic index, occupational income score, and occupational category), this paper proposes a multi-stage model of immigrant economic integration. Through the use of regression models (including OLS, logistic regression, and multinomial logistic regression), this analysis finds evidence that in addition to individual human capital attributes, socialization in the U.S. education system, as well as the labor market and policy environment are also significant. Furthermore, the evidence suggests that an immigrant’s mode of entry largely determines their level of economic integration, and mediates their ability to transfer their human capital into labor market rewards.	Shannon	 Gleeson
2005	142	Economic Integration of Immigrants	Immigrant Acculturation in a Complex National and International Climate	How immigrants adapt depends on a number of social, economic and contextual factors. The research presented in this paper focuses on one specific issue – access to first employment. The authors control for factors such as local economic conditions and the individual’s human capital characteristics in investigating the success (or lack thereof) that immigrants have in obtaining their first paid employment upon arriving in Canada. In addition, the authors explore the impact on labor market access of events such as September 11th, 2001 on individuals belonging to specific ethnic groups. The research is conducted on the first wave of data from the Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Canada (n = 12 040). The authors use event history analysis models with the time to access paid employment as the dependent variable.	Gustave	 Goldmann	Jean	 Renaud
2005	142	Economic Integration of Immigrants	Re-Assessing the Relationship between Migrant Kin Networks and Wages among Mexican Migrant Men	The conventional wisdom is that networks matter to economic outcomes for immigrants in the U.S. In reality, though, there have been only a handful of quantitative examinations of this relationship, most of which have relatively major methodological weaknesses which bring into question the validity of their findings. My research corrects for the past weaknesses, and further advances the research by applying fixed effects methods and using more nuanced model specifications. Results show that in the aggregate migrant kin networks have a minimal positive effect on migrant wages. However, disaggregating the data reveals that migrant kin networks do positively affect Mexican men’s wages in the U.S., but only for men in the lower half of the U.S. wage distribution.	Gretchen	 Livingston
2005	142	Economic Integration of Immigrants	The Influence of Immigrant Origin on the Labour Market Situation of Young People in Spain	The purpose of this paper is to examine the influence of origin (migrant/non-migrant; foreign-born/native parents) on the incorporation to the labor market of young men and women in a new country of immigration, Spain. Using data from the recently released 2001 census, we have done multivariate analyzes using logistic regression to verify whether belonging to certain non-native origin groups has a negative impact on three aspects of their labor market situation: occupation, employment situation, and type of contract. Our findings suggest that differences by origin are significant and persist even when demographic and other socio-economic characteristics are accounted for. However, these differences do not always go in the direction expected. Being born in Spain or having lived in the country longer do not systematically lead to a better labor market situation.	Marta	 Roig	Joaquin	 Recano-Valverde
2005	143	Health and Education in Developing Countries	Maternal Schooling and Child Health Revisited: Does Non-Formal Education Matter?	This paper examines the impact of maternal literacy and numeracy skills and schooling on the production of children’s health in Ghana. To allow for the possible endogeneity of maternal skills and schooling an IV-based estimation approach is pursued. In addition to the well-established finding of a positive impact of maternal formal schooling on child health input demand and child mortality I also find a substantial impact from adult literacy course participation and also some impact from literacy and numeracy skills. These results point towards the potentially important role of adult literacy programs in promoting child health through the acquisition of health knowledge by participants, something which has previously received little to no attention in the economics literature but has important policy implications.	Niels-Hugo	 Blunch
2005	143	Health and Education in Developing Countries	Parental Death and Children's Schooling in Two Sahelian Countries (Burkina Faso and Mali). What's Wrong with the Extended Family System?	Sub-Saharan Africa is well known for the importance of its extended family system which allows support to vulnerable members, for instance orphans, in terms of education, health or others social issues. But in a context of declining living standards as it is the case in Burkina Faso and Mali, two poor sahelian countries experiencing the consequences of drastic economic policies like the Structural Adjustment Programs, one expects the family system to be unable to come up to all the expectations from the extended family members, in particular to afford for orphans’ needs. Using event history data sets from two 2000 national surveys that provided information concerning almost 8 644 and 8 453 individuals respectively in Burkina Faso and Mali, we examine the impact of the death of parents on children’s probability of entry to school and dropping out from school.	Jean-François	 Kobiané	Richard	 Marcoux
2005	143	Health and Education in Developing Countries	Household Deaths and Children’s Schooling: Quantifying the Effects of HIV/AIDS on Adolescent’s Work-Schooling Choices in Malawi	Malawi is one of the countries seriously affected by the HIV-AIDS epidemic. Adult HIV-prevalence is 14.2%, the eighth largest in the world. HIV-AIDS is the leading cause of death among those aged 20-49. These deaths can have serious implications on surviving members. For example, Carter and Maluccio (2003) show that death of a household member is the most frequently mentioned shock (32.2% of the times) that a household in South Africa experienced in 1993 and 1998, followed by serious injury (18%). In Malawi, 'taking children out of school' is reported as one of the coping strategies from HIV-AIDS. This study will show the impact of adult deaths on adolescent children’s probability to attend school and on their time allocation to schooling and work. The study will also show the impact of expected future death. Survey and biomarker data, on about 1,000 adolescents, collected in March-August 2004 will be used.	Flora	J. Nankhuni
2005	143	Health and Education in Developing Countries	Adolescent Health and Sex-Bias in Nutrition in Bangladesh: Evaluating the Standards Used to Classify Malnutrition	Bangladeshi children under the age of 10 have experienced significant improvements in nutrition and education, and sex differences in child nutrition have declined significantly during the past decade regardless of family structure, a tremendous change from previous observations in Matlab. However, our attempts to understand adolescent well-being and other longitudinal work that studies child nutrition in developing countries are hindered by the lack of an appropriate standard of comparison using a population in developing countries. The WHO endorsed standard population—based on U.S. children—misclassifies a large number of children in Bangladesh as malnourished, particularly in the adolescent years when rates of obesity in the U.S. begin to rise. We explore malnutrition in adolescents in Matlab, Bangladesh using the current and past standards, and test the standards for sensitivity to various thresholds to evaluate the current standards and begin a path toward a more appropriate comparison.	Erin	 Trapp	Jane	 Menken
2005	144	Union Dissolution, The Family, and Social Change	Divorce in Europe: A Comparative Study between France, Italy, Sweden and Switzerland Using Fertility and Family Surveys in the 1990s	The model of families as forming after a marriage has gradually found itself in competition with many new familial configurations. There are now numerous ways of living as a couple: in or outside wedlock, or even separately. Among the younger generations, there has also been a rise in the number of separations in cohabiting couples. This questioning of traditional unions is also found among married couples, who now frequently divorce. Comparative studies on the factors leading to divorce are rare in Europe and the frequently proposed causal models have only rarely been tested identically in different countries. In this paper, we will try to weigh the role of individual factors, those characterizing the formation of the couple, and those linked to conjugal history in cases of divorce using data collected in the 1990s by FFS studies in France, Italy, Sweden, and Switzerland, as well as biographical methods.	Laurence	 Charton
2005	144	Union Dissolution, The Family, and Social Change	Individual and Structural Determinants of Marital Stability: Matchmaking, Gender Ratio, and Modernization in Cambodia	Over the past 30 years, the Cambodian marriage system has experienced a series of potentially destabilizing factors. This paper assesses the impact of three central factors on marital stability: (1) a radical change in the way marriages were arranged under the Khmers Rouges, (2) a very low gender ratio in the adult population in the following years, and (3) in the last decade, the rapid opening of a society long isolated from Western economic and cultural influences. Surprisingly, the latter is found to have the largest negative impact on marital stability, whereas the cohorts married during the Khmers Rouges do not stand out. These findings suggest than the quality of the spousal match at the time of marriage may matter less for future marital stability than the economic and cultural environment provided by the subsequent periods and the impact they may have on the trade-off between separating and staying married.	Patrick	 Heuveline	Bunnak	 Poch
2005	144	Union Dissolution, The Family, and Social Change	The Third Great Wave of Social Change: Public Policy and the Family	Emergent from the rigid social regime of the male breadwinner model of the family, two waves of social change have subsequently had profound effects upon family formation behavior. The first wave of change beginning in the 1960s but consolidated in the 1970s was a rapid expansion of social liberalism. The second wave beginning in the 1980s and consolidated in the 1990s was a sharp shift to economic deregulation. Both changes were state-sponsored and both have had substantial effects on the institution of the family in differing cultural and welfare environments. The period has seen the emergence of high rates of relationship breakdown and singleness and very low birth rates that are now posing challenges to social and economic futures. Yet the personal desire for intimacy and individuation through family relationships remains strong. This paper will investigate family policy approaches across varying institutional contexts that can restore the social balance.	Peter	 McDonald
2005	144	Union Dissolution, The Family, and Social Change	Marital Dissolution in Japan - Recent Trends and Patterns	Existing research on recent trends in divorce in Japan is extremely limited. In this paper, we use available data from the Japanese vital statistics and census to describe trends in the experience of marital dissolution across the life course and to examine trends in educational differentials in the prevalence of divorce. Cumulative probabilities of marital dissolution for real and synthetic marriage cohorts show that divorce has increased rapidly over the past twenty years, with roughly one-third of Japanese marriages now expected to end in divorce. Estimates of educational differentials in the prevalence of divorce also indicate a rapid increase in the extent to which divorce is concentrated among those with lower levels of education. Educational differentials were negligible in the 1980 census but women with a high school degree or less are far more likely than their more highly educated counterparts to be divorced in the 2000 census.	James	 Raymo	Miho	 Iwasawa	Larry	 Bumpass
2005	146	Marriage and Family in Developing Countries	Family Transition in South Asia: Determinants and Implications	Although families in general have moved from being extended to being more nuclear, South Asian countries show diversity: the average size of the family ranges from relatively small nuclear to large extended. Recent trends in fertility, marriage dissolution, migration and urbanization, and age-structure that affect the family were studied in South Asian societies. Consequent to large scale migration of youth and the associated erosion of the extended family system, new social problems and disorders emerged. They paved the way for long-term demographic implications, such as declining fertility, aging, increased age at marriage and marriage dissolution. Thus the structure and functions of South Asian families have changed significantly. Female-headed households have become a steadily growing phenomenon. Nuclear families are particularly in crisis, both socially and economically, making the provision of social services and protection a necessity. Most of the welfare programs are remedial in nature, making recipients of their services dependents.	Weraduwage	I. De Silva
2005	146	Marriage and Family in Developing Countries	The Impact of Social Change on Vietnamese Families	Vietnam has experienced dramatic changes during the past century, including prolonged periods of war, socialist collectivization, political reunification, a shift from a centrally-planned to a market-based economy, and an extensive opening to the outside world. Major policy initiatives designed to affect basic aspects of family life, including marriage, gender relations, and family size, have also been adopted. This research focuses on the impact of these social changes on family behavior, particularly marriage, living arrangements, and the division of household labor. We use data from the Vietnam Surveys of Family Change, a representative sample of three marital cohorts that correspond to major historical periods—the war years, the years following the country’s reunification, and the year following the passage of renovation policies. Data are available from both north and south, allowing a comparison between these two regions that, until recently, experienced different governments and social and economic conditions.	Rukmalie	 Jayakody	Vu	Tuan  Huy
2005	146	Marriage and Family in Developing Countries	The Determinants of Household Break-up: A Case of a Developing Country	This paper investigates the underlying factors determining household break-up in Indonesia, utilizing data from three waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey (1993, 1997, 2000). Borrowing the empirical approach suggested by Foster and Rosenzweig (2002), we estimate the probability of household break-up between the survey waves. The findings suggest that along with age composition, education plays an important role in determining household break-up. Education of the head and the maximum education of other household members are negatively and positively associated, respectively, with the probability of household break-up. These results, along with our findings on urban-rural differences indicate that household break-up in Indonesia may largely be associated with the mobility of the younger, more educated household members. The change in household structure as a response to economic shocks is also investigated. The paper contributes to our understanding of household formation and dissolution, which in most previous studies is treated as exogenous.	Firman	 Witoelar
2005	146	Marriage and Family in Developing Countries	Investigating China’s Stalled Revolution: Husband and Wife Involvement in Housework in the PRC	China’s socialist revolution is credited with improving the status of women. In promoting the socialist agenda, leaders emphasized women’s labor in China’s drive to modernize; as half the population, women had much to contribute. Today female labor force participation rates are high. Yet, while expectations for gender-neutral work outside the house were cultivated, in the arena of household work, expectations remained highly gendered. Thus, while women shifted into outside work, men did not shift into domestic work. The situation mirrors what Hochschild (1989) observed in the 1980s among couples in the U.S. --- a “stalled revolution.” This paper investigates factors associated with couple division of housework using China Health and Nutrition Survey data. Results suggest that fifty years after the onset of the communist revolution, housework remains highly gendered. Nonetheless, gender equity in housework is sensitive to education, occupation, and other factors that are changing rapidly in today’s China.	Juhua	 Yang	Susan	E. Short
2005	147	Population, Health, and Environment	Land Use Choices in the Tropical Forest Frontier: The Potential Role of Malaria	This paper addresses the potential impacts of malaria on patterns of land use in the Brazilian Amazon. We use data from the Machadinho settlement project (Rondônia), opened for settlement late 1984. Multiple field surveys were conducted in the area gathering data on a multitude of variables, such as demography, economics, ecology, agriculture, and health. Landsat images are also used, facilitating the evaluation of land use patterns/changes over time. We start with a similar approach that most research on land use has taken, but with focus on incorporating variables that account for malaria transmission. First, we assess if malaria has an immediate impact on land use, evaluating the patterns in individual years. Second, we appraise the potential impact in land use changes over the short and long run. Finally, given the strong spatial correlation of malaria, we take space into account, evaluating differentiated effects of malaria on land use practices.	Marcia	C. de Castro	Burton	 Singer
2005	147	Population, Health, and Environment	Is Economic Growth Bad for Your Health? Industrial Growth and Industrial Pollution in Indonesia	The type of industrialization underway in today’s developing countries provides a poignant example of the pernicious side of economic growth. It is a process marked by rapid urbanization, crowding, and rampant industrial pollution. Adverse health consequences of pollution have proven difficult to measure, however, since industrialization also has positive effects, the most salient of which lies in rising incomes. This study exploits the Indonesian financial crisis as a ‘natural experiment’ to circumvent identification problems due to omitted variables that have plagued previous studies – since pollution is not random, it is difficult to control for all the variables that may impact health other than pollution, but that incidentally accompany pollution. Results show that the change in incidence of all respiratory problems, coughing, and breathing difficulty was positively correlated with the sub-district’s change in pollution. Other health problems, including fever, headache, flu, accidents, mortality, doctor visits, and medication were insignificant or negative.	Jules	R. Elkins
2005	147	Population, Health, and Environment	Lead Exposure and Stunting in Young Children in Delhi and Mumbai, India	Lead is a toxic, naturally-occurring metal that has become widespread in the environment, especially given its many industrial uses. The adverse effects of exposure to lead have long been known. However, studies documenting the association between asymptomatic lead poisoning and short stature have been outnumbered by analyzes of lead’s effects on neurological development and function.    The 1998-99 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2) in India incorporated the collection of blood lead, hemoglobin, and anthropometric measures into a survey instrument that also collects an extensive array of social, behavioral and demographic data. Using this unique cross-sectional dataset, which provides information on blood lead levels for a representative sample of young children living in Mumbai and Delhi, this study finds a negative association between blood lead levels and child growth. Preliminary analyzes indicate that this association remains after controlling for such confounding factors as age, hemoglobin levels, and household wealth.	Kiersten	 Johnson	Jasbir	K. Sangha
2005	147	Population, Health, and Environment	Spatial Variation in Lead Levels in Blood among Children of Mumbai: Evidence from NFHS II	Lead poisoning is one of the main urban environmental hazards in most of the developing countries. Though the continual implementation of preventive measures has been implemented by the Indian government for the last few years, even today, no reliable statistics are available on the prevalence of lead poisoning and its associated factors, and hence, the problem remains poorly understood. This study highlights the current elevated lead levels in blood among the children of below three years age in the city of Mumbai. Data are obtained from the National Family Health Survey conducted in 1998 that covered a representative sample of the population. The results of this study, with its particular attention to spatial variations in blood lead levels in young children, lends support to a belief that the areas where lead poisoning is severe the children belong to slum areas, living in water bound or industrial areas.	Niranjan	 Saggurti	K.	 Madhusudhan
2005	148	Consequences of Welfare Reform	Is Welfare Reform Responsible for Low-Skilled Women’s Declining Health Insurance Coverage in the 1990s?	We use data from the 1989-2001 March Supplements to the Current Population Survey to determine whether welfare reform contributed to the declines in health insurance coverage experienced by low-skilled women over this period. During the 1990s, women with less than a high school education experienced a 10.1 percentage point decline in the probability of having health insurance. Against this backdrop of large overall declines in coverage, welfare waivers were associated with a modest, 1.8 percentage point, increase in coverage for low-skilled women by increasing their probability of having private health insurance, while Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) itself had no statistically significant effect. Overall, welfare reform did not contribute to declines in coverage but rather offset them somewhat. Unfortunately, some groups among low-skilled women did not experience these relative gains in coverage in response to reforms including non-employed women, African-American women, unmarried women, and unmarried women with children.	Thomas	 DeLeire	Judith	A. Levine	Helen	 Levy
2005	148	Consequences of Welfare Reform	Predicting Post-2000 Welfare-to-Work Transition: Personal and Family Life Course, State Welfare Rules, and State Economic Effects	The object of this research is to investigate explanations for the welfare-to-work transition of female TANF recipients during the 2001-2003 economic downturn period in the U.S. The hypothesized determinants of welfare-to-work transition include demographic characteristics, family structure, human capital, work and welfare experience, migration, supplemental financial assistance, state welfare policies, and state economic indicators. Family characteristics are hypothesized to mediate the influence of race on welfare-to-work transition. Individual-level longitudinal data from the 2001-2003 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation are merged with state-level data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Welfare Rules Database to test hierarchal multinomial models of welfare-to-work transition. Descriptive data show that 32% of TANF receivers at time 1 were working and not receiving TANF at time 2 and an addition 15% were both working and receiving TANF at time 2. Initial results show that work and welfare experience are the strongest predictors of welfare-to-work transition.	Shelley	K. Irving	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe
2005	148	Consequences of Welfare Reform	Desperate or Deviant? Trends in Criminality among TANF Recipients	As state welfare rolls have declined significantly in the past decade, female criminality has been on the rise. Under these circumstances, we are uniquely poised to answer important questions about the links between gender, welfare receipt, financial hardship and criminal behavior, such as the following: How did the 1996 welfare legislation affect criminality among recipients and former recipients? Does going off welfare increase the likelihood of committing an offense, as many critics of the reform argued it would? Or is there more criminality among women who remain on the rolls, as the culture of poverty argument suggests? Using the Illinois Family Study (IFS), a longitudinal study of individuals who were receiving welfare in Illinois in 1998, we explore trends in criminal arrest by welfare receipt. We find that financial hardship, in both the forms of unemployment and non-receipt of welfare, is significantly associated with an increased hazard of criminal behavior.	Lindsay	M. Monte	Dan	A. Lewis
2005	149	Historical Demography: Migration	Moving In, Moving On: Changing Lives in a Southern City, 1900-1930	Southern cities experienced significant changes in the early 20th century. Yet the impact these changes, particularly the effects of the Great Migration, on family and residential patterns in the South have not been fully studied. This paper examines population change in Charleston, SC, over the 1900 to 1930 period. I begin by describing the processes used to link multiple samples of residents using census records from the 1900-1930 US Censuses. I then present preliminary analyzes of the linked data. While the primary focus of these analyzes is mobility within the city, substantial migration in and out of the city occurred during this period as well. Immigration to Charleston was low, but the Great Migration brought many rural residents to the city. The strategy of linking multiple samples over an extended period allows us to observe the characteristics of the population in relation to their migration status (inmigrants, outmigrants, stayers).	Regina	M. Bures
2005	149	Historical Demography: Migration	Labor Migration and the Spread of STD: Gonorrhea in Japanese-Occupied Micronesia, 1920 - 1945	Male migrants are associated with increased STD prevalence particularly because they tend to engage in risky sexual behavior while away. However, little research has quantified the impact of return migration on STD prevalence in the female population at home. This paper presents a microsimulation model of gonorrhea transmission in order to measure the effect of migration on gonorrhea prevalence. The model is fitted with data from a Japanese-occupied island in Micronesia, where gonorrhea prevalence was extremely high and the only significant population movement was male labor migration. Migration plays a significant role in the initial rate of increase of gonorrhea prevalence; but once rates stabilize over time, labor migration was only responsible for a 3% increase in women’s gonorrhea prevalence. The reason why migration did not contribute to a greater increase in gonorrhea prevalence rates is because of the combination of short infectious periods and high transmission probabilities.	Susan	L. Cassels
2005	149	Historical Demography: Migration	The Revolving Door to Gold Mountain: How Chinese Immigrants got Around U.S. Exclusion and Replenished the Chinese American Labor Force, 1900-1910	By what means did Chinese Americans get around the U.S. embargo on immigration as they sought to maintain viable communities during the late 19th and early 20th centuries? This paper investigates the use of centrally orchestrated immigrant substitution schemes. First, we use primary and published law enforcement documents (circa 1896-1902) to elucidate the mechanics of the substitution schemes. Second, we use records for 4,887 steamship person-arrivals (circa 1904-1907) to estimate the contribution of substitution schemes to the total flow of illicit Chinese migration and their impact on the age composition of Chinese American communities. Substitution schemes were crucial parts of a revolving door system that achieved both external compliance with the immigration embargo and replenishment of the Chinese American labor force with younger workers.	Ken	 Chew	Mark	 Leach	Robert	C. Romero	John	 Liu
2005	149	Historical Demography: Migration	Southerners in the West: The Relative Well-Being of “Direct” and “Onward” Migrants	The Great Migration remains one of the most significant demographic events in U.S. history. At first, southern migrants headed primarily to the Northeast and Midwest. Later, a larger proportion moved to the West. This paper uses information from the 1970 and 1980 public use microdata samples to examine the economic status of southern migrants in the West, specifically comparing the relative well-being of “onward migrants” from the Northeast and Midwest and “direct migrants” from the South. Our findings show that for whites, onward migrants enjoyed higher occupational status and incomes than direct migrants in 1970. In contrast, black and white onward migrants were less likely than direct migrants to be employed in 1970. All differences disappear by 1980. Results are consistent with our hypotheses that focus on differences between onward and direct migrant in human capital acquisition, and on socioeconomic changes occurring at that time in the North and South.	Stewart	E. Tolnay	Suzanne	C. Eichenlaub
2005	150	Risky Adolescent Behaviors	Searching for Peer Group Effects: A Test of the Contagion Hypothesis	Using state-level variation in kindergarten start dates coupled with information on birth and interview dates to generate an exogenous measure of the relative age of a student’s peer group, we find that, controlling for age, females with older peers are more likely to use substances than females with younger peers. In contrast, there is little evidence that having older peers is related to the risky behavior of male adolescents. Because there is no reason to suspect that birth and kindergarten start dates should be correlated with the choice of school, the socioeconomic status of a child’s peers, or neighborhood unobservables, we view our results with regard to females as providing support for the idea that peer behavior can be contagious.	Laura	M. Argys	Daniel	I. Rees
2005	150	Risky Adolescent Behaviors	Personal Friendship and School Social Network Effects on Adolescents’ Excessive Alcohol Use	Alcohol is the top drug of use among American teenagers. As a significant problem in the United States, adolescent alcohol use is linked to poor school performance, depression and other mental health disorders, unprotected sex and unintended teenage pregnancies, accidents, suicide, and adult alcohol abuse. Friends, peers, personal and school social networks influence adolescents’ behaviors independent of the effects of any network member’s individual behaviors, because networks constrain an adolescent’s norms and behaviors to be consistent with those generally held within the friendship network. We use longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) to examine the effects of best friend and personal and school social network characteristics on adolescent excessive alcohol use (e.g., frequency of binge drinking, and frequency of drunk days), accounting for ethnic differences, and the ameliorating effects of protective factors, such as parenting and pro-social activities, including school attachment and involvement in school and religious activities.	Lisa	 Cubbins	Lucy	 Jordan
2005	150	Risky Adolescent Behaviors	Social Multipliers in Sexual Initiation Decisions among U.S. High School Students	This paper uses a national sample of high school students to test for several types of social influences on the decision to have sexual intercourse. I find evidence of endogenous social interactions (social multipliers), where the propensity of an individual choosing to have sex varies with the average behavior in his school. Additionally, the magnitude of the social multipliers and several other interesting risk factors differ by gender and race. These finding might help explain the large variation in sexual initiation across schools in the United States. Additionally these results add to the debate over school vouchers and ability grouping. Large multipliers imply large changes in school-wide rates of sexual behavior with moderate changes in school-body composition. In this way, school vouchers and ability grouping might exacerbate the situation of high teenage pregnancy rates and out-of-wedlock births in some communities.	Jason	 Fletcher
2005	150	Risky Adolescent Behaviors	Help or Hindrance?: A Multi-Level Analysis of the Role of Families and Communities in Growing up American	The possibility of downward assimilation among children of immigrants has received considerable attention in both the academic and popular presses. Chief among the explanations behind this possible trend involves the disproportionate residence of children of immigrants in inner-city communities. Yet beyond allusions to cumulative disadvantage and close proximity to other U.S. minority groups, very little is known regarding the process through which deleterious residential context may or may not influence the well-being of children of immigrants. Nor do we know whether some neighborhoods actually provide a buffer against such negative outcomes. An appropriate test necessitates a multi-level analysis. The proposed analysis will test the possibility that the success of children of immigrants is linked to a mix of parental and community factors. The data for this analysis will come from the L.A.FANS, a L.A.-based survey designed specifically to model multi-level effects.	Reanne	 Frank
2005	151	Policy Dimensions of Immigrant Settlement	Effect of Immigration Policy on the Process of Asylum Seekers Families’ Integration (A Case Study of Kosovan Families in the East End of London, 2003-2004)	This paper will examine the effects of the limits set by the UK integration policy on the process of integration for asylum seekers families. This will be achieved by looking at the experiences of Kosovan families in London. Using the ‘snowballing’ method, we interviewed fifty respondents, between January 2003 and October 2004, pre-Amnesty and post-Amnesty and we held a limited number of in-depth interviews. We saw how the exclusion of the asylum seekers family from the integration policy programs which apply only for refugees effects the process of integration of all those who will become future refugees. It is too high a price for keeping the principle that only integration in the full sense of the word can take place only when a person has been confirmed as a refugee. It is necessary to recognize that the process of integration begins on the day of arrival in the host country.	Janusz	 Balicki
2005	151	Policy Dimensions of Immigrant Settlement	The Socio-Economic Consequences of Immigration: The United Kingdom as a Test Case	Since 1997 a new UK policy has promoted increased immigration on the grounds that it is essential for its economic well-being and beneficial for its society. New measures have been introduced, successfully, to increase inflows. The benefits claimed include fiscal advantages, increased GDP, a ready supply of labor and improvements to the age-structure. Fears that large-scale migration might damage the interests of the indigenous workforce are discounted. Similar arguments are advanced in favor of migration in other developed low-fertility societies.  This paper examines these claims using a new analysis of UK data and a variety of international evidence. It is concluded that the economic consequences are mostly trivial or negative, that the interests of the domestic population may well be damaged, and that any fiscal or other economic benefits are unlikely to bear comparison with its substantial and permanent demographic and environmental impact. Such findings resemble those from other developed countries.	David	A. Coleman	Robert	E. Rowthorn
2005	151	Policy Dimensions of Immigrant Settlement	The Effect of Remittances on Investments in Housing: Evidence from Nicaragua	Remittances play an increasingly important role in Nicaragua’s economy. While some argue that housing is a less productive use for remittances than other areas, improvements in specific housing outcomes may generate important productivity gains. Particular improvements, such as covering dirt floors, are associated with gains in health outcomes. Hernando de Soto links home ownership to the ability of the poor to use assets for collateral.   	This paper will exploit the panel nature of the 1998 and 2001 LSMS surveys to examine the impact of remittances on investments in housing. We will examine changes in housing outcomes between 1998 and 2001, including home ownership, and whether improvements/repairs have been made in the last 12 months leading up to the 2001 survey. We will examine whether the changes in these outcomes are related to changes in remittances, defined by having a family member who migrated between since 1998 and who sent remittances.	Mary	 Arends-Kuenning	Suzanne	 Duryea	Analia	 Olgiati
2005	151	Policy Dimensions of Immigrant Settlement	Poverty among Korean Americans	Public use microdata samples of the 2000 U.S. census are used to examine the income of Korean immigrants and their children with particular attention to poverty levels. Assimilation and human capital perspectives provide the framework for a logistic regression analysis of poverty among Korean American householders. Major findings include the following: First, the rate of poverty among Korean Americans was very high compared to native Whites and other Asian minorities. Second, the assimilation approach is only partially confirmed in that the poverty rate of the second generation is lower than that for the first generation but higher than that for the 1.5 generation. Third, the poverty rate varied by sex in each generation and the poverty rate among men was much lower than that among women. Finally, four explanatory factors operate differently by generation and by sex in each generation in accounting for the poverty status of Korean American householders.	Kyonghee	 Min	Mary	G. Powers
2005	152	Infant and Child Mortality	The Effects of Female Education and Health and Family Planning Programs on Child Mortality and Fertility in Indonesia	Numerous studies indicate that female education is a major determinant of child mortality and fertility. Estimated reductions of mortality and fertility due to increases in education typically dwarf the effects of most other variables, including those measuring health and family planning programs. There are, however, two deficiencies in this empirical research. First, most studies do not treat a woman’s education as a possibly endogenous determinant. Education may be a proxy for unobserved characteristics as woman’s ability and motivation. Second, programs may influence a woman’s decision about education. In this paper we present an empirical model that treats female education as an endogenous determinant of child mortality and fertility and allows for health and FP programs to influence female education. Model estimates using the 1993 Indonesia Family Life Survey provide better understanding of the role of female education and health and family planning programs on these important population outcomes in Indonesia.	Gustavo	 Angeles	David	 Guilkey	Thomas	 Mroz
2005	152	Infant and Child Mortality	China's Rising Sex Ratio at Birth: New Assessments, Provincial Trends, and Linkages to Postnatal Discrimination	The sex ratio at birth reported in China’s 2000 census was nearly 117 males per 100 females. This record distortion is due primarily to rising use of sex-selective abortion, although excess underreporting of daughters is another factor. Based on a broad assessment of Chinese and international data, as well as assumptions of no change in excess daughter underreporting, we posit that China’s true sex ratio at birth was 114 in 2000, up from 108 in 1989. That assessment connects with another question – has rising prenatal discrimination added to (or substituted for) postnatal discrimination against young daughters? We examine national and province level data derived from China’s 1990 and 2000 censuses. Rising sex ratios at birth were associated with rising excesses of female infant mortality. Such additive findings at the regional level, whatever their explanation, may not reflect decisionmaking by individual parents, who may substitute one discriminatory practice for another.	Daniel	M. Goodkind	Loraine	A. West
2005	152	Infant and Child Mortality	Neonatal Mortality in the Developing World	Over one-third of the 10.8 million under-five child deaths in 2000 occurred in the neonatal period, but neonatal mortality across the developing world has received little formal study. This paper examines age patterns and trends of early and late neonatal mortality in developing countries, using birth history data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Data quality is assessed both by examination of internal consistency and by comparison with historic age patterns of neonatal mortality observed for England and Wales. Neonatal mortality trends are examined using a country fixed effect regression model. The median neonatal mortality rate (NMR) across 108 DHS was 33 per 1000 live births. NMR averaged an annual decline of 1.7 % for the last two decades. Age patterns of neonatal mortality were comparable with those of historical data, indicating no significant underreporting of early neonatal deaths in DHS birth histories.	Kenneth	H. Hill	Yoonjoung	 Choi
2005	152	Infant and Child Mortality	Changes in Infant and Child Mortality in Shanghai in the Second Half of the 20th Century	Many less developed countries have experienced a rapid reduction in mortality in the second half of the 20th century. While WHO and many countries have invested heavily in health related areas and a significant progress has been made in many populations, the process of their health and mortality transition remains poorly understood. The paper, on the basis of our analysis of some 300,000 death certificates collected in Shanghai over the period between 1961 and 2001, and other officially published mortality data, examines changes in infant and child mortality levels, patterns, and major causes of infant and child deaths in Shanghai over the last few decades.	Zhongwei	 Zhao	Xizhe	 Peng
2005	153	Family, Race/Ethnicity, and Poverty in Rural America	The Macroeconomy, Social Policies, and Poverty: Is the Relationship Different in Rural America?	A long economic expansion and changes in social programs were credited with the 25 percent decline in poverty in rural and non-rural areas from 1993 to 2001. Despite research indicating that the macroeconomy and social policies should have different effects in rural areas, little is known about whether this is the case, especially in recent years. I use a 15-year panel of state-level information (portraying conditions before 1993 and after 2001), broken down by metro status, to address this research lacuna. Using two poverty measures and three household-structure categories, I find several differences between rural and non-rural areas. In particular, a demand-side measure of employment (employment growth per capita) leads to declines in poverty in rural but not non-rural areas; poverty tends to be more persistent in non-rural areas; and welfare waivers lead to increases in poverty in rural areas but had no effect in non-rural areas.	Craig	G. Gundersen
2005	153	Family, Race/Ethnicity, and Poverty in Rural America	Spatial Decomposition of Persistent Poverty in the United States	Persistent poverty in particular geographic regions of the U.S. is a well documented phenomenon. Regional pockets of poverty are often related to racial concentration, particularly among minority groups. Do persistently poor regions account for an ever increasing share of total U.S. poverty, or are they becoming an ever smaller component of overall poverty? The continuation of persistent poverty in regions and counties can be decomposed into exits (outmigration) of the non-poor, entries (inmigration) of the poor, and increased impoverishment of the population. Identifying the process by which regions have remained poor over a long period of time has many implications for policy intervention. Using the U.S. Decennial Censuses from 1970-2000, we employ geographic analysis, population decomposition methods, and shift share analysis to assess changes in the geographic concentration of poverty in the U.S. The analyzes are based on aggregate files, the PUMS microdata and, as available, special migration tabulations.	Marlene	A. Lee	Joachim	 Singelmann
2005	153	Family, Race/Ethnicity, and Poverty in Rural America	The Work Preferences and Labor Force Participation of Rural Mothers	The current study proposes to examine employment, work preferences, and psychological outcomes of mothers in rural America. Factors such as the unavailability of employment and less stable family structures of those living in rural poverty lead us to expect to find that work preferences often do not meet current labor force participation. Some rural mothers may be underemployed, while others may have to work due to limited rural employment options for their partner or because of the absence of a partner. This study will focus on the unique circumstances of rural working mothers following the birth of a child, focusing special attention to how their employment or lack of employment affects their mental health during this distinctive time in the life course.	Amy	E. Pirretti	Karina	M. Shreffler	Stephanie	 Lanza	Ann	 Crouter
2005	153	Family, Race/Ethnicity, and Poverty in Rural America	Race, Place and Family: Race/Ethnic Differences among Nonmetro Female-Headed Families	This paper analyzes racial/ethnic differences among female-headed families in nonmetro versus metro America, with a focus on alternative female-headed family structures – co-habitation, subfamilies, residence with grandparents, among other similar structures. Few data sets allow the level of disaggregation for a focus on nonmetro areas. The result is that little is known at this time on nonmetro race/ethnic variations across female-headed families where so many are poor. Clearly, understanding where race, ethnicity and residence make differences in outcomes within female-headed families serve to better inform policy – a critical focus given the current policy debate over re-authorization of welfare legislation and the new focus on moving the unmarried into marriage. Understanding the prevalence and implications of different family structures among different populations – Black, Hispanic, and others – is likely to be critically important in this debate. We use data from the 2000 5% PUMS for the analyzes.	Anastasia	R. Snyder	Diane	K. McLaughlin	Jill	L. Findeis	Alishia	 Coleman	Mary	Ann  Demi
2005	154	Sexual Behavior in Developing Countries	Husbands’ Behavior and Wives’ Risk of Sexually Transmitted Infections and HIV in North India	Indian women suffer from a high burden of reproductive disease, and the majority of HIV positive women in antenatal clinics were infected by their husbands. This study investigates the association between wives’ risk for STIs and their husbands’ risky sexual behavior, and health seeking behavior for symptoms of reproductive tract infections. A survey of a probability sample of couples was conducted among residents in Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, India, in 2002; the total sample was 3387 couples. Controlling for sociodemographic factors, wives whose husbands reported recent nonmarital sex (OR=1.87, 95% CI=1.41-2.46) or paid sex (OR=1.75, 95% CI=1.07-2.85) were more likely to report symptoms of STIs. More empowered women—those recently exposed to the media—were more likely to seek treatment for symptoms (OR=1.77, 95% CI=1.18-2.64). This study supports the body of research in South Asia showing that women’s lack of empowerment puts them at risk for poor reproductive health outcomes.	Shelah	S. Bloom	Kaushalendra	K. Singh
2005	154	Sexual Behavior in Developing Countries	Understanding Perceptions of HIV Risks among Married Couples: Why Do Wives Worry More?	This paper aims to understand why wives perceive themselves to be at greater risk of having HIV/AIDS than their husbands when both biological measures and a priori expectations indicate that married couples largely share risks and have comparable rates of HIV infection. Using data from the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change (MDIC) survey conducted in 2001, we postulate and test three possible explanations for these stark differences in HIV risk perception by sex. While we cannot eliminate the problem of reporting errors with respect to self-reported sexual behaviors, we use an instrumental variable approach to control for measurement error associated with reports about suspicion of spouse’s sexual behaviors. The results indicate that wives are not merely “bigger worriers” than husbands nor are they engaging in “riskier” sexual behaviors, but rather that uncertainty about spouse’s behaviors, specifically their extra-marital relationships, drive the discrepancy between husbands’ and wives’ HIV risk perception.	Shelley	 Clark
2005	154	Sexual Behavior in Developing Countries	Sexual Violence against Women in Moshi, Tanzania: Risk Factors and Consequences	The objectives of this study were to establish the prevalence of sexual violence at first intercourse, to identify associated risk factors, and to explore the life-trajectory influences of this sexual violence using a life course framework. A representative household survey in Moshi, Tanzania with face-to-face interviews of 1,835 women was analyzed using multivariate logistic regression. Women were asked about sociodemographics, sexual violence at first intercourse, and marriage history. Women were also tested for the presence of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Approximately 10.9% reported forced first intercourse and 15.3% reported unwanted first intercourse. analyzes indicate that forced sexual initiation is associated with presence of an STI, as well as with being married more times, polygamous unions, having first births before marriage, and more sexual partners. Some implications are to conduct research on resiliency factors and to improve follow-up with girls experiencing sexual violence to diminish its impact on their future health.	Corrine	 Williams	Ulla	M. Larsen	Laura	 McCloskey
2005	154	Sexual Behavior in Developing Countries	Masculinity and Risk Behavior among Youth in Thailand	This paper examines the relationship between masculinity and sexual and other risk behaviors among Thai male youth. We argue that recent processes of modernization have crystallized adolescence as a life course stage for young men in which opportunities for experimentation, adventure, and thrill should be maximized. These processes have served to sharpen the association between male adolescence and risk behavior because of the normative acceptability of risk taking, and because of the increasing range of options and opportunities for undertaking risk behaviors that include sexual activity, drugs, drinking, motorcycle riding, and gang activity. Our research also shows that a better understanding of the association between masculinity and risk behaviors is a critical step for developing programmatic interventions aimed at better life outcomes for young people. Two promising intervention entry points are 1) positive deviance through peer networks, and 2) emphasis on long term schooling and career goals in the schools.	Anju	 Malhotra	Eva	 Roca	Amara	 Soonthorndhada	Sirinan	 Kittisuksathit	Sarah	 Martin
2005	155	Marriage and Health: International Perspectives	Women’s Autonomy and Male Involvement in Antenatal Care in Katmandu, Nepal: Associations and Tensions	Women’s empowerment programs focus primarily on increasing the decision-making power of women, while male involvement/couple friendly programs emphasize communication and negotiation between couples in making decisions. A survey focusing on the role of husbands during pregnancy and household decision-making was administered to 592 pregnant women receiving antenatal services at the largest maternity hospital in Katmandu, Nepal. In-depth-interviews and focus group discussions were also conducted. Multivariate regression techniques were used to compare male involvement behaviors across different levels of women’s autonomy. Higher women’s autonomy, as measured by sole final decision-making power, was associated with less male involvement in pregnancy health. Conversely, joint decision-making between the husband and wife was associated with higher levels of male involvement. These qualitative and quantitative data illustrate the inherent tensions between women’s empowerment and male involvement goals by assessing how different decision-making patterns within couples influence the degree of male spousal involvement in pregnancy health.	Britta	C. Beenhakker	Stan	 Becker
2005	155	Marriage and Health: International Perspectives	Gender, Marital Status and Health among the Elderly in Singapore	This paper examines the association between gender, marital status and health in later life and the role of the social support and economic factors in mediating the relationship between marital status and elderly, using the 1999 survey of Transitions in Health, Wealth, and Welfare of Elderly Singaporeans: 1995-1999. Our analyzes include three indicators of health, self-assessed health, chronic disorder and functional disability. Using logistic regression and interaction terms, we found significant gender interaction between the effects of gender and several of the socioeconomic and social support variables that we consider. Our hypothesis that being unmarried is more detrimental for older men than for older women seems to be borne out in this analysis with regards to self assessed health and the presence of a chronic condition. Rather than being disadvantaged, unmarried older females report better health than their male counterparts. These results suggest being unmarried at older ages need not have deleterious health effects for women.	Santosh	 Jatrana
2005	155	Marriage and Health: International Perspectives	Nuptial Strategies for Managing the Risk of HIV Infection in Rural Malawi	In a context where the transmission of HIV largely operates via heterosexual contact and where no cure or vaccine is available, behavioral changes are thought crucial for containing the epidemic. Most often it is abstinence, condom use and faithfulness that receive attention in this context, but these strategies sometimes lack realism (e.g. abstinence) or are beyond the control of women (e.g. condom use or faithfulness of the partner). In this contribution I investigate partner choice and divorce as two other behavioral strategies that women in rural Malawi deploy to manage their exposure to HIV.   The analysis consist of two parts. In the first part, temporal changes in aggregate level indices of nuptiality characteristics are compared with trends in AIDS mortality. The second part tests the association between perceived risk of exposure to HIV and marriage practices. The longitudinal character of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project is exploited to avoid problems of reverse causality.	Georges	 Reniers
2005	155	Marriage and Health: International Perspectives	The Effect of Marital Status on Hypertension in Women: Variations by Employment and Parental Roles	This study employs an integrated social roles and structural framework for health determinants, analyzing the data from the China Health and Nutrition Survey (1991-1997).   The study examines the effect of initial marital status on subsequent hypertension within Chinese women at age 20-59, interacting with parental and employment roles and controlling initial health status, sociodemographic factors and structural factors. A mulit-level logit regression model will reveal that the effect of marital status varies by parental and employment roles. People who are wage workers, have children above age 6, and are currently married have lower probability of having hypertension than those who are in other role combinations. The protective health effect of marriage is more distinctive among women without wage work and having children under age 6.	Haijiang	 Wang
2005	156	Population and Povery 2	Household Structure and the Production of Urban Poverty: Findings from Outer Beirut	This study examines the link between family structure and poverty, using recent survey data from 2799 households living in three ‘impoverished’ communities in the outskirts of Beirut. The paper provides a profile of poverty using various absolute and relative measures of poverty, and investigates the relative merit of household structure and demographics, human capital, and ethnicity on poverty incidence using a series of logistic regression models. The findings show that poverty is pervasive in outer Beirut. Clear differences by community are also evident, with the camp population being the most vulnerable. The findings show a strong link between poverty and human capital, but the picture concerning household structure and poverty is mixed. Loners tend to be better off while married couples with children 0-14 of age are especially vulnerable when controlling for other factors. Some policy implications of the findings for populations living in ‘uncertain’ urban environments are discussed.	Marwan	 Khawaja	Mylene	 Tewtel-Salem	Mona	 Mowafi
2005	156	Population and Povery 2	Explaining Fertility in the American South during the 1990s	In 2002, 34.6 million people or 12.7 percent of the United States population was poor. Hidden in these statistics are dramatic regional differences in poverty. Nine of the ten states (including the District of Columbia) with the highest proportion of poor people were located in the southern census region. Although there are many reasons for the higher poverty rates in the South, one factor that is often neglected is differential fertility rates leading to larger family size.   Using data from the National Center for Health Statistics and a variety of other sources, this research looks for links between demographic, economic, and policy factors and the differential fertility of women in the American South during the 1990s. More specifically, this research asks if differences in age, race/ethnicity, unemployment rates, female wages, Child Support Enforcement, Aid to Families with Dependent Children benefits, and abortion policies can explain why the South is different.	Leonard	M. Lopoo
2005	156	Population and Povery 2	Estimates of the Poor Elderly Population in China	There were 130 million elderly population aged 60 and over in China at the end of year 2000. Poverty is the most serious problems among aging issues in China. However, we have never known how many of them were poor even though Chinese economic situation has improved greatly since 1980s. The objective of this research is to estimate the proportion and the number of poor elderly population in mainland China. The data used for estimation is from the National Urban-Rural Sampling Survey of the Elderly conducted by China Research Center of Aging in November, 2000 and the 2000 national census on November 1st, 2000. The result is that the proportion of the poor elderly was 17.5 percent and the number of the poor elderly was 22.75 million at the reference time of the census. In addition, the demographic and social characteristics of the poor elderly were also analyzed.	Xiaochun	 Qiao	Kaiti	 Zhang	Lujun	 Sun
2005	156	Population and Povery 2	Children and Standards of Living in Old Years	A cross sectional data source, the Bank of Italy Survey on Household Income and Wealth (years 2000 and 2002), is used to assess the association between the economic conditions in old age and a few covariates, among which past fertility, marital status and living arrangements. For the elderly, past fertility behavior does not seem to impact very much on current economic performance, although the worth of assets is inversely related to the number of children. However, ceteris paribus, having (adult) co-residing children is associated with worse economic conditions, both objectively (equivalent income, poverty, assets) and subjectively. In short, having children does not seem to protect from poverty in old age, and may make things worse. Prospects are better when there are other grown-up members in the household, especially males, when education is high, and when the household resides in the North of Italy.	Maria	Letizia  Tanturri	Gustavo	 De Santis	Chiara	 Seghieri
2005	157	Comparative Immigration: Economic and Educational Dimensions	Are There Gender Differences in Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes across European Countries?	We use the 1994-2000 waves of the European Community Household Panel to analyze earnings of immigrants as compared to natives in a sample of 15 European countries. We test for any variation in earnings across gender related to duration in the destination, schooling, age at immigration, country of origin, or country of destination. We find a significant negative effect of immigrant status on individual earnings of around 40% at the time of arrival in the pooled sample (smaller for women). Differences vary across countries: migrants in Germany and Portugal fare best relative to natives and those in Sweden, Denmark, Luxembourg or Spain, the worst. Gender differences are larger among non-Europeans. By continent, Asian men followed by Latin-American and Eastern European men receive the lowest earnings. Latin-American and Eastern European women are at the bottom of the distribution. Education matters more for women in terms of explaining earnings, whereas language skills are more relevant for men.	Alicia	 Adsera	Barry	R. Chiswick
2005	157	Comparative Immigration: Economic and Educational Dimensions	Comparing Likes with Likes: Immigrants in Denmark and Germany	In this paper I study and compare the earnings of the same immigrant groups in Germany and Denmark using fresh bi-national surveys. Results show that Danish immigrants earn more than comparable immigrants in Germany. Although experience is not as well rewarded in Denmark, an initial earnings advantage upon arrival is sustained. Human capital acquired in the host country generates an earnings premium in both countries. Controlling for individual characteristics the differences across the nationalities disappear among the Danish immigrants. They remain, however, among the German immigrants: Compared to Turks, all groups earn more except the Lebanese, who earn less. Counterfactual analysis shows that if Danish immigrants were to move to Germany, they would suffer a total financial loss but if German immigrants were to move to Denmark they would experience an improvement in their earnings. This suggests that the Danish labor market is more effective in enhancing the immigrants’ capacity to succeed in the labor market.	Amelie	 Constant
2005	157	Comparative Immigration: Economic and Educational Dimensions	Refining the Estimation of Immigration’s Labor Market Effects	Except for Borjas (2003), most papers estimating labor market effects of immigration find quantitatively small, negative effects on native workers using a spatial variation approach. Borjas suggests these effects are understated since migration within the U.S. arbitrages local wage differentials. He uses variation across skill groups over time in the national labor market and finds large, negative effects. This paper finds that Borjas’ results are driven by the earnings of high school dropouts between 1980 and 2000. Any factor correlated with decreasing earnings of this group – de-industrialization, skill-biased technological change, increasing negative selectivity of dropouts – explains his results. Indeed, we find wage decreases from these factors preceded the effect from immigration shocks. We use the different skill composition of immigrants to Canada as a point of comparison to Borjas (2003) and find the effect of immigration on wages of Canadians is negative, small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.	Seth	G. Sanders	Sarah	 Bohn
2005	157	Comparative Immigration: Economic and Educational Dimensions	How Different are Immigrants? A Cross-Country and Cross-Survey Analysis on Educational Achievement	This paper examines differences in educational achievement between immigrants and natives in ten countries with a high population of immigrant pupils: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the USA. The first step of the analysis shows how far countries differ regarding immigrants’ educational disadvantage. In a second step, the paper compares immigrants’ characteristics across countries focusing predominantly on socio-economic status, language proficiency, immigrants’ time spent in the host country and patterns of school segregation. Using a regression framework the last step of the analysis investigates how far these determinants of educational achievement can explain observed immigrants’ educational disadvantage in the countries examined. The paper evaluates whether results found are robust across different sources of achievement data: the Trends in International Maths and Science Study (TIMSS), the Programme of International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Programme of International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).	Sylke	V. Schnepf
2005	158	Early Health Influences and Impacts	Do Grandmothers Improve Child Health at Birth?	Are children whose mothers have access to grandparental help during pregnancy born bigger and healthier? Grandparents can be an important source of assistance during the prenatal and perinatal period, for example by providing additional food to the expectant mother, helping her travel to the clinic for antenatal care, relieving her of some of her work, monitoring the pregnancy for complications, and helping in delivery emergencies. While several papers have attempted to test the effect of grandparental presence on child health, they have not looked for evidence of grandparental effects prior to birth. This paper studies the possible benefits of grandparents for health at birth using a demographic surveillance survey from rural KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. I assess child health at birth in terms of birthweight, a measure of development throughout gestation, and Apgar score, a measure of child wellbeing at the end of the pregnancy and during birth.	Solveig	 Argeseanu Cunningham
2005	158	Early Health Influences and Impacts	Family Choices of Child Care in Los Angeles County: Does Child's Health Matter?	The effect of child's health on child care choices has been a neglected area in child care research. While a large body of literature exists on how child care affects child's health and sociocognitive development, little is known about the directionality from child health to child care choice. The potential two-way directionality between child health and child care choices poses problems of endogeneity when attempting to isolate the effects of child health on child care choices. In order to examine this relationship, we use data from the Los Angeles and Families and Neighborhoods Survey on child's health at birth and current child care choices among children 0-5 years old and not yet in school. Preliminary results suggest that subjective evaluation has a marginally significant effect on regular use of care, and birth weight and subjective evaluation have a marginally significant effect on type of child care used.	Chi	 Chiao	Laura	 Chyu
2005	158	Early Health Influences and Impacts	Selection and the Effect of Prenatal Smoking	A large number of studies finds that smoking during pregnancy is associated with poor infant health outcomes. However, there is an on-going debate about the extent to which this association is causal. It is difficult to determine whether these poor health outcomes are the result of prenatal smoking or are also attributable to characteristics of the mother which are correlated with prenatal smoking. I examine the importance of selection on the effect of prenatal smoking by comparing the effect sizes across groups whose selection varies. Specifically, I use three British birth cohorts where the mothers’ knowledge about the harms of prenatal smoking varied substantially. Preliminary evidence indicates that the effect of prenatal smoking on low birth weight for gestational age among children born in 2000 is twice that of children born in 1958, implying that selection plays an important part in the association between smoking and birth outcomes.	Angela	R. Fertig
2005	158	Early Health Influences and Impacts	Why are Children with Married Parents Healthier? The Case of Asthma among Very Young Children	Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study, I find that children born to unmarried parents are more likely to be diagnosed with asthma and more likely to require emergency treatment for asthma early in life compared with children whose parents are married. Prior research has debated whether this type of “married-parent advantage” for children stems from socioeconomic differences across family structures (selection) or from differences in parenting. Because parents potentially play a large role in identifying and controlling asthma triggers in the household, we might expect the parenting component to be particularly important in the case of family structure disparities in asthma outcomes. Nevertheless, I find that a large portion of married-parent advantage stems from the socioeconomic and demographic correlates of marriage and that parenting behaviors play a very small role in explaining family structure disparities in children’s asthma outcomes.	Kristen	 Harknett
2005	159	Social Change and Union Formation: Cross-National Perspectives	Union Formation in Russia, 1985-2001	The economic and social turmoil accompanying the collapse of the Soviet system make contemporary Russia an ideal setting in which to study how macro-level structural and institutional changes affect patterns of union formation. We analyze marital histories from a recent survey of 7,167 Russian adults in order to: 1) identify trends in the raw (gross) and adjusted (net of covariates) rates of first marriage, remarriage, any marriage, and cohabitation in Russia from 1985-2001, among those at risk for these outcomes; 2) assess how marital status, age, gender, education, employment status, city size, and regional economic conditions affect union formation in contemporary Russia; 3) test for variation in the effects of these variables by gender; and 4) test for change in the effects of age, education, and employment status, following the collapse of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991.	Theodore	P. Gerber	Danielle	 Berman
2005	159	Social Change and Union Formation: Cross-National Perspectives	Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing the Role of Technological Progress on the Formation of Households	Since World War II there have been: (i) a rise in the fraction of time that married households allocate to market work, (ii) an increase in the rate of divorce, and (iii) a decline in the rate of marriage. What can explain this? It is argued here that technological progress in the household sector has saved on the need for labor at home. This makes it more feasible for singles to maintain their own home, and for married women to work. To address this question, a search model of marriage and divorce is developed. Household production benefits from labor-saving technological progress.	Jeremy	 Greenwood	Nezih	 Guner
2005	159	Social Change and Union Formation: Cross-National Perspectives	Underlying Diversity of the First Marriage Process in China—An Application of the Hernes Model	Marriage in the Chinese population has long been portrayed as distinctively early and universal. This impression has actually hampered the process of marriage research in China. Although the traditional marriage pattern has rarely been questioned, there is some evidence that the marriage pattern of modern China significantly distinguishes from the traditional portrayal. In this study, I apply the Hernes diffusion model to examine the underlying diversity in the first marriage process in China nowadays. The major objective is to investigate and compare the processes of entry into first marriage for different cohorts, among the population with different socioeconomic and demographic characteristics. It is expected to increase our knowledge about the changing tendency of the marriage process across successive cohorts and the patterns for various subpopulations. In addition, I also attempt to assess the applicability of the Hernes model in the Chinese population.	Jianlin	 Niu
2005	159	Social Change and Union Formation: Cross-National Perspectives	Social Effects, Household Time Allocation and the Decline in Union Formation	Economic theories of the household and the marriage market provide an explanation for differences in household formation rates over time based on the evolution of female wages. However, cross-country differences in female market human capital are unlikely to account for the divergence in existing union formation rates across developed countries. I develop a partial equilibrium model that formally analyzes the effect of social externalities on the woman's decision to enter a household. Social externalities are characterized as gender roles that constrain potential partners away from the efficient allocation of household labor and diminish the gains to entering a union. I test the model using individual level cross- country and longitudinal data (ISSP 1994 and 2002) containing information on attitudes toward gender roles and the allocation of time to household production. The empirical findings support the proposed model of social constraints upon the allocation of household time.	Almudena	 Sevilla-Sanz
2005	160	Demography of Home Ownership Trends	Cohort Longitudinal Analysis of the Income Composition of Demand for New Houses, 1960-2000	This paper argues that shifts in the population of new house buyers underlie the increasing size of new houses in the US at the end of the twentieth century. Following Myers (1990, 1999), I draw on a revised “filtering theory” to conceptualize historical change in the housing stock within a demographic framework. Since income trends are key period effects for cohorts of households, I also analyze the income composition of demand for new houses. I compare the age and income profile of households living in 1990s vintage houses to those living in 1950s and 1960s houses when new. I use US Census microdata for 1960 to 2000 to develop a cohort longitudinal estimation of historical change, and employ both analytic graphs and regression techniques. I find significant shifts between cohorts of households in the age and income composition of demand for new houses, with implications for the entire housing market.	Rachel	E. Dwyer
2005	160	Demography of Home Ownership Trends	The Decline of the Immigrant Homeownership Advantage: Life-Cycle, Declining Fortunes and Changing Housing Careers in Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver, 1981-2001	In the past, working-age immigrant families in Canada’s large urban centers had higher homeownership rates than the Canadian-born. Over the past twenty years however, this advantage has reversed, due jointly to a drop in immigrant rates and a rise in the popularity of homeownership among the Canadian-born. In this study I assess the efficacy of standard consumer choice models, which include indicators for age, income, education, family type, plus several immigrant characteristics, to explain these changes. I find that the standard model almost completely explains the immigrant homeownership advantage in 1981, as well as the rise over time among the Canadian-born. In contrast, even after accounting for the well-known decline in immigrant economic fortunes, only about 1/3 of the 1981-2001 immigrant change in homeownership rates is explained. I discuss some of the implications of this inability and make several suggestions for further research.	Michael	 Haan
2005	160	Demography of Home Ownership Trends	“The White Picket Fence Dream”: Effects of Assets on the Choice of Family Union	Marriage is perceived as a family status to be chosen after certain economic and relational preconditions are fulfilled – after the couple have achieved the so-called “white picket fence dream”. In this paper, using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, we examine whether there is any direct relationship between the individual’s financial and housing assets and his/her transition into cohabitation or marriage. Preliminary results indicate that both for men and women, home ownership and access to liquid financial assets increases the probability of marriage. Transition into cohabitation, however, is not significantly influenced by asset ownership.	Arif	 Mamun
2005	160	Demography of Home Ownership Trends	How Much Does Declining Household Formation Contribute to Rising Homeownership?	The 1990s saw widespread increases in homeownership rates, suggesting that a larger share of households own their homes. However, the increases may in part be due to renters dropping out of the housing market. This paper investigates the extent to which the homeownership increases in the top 100 U.S. metropolitan areas is the result of the decline in household formation and the displacement of would-be renters from the housing market. We expect to find: The effect of declining household formation on homeownership attainment is most evident among adults under age 35, adults of lower educational attainment or income level, minorities, and recent immigrants. While large differences exist across metropolitan areas, the impacts are most evident in metropolitan areas that received a large number of in-migrants, and where housing construction lagged behind employment growth. The drop in household formation is reflective of both affordability problems and voluntary changes in household structure.	Zhou	 Yu
2005	162	Change and Continuity in Fertility Preferences	How Much Does Household Income Matter for Fertility Intentions in Bulgaria? Some Empirical Descriptions	Using data from the Bulgarian survey ‘The Impact of Social Capital and Coping Strategies on Reproductive and Marital Behavior’ from 2002, the influence of households' economic situations, measured by their monetary income and the share of income spent for food, on fertility intentions of individuals and couples is explored. The results show that male’s general intentions to have a second or a third child are sensitive to the economic situations of their households. However, males and females from high-income households intend to postpone the birth of a first child. Higher levels of income and lower shares of income spent for food also increase the probability that both partners intend to have a second child in general. According to the timing of a second child however, a better economic situation of the household supports primarily males’ intentions to have this child soon.	Christoph	 Buehler
2005	162	Change and Continuity in Fertility Preferences	Fertility Intentions and Preferences: Effects of Structural and Financial Incentives and Constraints in Austria	This paper addresses the question to which extent the low fertility in Austria can be accounted for by effects of structural and financial measures. Using data from the Population Policy Acceptance Survey 2001 we analyze the effects of incentives and constraints on the desired number of children, on wanting no (more) children, and on fertility aspirations under the implementation of certain public policies. Based on zero-inflated Poisson models we find that only structural constraints have an effect on desired fertility, while financial constraints have no effect. Logistic regression results suggest that neither structural nor financial factors affect the desire for wanting (more) children. Concerning the fertility aspiration under the implementation of certain policy measures our results based on matching methods indicate that both structural and financial incentives would have an effect on thinking about having a(nother) child, on deciding to have a(nother) child, as well as on having the first/next child sooner.	Henriette	 Engelhardt
2005	162	Change and Continuity in Fertility Preferences	Infertility and Preferences for Adoption	Research shows that subfecundity/sterility is an important determinant of an individual's preference for adoption; the cumulation of this individual desire across an increasingly subfecund population implies a rising demand for adoption. At the same time, infants available for adoption have declined. As well, advances in assisted reproductive technologies have made a variety of medical treatments more available and reliable, and insurance coverage has made them more affordable. Public policy does offer some attempt to encourage preferences toward adoption through a tax credit, but other barriers to adoption are perceived as formidable. To date, no study has examined who is willing to adopt hard-to-place children, who expresses only selective preferences, and who pursues medical treatment only. Preliminary analyzes using the 1995 NSFG show a positive association between infertility treatment and preferences for an infant rather than an older child and a child without disabilities rather than a child with mild/severe disabilities.	Rosalind	B. King	Carolyn	A. Kapinus
2005	162	Change and Continuity in Fertility Preferences	The Measurement of Unintended Pregnancy in Rural India: A Comparison of Prospective versus Retrospective Assessment	Estimates of unintended childbearing in developing countries have been almost exclusively derived from women’s retrospective responses. A 2003 follow-up survey of 6437 reproductive-aged women in four Indian states who were interviewed in the 1998-99 NFHS-2 provides a unique opportunity to assess prospective vs. retrospective assessments of unintended childbearing for 3900 births during the 1998-2003 period. In all four states, a pronounced shift is evident in births which were prospectively classified as unwanted to having been wanted based upon retrospective assessments. These results provide evidence of widespread rationalization by women of subsequent unwanted births to having been wanted, and suggest that retrospective assessments such as the DHS may lead to pronounced underestimations of the true extent of unintended childbearing. Our analysis subsequently explores the specific factors (demographic, socio-cultural, child, and husband) which explain this stability/shift in wantedness status among the 1075 births during this period which were prospectively defined as unwanted.	Michael	 Koenig	Rajib	 Acharya	Tarun	K. Roy	Sagri	 Singh
2005	163	Girls' Education in Muslim Societies	Impact of Child Labour on School Attendance and School Attainment: Evidence from Bangladesh	This paper uses data from Bangladesh to examine household decisions involving child schooling and child labor. Using a multinomial logit model, we first estimate the determinants of household’s decision to put the child one of the four states - study only, work only, combining study and work, and neither work nor study for 5-17 year old children. The paper then looks at the impact of work on child’s current school attendance and school attainment using logit model. Multinomial logit results show that the education of parents significantly increases the probability that a school-age child will specialize in study. The significant and positive gender coefficient suggests that girls are more likely than boys to combine schooling with work. However, the central message from this study is that child labor adversely affects the child’s schooling, which is reflected in lower school attendance and lower grade attainment. School attendance suffers most compared to grade attainment.	Rasheda	MS Khanam
2005	163	Girls' Education in Muslim Societies	Girls' Schooling in Rural Bangladesh	In Bangladesh girls' ability to complete schooling, especially beyond the primary level, is compromised not only by poverty, but also by the practice of early marriage. Since the mid 1990s the Bangladesh government has provided financial incentives to parents in rural areas to enroll and retain their daughters in secondary school. Although enrollment has increased tremendously some girls still never enroll and school dropout continues to be high. This paper uses a panel survey (2001 and 2003) of nearly 3000 adolescent girls in rural Bangladesh to predict schooling outcomes. The analysis finds that factors explaining school enrollment and school retention are not necessarily the same, and that the reasons why girls discontinue school can have profound immediate and long term consequences for their well being and varies according to household socio-economic status.	Simeen	 Mahmud
2005	163	Girls' Education in Muslim Societies	Trade-offs of Girls' Schooling in Rural Pakistan: Influences of Gender, Poverty and Community	Wide community differences in rural Pakistan, depending on resource allocation and service availability, lead to significant variation in opportunities for education and work for children and young people. At the same time, households have a huge influence on the social mores and demand for schooling and the pressures to enter employment for children especially in situations of poverty. We examine community and household effects on school enrollment and attainment level. We focus in particular on the impact of expanding educational opportunities for girls. We utilize the “Adolescent and Youth in Pakistan 2001-02”, a nationally representative sample survey of 8,074 young people aged 15 – 24 - 4,803 adolescents. Data sourced at three levels are linked - the individual, household/ parental attitudes, and the context of the community in which they reside – and analyzed using multilevel modeling.	Zeba	A. Sathar	Christine	 Callum	Minhaj	Ul Haque
2005	163	Girls' Education in Muslim Societies	Islam, Regional Context, and Girls’ Educational Deficit	Access to primary education is basic to human development. The achievement of mass education, or 90% of school-aged children attending primary school, also affects demographic changes associated with national development. Nevertheless, girls’ net primary enrollment rates are       	Kathryn	M. Yount
2005	164	Predictors and Consequences of Gender Based Violence	Domestic Violence and Time Use in Rural Bangladesh	Absence of domestic violence is a striking measure of marital welfare. However, other indicators of well-being, such as time use patterns, may be additional ways to measure the more subtle and complex realities of married life. Through analysis of time use patterns this paper explores whether leisure and other self-indulgent activities are associated with violence. Leisure time has recently been proposed as an important and distinct category by which women’s well-being can be measured (Basu and Koolwal, 2004). Using longitudinal panel data from an adolescent study in rural Bangladesh, this paper will examine the association between time use patterns and domestic violence during the early years of marriage. The sample represents a population of adolescent girls residing in districts characterized by very early patterns of marriage and childbearing.	Sajeda	 Amin	Luciana	 Suran
2005	164	Predictors and Consequences of Gender Based Violence	Witnessing Parental Domestic Violence and Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety in Filipino Adolescents	The experience of adverse familial events, such as parental domestic violence, could have a lasting impact on the mental well-being of adolescents. Using cross-sectional data from 2,051 adolescents who were interviewed in 2002 as part of an on-going cohort study in Cebu, Philippines, levels of anxiety/depression and reports of witnessing parental domestic violence were obtained. Twenty-six percent of males and 37% of females reported experiencing four or more symptoms of anxiety/depression and 47% recalled parental domestic violence. After adjustment, males who witnessed domestic violence were 1.43 times more likely and females were 1.75 times more likely to report having four or more symptoms of anxiety/depression. Females were over three times as likely to report four or more symptoms of depression/anxiety if they remembered parental domestic violence severe enough to require medical attention. Adolescents who report witnessing parental domestic violence are at significantly greater risk of having depression/anxiety.	Michelle	J. Hindin
2005	164	Predictors and Consequences of Gender Based Violence	Relationship Characteristics Associated with Intimate Partner Violence among Women in Moshi, Tanzania	The objectives of this study were to identify the relationship characteristics associated with intimate partner violence (IPV) against women in an urban population in Tanzania, and to report the prevalence rate of IPV in a population-based sample. A representative household survey of 1,444 women in Moshi, Tanzania was analyzed using multivariate logistic regression. The 12-month prevalence of IPV was 21.2% (95%CI:18.5-23.9). analyzes confirmed that violence was more typical of couples where: men had multiple partners and did not contribute to children’s health care; men’s heavy drinking; having five or more children; problems conceiving; and women’s lower educational attainment. Features of relationship investment correlate with IPV in this population. Some implications are to enhance men’s commitment through promoting monogamy; enhance marital satisfaction through alcohol treatment for men and family planning to reduce fertility; and to provide women with alternatives through the promotion of education opportunities from secondary school to adult education	Laura	 McCloskey	Corrine	 Williams
2005	165	Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Economics	Early Career Wage Growth of White and Black Women	A substantial wage differential exists between black and white female workers of similar educational levels. This unexplained white-black wage gap may result from both unmeasured earnings-enhancing attributes favoring whites, as well as market discrimination against blacks. To separate these two effects from one another, we estimate a within-cohort fixed-effect model that assesses the race-based gap in wage growth within four educational levels. Using data from the NLSY Work History file we depict the diverging wage trajectories of women's first post-schooling decade. The results point at a disturbing pattern: while wage growth of black women who attend college is similar to that of whites, the less-educated black women, do not experience similar rates of wage growth as their white counterparts. These estimates capture, at least in part, the degree to which labor market treatment (i.e., discrimination) contributes to the growing wage disparities between less educated black and white young women. Several possible explanations for our results are discussed.	Sigal	 Alon	Yitchak	 Haberfeld
2005	165	Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Economics	Double Disadvantage among Immigrant Women in the U.S. Highly Skilled Labor Market	While the social-economic characteristics and labor market outcomes of the highly skilled workers have become the subject of recent inquires, little research has been devoted to the experiences of 49 percent of professional labor force –women. By employing the U.S. Census 2000 data, my research addresses two research questions: 1) Do immigrant highly skilled women face greater hardships in the labor market compared to other groups (immigrant men, native-born men and women); 2) What factors tend to aggravate and alleviate these economic disadvantages? In particular, are there significant variations in labor market experiences of women-professionals by race/ethnicity as well as local labor markets? This project will contribute to the limited literature on highly skilled migration as well as to the literature on the influences of gender, race/ethnicity, nativity, and their interactions on socioeconomic inequality.	Jeanne	 Batalova
2005	165	Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Economics	Placing Progress: Contextual Inequality, Race, and Immigrant Incorporation in the U.S.	Recent research has examined how immigrants' prospects for economic and social incorporation are geographically contingent, both within and across U.S. metropolitan areas. The relatively recent ability to consider the second generation children of immigrants provides an opportunity to examine the importance of local contexts not only with regard to immigrants but also to their U.S.-born and educated children, further invoking questions of social mobility and the persistence of race and ethnicity as components of inequality. I employ a relative distributions approach to the examination of wages across U.S. metropolitan areas for natives, immigrants, and their adult children. This approach allows consideration of how opportunities for immigrant incorporation have been affected by city contexts of wage inequality, as well as the relational changes in labor market position realized by native, immigrant, and second generation race groups as a result of economic changes in the 1980s and 1990s.	Jamie	 Goodwin-White
2005	165	Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Economics	Cost of Being a Mexican Immigrant and Being a Mexican Non-Citizen	We examine hourly wage differences across different groups of Mexican-origin workers. First, we assess the cost of foreign-born status by comparing the hourly wages of Mexican immigrant workers with those of native-born Mexican American workers. Second, we assess the cost of non-citizenship status by comparing the hourly wages of non-citizens with those of Mexican-born naturalized citizens. We also seek to determine if these costs are greater in California than in Texas. Data from the 2000 5% PUMS are used to conduct the analysis. The results from multiple regression analyzes reveal that being an immigrant, particularly a non-citizen immigrant, is associated with lower hourly wages, especially in California. Thus, Mexican-origin workers, especially those in California, bear dual costs for being foreign-born and not being naturalized citizens. Furthermore, our focus on length of U.S. residence reveals that these costs are greater for those who arrived after 1980, especially in California.	Isao	 Takei	Jing	 Li
2005	166	Generations and Immigrant-Group Incorporation	Patterns of Economic Participation of Mexican-Origin Women in the United States of America	Using the Current Population Survey, data from March 2001 and a hierarchical linear model, this paper explore the factors that affect the economic participation across generations of Mexican-origin women in the United States. The main purpose of this study is to show that there are different patterns of economic participation in the labor force of Mexican-origin women depending on the generational status, and three dimensional issues: individual and human capital, the family characteristics and the characteristics of the place of residence. In the same way, this study attempts to compare the pattern of Mexican-origin women with the American mainstream (white non-Hispanic natives) and to explain the differences between profiles using the perspective of assimilation. The evidence obtained showed that the economic participation profile from third generation was similar to the white non-Hispanic ones, probably because they were more assimilated to the American mainstream, in opposition to other generations.	María	Adela  Angoa Pérez
2005	166	Generations and Immigrant-Group Incorporation	Generational Differences in Mexican-Americans' Earnings	Generational economic progress of Mexican Americans is stagnant in terms of earnings. Using the Current Population Survey data from 1994 to 2003, we test if earnings of the third generation Mexicans are different from that of the second generation. We classify two types of the second generation: one who has one Mexican-born parent (SG-1) and another who has two (SG-2), and analyze male and female workers separately. Among females, we do not find significant difference between the two generations after controlling for human capital, urban residence, and industry in which they work. Among males, SG-2 makes just as much earnings as the third generation does. These results suggest that Mexican American’s earnings in general do not change by generation. Exceptionally, male children with mixed-nativity parents (SG-1) earn significantly greater than the third. We assume such parents are better equipped with resources to support their male children’s adaptation.	Yukio	 Kawano	Katharine	M. Donato	Charles	 Tolbert
2005	166	Generations and Immigrant-Group Incorporation	Interracial, Interethnic, and Intergenerational Marriages: National Origin Differences	Social Scientists use intermarriage patterns as a measure of social distance and immigrant adaptation. But, the increase in immigrants from diverse national origins has given rise to concern that not all groups will experience the same levels of intermarriage across racial, ethnic or generational boundaries. We examine these three types of intermarriage for four distinct national origin groups in the United States. Using 2000 US Census data for Puerto Rican, Mexican, Chinese and Filipino origin individuals we estimate multinomial regression models predicting intermarriage type. Preliminary results indicate that natives are more likely to intermarry than the foreign born but important national origin differences in the likelihood to marry whites or others within the same panethnic group emerge. Results are presented separately for men and women and significant differences by gender are found.	Zhenchao	 Qian	Jennifer	E. Glick	Christie	D. Batson
2005	166	Generations and Immigrant-Group Incorporation	Generational Patterns in Academic Performance: The Variable Effects of Attitudes, Social Capital, and Peer Influences	The resumption of high levels of immigration to the United States since the late 1960s has led to numerous studies examining the social and economic adaptation of new arrivals. Increasingly researchers have focused on the adaptation of immigrant youths, particularly in terms of educational achievement. Studies of academic performance have produced conflicting results concerning the effect of generational status; while having immigrant parents was associated with adverse educational outcomes in studies using data from the 1980s, being a child of immigrants proved an advantage in the 1990s. Using newly released data from the base year of the Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS2002), this paper will provide an up-to-date reading of generational patterns in academic performance, and will take advantage of new variables in ELS2002 to examine the varying roles that psychosocial attitudes, peer influences, and access to social capital play in determining the relative performance of immigrant students.	Emily	 Rosenbaum	Jessie	Anne  Rochford
2005	167	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis III	A General Temporal Data Model and the Structured Population Event History Register	Multi-site longitudinal investigations including large scale vaccine and behavioral intervention trials are becoming more common, making it an urgent matter to develop a standard temporal framework to guide the storage and manipulation of complex temporal data describing the histories of people (and households and other aggregations of people) living in multiple populations. This work begins to address this challenge by presenting 1) an abstract temporal data model that can represent an arbitrary range of inter-related temporal trajectories – the General Temporal Data Model or GTDM, 2) a relational database implementation of the GTDM that is able to store an arbitrary range of inter-related temporal trajectories with a single static relational schema – the Structured Population Event History Register (SPEHR), and 3) a relational database schema based on SPEHR that can store the contents of many SPHER-based databases allowing data from different longitudinal projects to be easily merged and managed together.	Samuel	J. Clark
2005	167	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis III	An Experiment with Approaches to Interview Hard to Access Respondents: A Study of Male Clients of FSWs in Mumbai, India	Scarcity of studies on 'actual' male clients of Female Sex Workers (FSWs) can mainly be attributed to the invisibility and inaccessibility of clients to researchers. Even when they are visible as the clients of brothel based FSWs, reaching them and winning their confidence for interview is really difficult. There are only few approaches tried out in different studies. Most of these in India are based on networks developed through FSWs/ ‘gharwalis’ or NGOs. The present paper deals with the critical assessment of various non-conventional approaches to reach the clients of FSWs such as 'individual follow-up', 'link with LKIs', 'mystery peer', 'mock chit-chat', etc. and examine their relative efficacy in terms of refusal rate, rapport development, reliability, ethical strength, financial constraints and operational convenience. The study has noted that ‘mock chit-chat between two investigators’ is the best way to rope in the clients for any program or intervention in the field.	Sudipta	 Mondal	Rajendra	 Singh	Shrikant	 Singh	Ravi	K. Verma
2005	167	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis III	Rendering Family: Using Auto-Driven Interview Techniques with Children in LDCs	This paper explores the advantages and disadvantages of collecting data from children using auto-driven interview techniques. With auto-driven interviews, researchers supply a stimulus, and respondents direct interview content. Auto-driven interviews have the potential to put children at ease because the auto-driven format allows children greater control over interview content. We discuss this methodology and its application to collection of data from children. Subsequently, we describe our experience using the pictures generated with single use cameras as the stimuli in auto-driven interviews with children in Lesotho. We evaluate the usefulness of this technique for interviews with children in low-income settings and discuss associated ethical issues.	Susan	E. Short	Maletela	 Tuoane
2005	167	Innovative Techniques in Data Collection and Analysis III	A Demographic Analysis of the Senegalese Population of Reproductive Health Care Organizations	The population of organizations in the reproductive health care field in Senegal serves as the analytical focus of this paper. Adapting the standard tools of demographic analysis, I examine the influence of global and national factors, such as health paradigms, population policies, and fertility levels, on the reproductive health care population in Senegal. As part of a larger project that explores the range of African responses to population problems, the analysis presented in this paper is unique in that it a) tests the application of demographic techniques to a nontraditional population, that of reproductive health care organizations, for whom data are sparse, and b) informs on non-governmental organizations, a relatively understudied organizational form. By combining demographic and sociological methods, this paper shows how understanding the macro causes of the Senegalese organizational population's evolution informs on the overall treatment of population issues in Senegal.	Rachel	 Sullivan
2005	168	Historical Transitions and Demographic Responses	Kin Outside the Household and Demographic and Social Outcomes in Rural Liaoning, China, 1774-1909	We make use of a uniquely detailed and voluminous longitudinal, individual- and household-level dataset from rural Liaoning in northeast China during the eighteenth and nineteenth century to examine the role of kin networks beyond the household in determining individual social and demographic outcomes in late imperial China. We examine how individual chances of attainment, fertility, marriage, and mortality were affected by measured characteristics of the household, an administrative unit known as the household group, the descent group, and the village. We assess the role of kin networks beyond the household by examining whether characteristics of the household group and descent group affected individual outcomes once characteristics of the household and village were controlled for. Results indicate that the household group and descent group were important units of organization in late imperial Chinese society, as reflected in the importance of their characteristics in determining individual social and demographic outcomes.	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	 Lee
2005	168	Historical Transitions and Demographic Responses	Something Old, Something New – The Hungarian Marriage Patterns in Historical Perspective	Among the various demographic events, marriage is probably the most sensitive to changes in social norms or economic structure. In most cases the patterns of nuptiality closely follow the development path of a society. The institute of marriage is also a core component of family formation, thus it also influences fertility decisions based on the social role of marriage in the given cultural context. This paper examines the changing trends of nuptiality in Hungary from the late 19th to the early 21st century. With the help of Hungarian historical statistical data we can see these changes from the perspective of broader socioeconomic development over time, during which Hungary has turned from a predominantly agrarian society into a modern urban one. This paper provides a historical demographic overview of a country where the state intervention to the social norms and collective behavior was itself a norm for a long time.	Laszlo	J. Kulcsar
2005	168	Historical Transitions and Demographic Responses	Filling Gaps in Japanese Historical Demography: Marriage, Fertility and Households in Nineteenth-Century Rural Japan	This study estimates nuptiality and fertility among peasants in nineteenth-century Japan and assesses their relationship to household organization and regional economic development. The own-children method of fertility is applied to the large cross-sectional data drawn from two regions: 1870 household registers of 35 villages in Tama (west of Tokyo) and religious investigations of 54 village years scattered over 1857-1869 in Echizen (current Fukui). Despite the different levels, both regions share similar patterns towards the end of the nineteenth century: the age at marriage increased; the gap between TFR and TMFR increased; and despite of the fluctuations of fertility rates due to cholera and social upheavals, there appears a sustainable increase in fertility rates in both regions. The study aims to explain gaps of understanding in current Japanese historical demography regarding the population development on the eve of industrialization, and the role of household organization in regional variation of demographic behaviors.	Satomi	 Kurosu
2005	168	Historical Transitions and Demographic Responses	Intergenerational Coresidence and Economic Opportunity of the Younger Generation in the United States, 1850-2000	In the mid-nineteenth century, about 70 percent of persons aged 65 or older resided with their adult children; by the end of the twentieth century, only about 12 percent did so. Analysts of this massive change in living arrangements have focused on increasing economic independence of the aged. This paper reexamines the issue by shifting the focus from the economic circumstances of the aged to the economic opportunities of the younger generation. Using newly-available census microdata, I estimate that rising income of the aged since the introduction of Social Security in 1936 can only account for about 30 percent of the long-run change in living arrangements. The growing economic opportunities of the younger generation—as measured by their shift from agriculture to wage labor and growing educational attainment—appear to have had a significantly more powerful impact on the independent residence of the aged.	Steven	 Ruggles
2005	168	Historical Transitions and Demographic Responses	Agrarian Change and Population Growth in Late Colonial Spanish America: The Case of Puerto Rico, 1765-1815	In the present study, we seek to reveal the basic contours of Puerto Rico’s demographic evolution from 1765 and 1815, and to understand the effects of changes in the agrarian economy on the colonial population. Our main data source is an under-utilized series of general censuses compiled by Spanish officials in response to Crown mandates for better intelligence on the state of the constituent units of the Empire. Using these data, we probe the broad outlines of population change, explore the spatial distribution of such change, and pose new questions to be answered with more detailed information. Study findings allow for a more informed discussion about Puerto Rico's late eighteenth century agrarian and population transition, its lasting impacts on the island’s development, and the theoretical implications for other instances of agrarian-population shifts.	Francisco	A. Scarano	Katherine	J. Curtis White
2005	169	Assessing Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	An Assessment of the Functioning of India's Public Health System	India has relatively poor health outcomes, despite having a well-developed administrative system, excellent technical skills, and an extensive network of public health institutions. This suggests that the health system may be mis-directing its efforts, or be poorly designed. We assess the performance of the Essential Public Health Functions at central government level, using data from senior officials. We find that the strengths of the system lie in its expertise and infrastructure. Weaknesses include overlooking some fundamental public health functions such as public health regulations, and deep management flaws which hinder effective use of resources. The latter include inadequate focus on evaluation; assessing quality of services; dissemination and use of information; openness to learning and innovation; partnerships with others; and providing support to sub-national levels. Resources could be much better utilized with small changes. With some re-assessment of priorities and better management practices, health outcomes could be improved with existing resources.	Monica	 Das Gupta	Manju	 Rani
2005	169	Assessing Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Improving Innovative Health Care Delivery Systems that Serve the Poor	Using data from the World Bank’s HNP Poverty Thematic Reports of 22 countries in Africa, we assess the use of services by asset quintile groups, for treatment of childhood diseases, proxies for publicly subsidized services. Results show that public sector services disproportionately serves the wealthy, and further clarifies the role of the private sector in serving the poor.    We assess the evidence on using franchise networks to supplement government programs. Examples from health franchises in Africa and Asia are provided to illustrate the potential for franchise systems to leverage private providers and so increase delivery-point availability for public-benefit services. Having explored the range of systems that have been tested for working with private providers, from contracting to vouchers to behavioral change and provider education, we conclude that franchising has the greatest potential for integration into large-scale programs in Africa that will address critical illnesses of public health importance.	Ndola	 Prata	Dominic	 Montagu
2005	169	Assessing Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Health Care for Rural Poor: Decentralization of Health Services in Karnataka,India	Decentralization of health sector results in greater community participation that leads to improved service quality and coverage. It also helps in focusing attention on vulnerable social groups, emphasizing preventive measures and reorienting programs to meet specific local needs. In this context, the paper examines the process and impact of decentralization of health services in India following the 73rd Constitutional Amendment. It looks into the devolution of powers and resources to local self-government institutions and also the coordination mechanism existing between the department of health and local bodies for planning and implementing health programs. The paper is based on a field study in 2001 covering three tiers of rural decentralized bodies at the District, Block (intermediary) and Village levels in Karnataka. The findings indicate an overall improvement in the quality of service delivery, accountability of personnel, and utilization of health services, despite financial constraints and lack of administrative clarity.	T.	V.  Sekher
2005	169	Assessing Public Health Interventions in Developing Countries	Evaluating the Impact of the ‘Basic Health Insurance’ Program on Skilled Birth Attendance in Bolivia: Evidence from the Household Surveys	The Basic Health Insurance (BHI), implemented in Bolivia in 1999, was created to reduce the financial barriers of access to the health system of uninsured populations by offering a basic package of free health services. This study examines the impact of the BHI on the coverage of skilled birth attendance. Under the assumption that the availability of medical personnel is correlated with the probability of being exposed to the program, the identification strategy consists of comparing the change in coverage of skilled birth attendance among women in municipalities with high and low ratio of doctors, before and after the BHI. The results indicate that coverage of skilled birth attendance increased more among women in municipalities with higher probability of receiving the benefits of the program. This increase was larger among poor indigenous mothers living in the rural areas, and provides evidence of the success of the program in Bolivia.	Cecilia	 Vidal
2005	170	Measuring Religious Influence	Religious Affiliation, Religious Milieu, and Contraceptive Use in Nigeria	Critically engaging existing theoretical perspectives on the association between religion and reproduction, we analyze Muslim-Christian differentials in modern contraceptive use in Nigeria. These differentials are seen through the prism of historical religious tensions and are examined at both the individual and community levels. We use the 1999 Nigeria DHS data and employ multi-level logistic regression to predict the likelihood of current use from individual religious affiliation and percent of Muslims in the community, controlling for other individual and community characteristics. Preliminary results demonstrate that at the individual level Christians are more likely to use contraception and that the share of Muslims has an independent effect on the probability of contraceptive use. The analysis also shows that this community-level effect differs both in shape and magnitude between Christians and Muslims. We interpret our results in light of Nigeria’s politico-religious landscape and reflect on their implications for Nigeria’s fertility transition and social stability.	Victor	 Agadjanian	Scott	T. Yabiku
2005	170	Measuring Religious Influence	Religion in the Context of the Nature-Nurture Debate: Is Individual Level Variation on Religious Outcomes the Result of Biological as Well as Social Forces?	The longstanding social scientific assumption that religion is a primarily, if not entirely, social phenomenon is being called into question by recent behavioral genetics findings. These studies, which employ data that compare family members (typically twin siblings) to one another, hint at the possibility that individual variation on religious outcomes is the product of biological or genetic influences, as well as social forces. This paper, which examines a diverse assortment of religion measures that have yet to be analyzed from a behavioral genetics perspective, strongly supports the idea that religion is a “biosocial” phenomenon. These findings pose potential implications (insufficient explanatory power, uninterpretable results, confounding effects or spurious relationships) and benefits (a new method that nicely supplements existing perspectives) for the social scientific study of religion.	Matt	 Bradshaw	Christopher	G. Ellison
2005	170	Measuring Religious Influence	Selection Effects and Social Desirability Bias in Studies of Religious Influences	At face value, religion appears to exert influence on the attitudes and actions of many people. However, some researchers are more skeptical about religious influences, choosing to attribute them to selection effects and/or social desirability bias in survey responses. We consider in this study the implications of selection effects and social desirability bias for studies of religious influences on adolescents. Our results suggest that two common measures of religiosity – religious service attendance and self-reported religious salience – are indeed subject to selection processes. There is also evidence for a strategic inclination to be more religious. However, these do not tend to alter independent religious effects on a variety of outcomes. Little evidence of social desirability bias is noted. More considerable evidence is found for reciprocal effects; that is, the likelihood that outcomes and behaviors may alter religiosity as much or more than it alters them.	Mark	 Regnerus
2005	170	Measuring Religious Influence	Happily Ever After?: Religion, Gender, and Relationship Quality among Fragile and Married Families	In recent years, the number of fragile families has risen markedly in urban America. Nevertheless, no research has yet determined if religious participation is associated with higher levels of relationship quality and lower levels of domestic violence among parents in fragile families. Research on religion and married parents indicates that religious participation is associated with higher levels of relationship quality and lower levels of domestic violence. But because religious institutions tend to stigmatize nonmarital unions, religion may not be associated with better relationship outcomes for parents in fragile families. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, this study seeks to determine if the association between religious participation and three relationship outcomes (emotional support, domestic violence, and a global measure of relationship quality) for urban parents varies by the marital status of those parents. Preliminary analyzes indicate that religious participation is more consequential for married parents—especially married fathers.	Nicholas	H. Wolfinger	W.	Bradford  Wilcox
2005	171	Contraceptive Use in the United States	Microfinance Programs, Empowerment and Contraceptive Use: Evidence from Indonesia	This study examines the relationship between microfinance programs, empowerment and contraceptive use with data from the 1993, 1997 and 2000 waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey. Community and individual fixed-effects models are used to control for nonrandom program placement and program participation selection bias. Empowerment of women, as measured by level of involvement in household decision-making, is the hypothesized mechanism linking microfinance programs and contraceptive use. I conclude that microfinance program participation and availability do not uniformly increase contraceptive use, but rather increase a woman’s ability to achieve her fertility preferences as measured by desire for more children. Household decision-making is also associated with higher rates of contraceptive use, but does not mediate the relationship between microfinance programs and contraceptive use.	Alison	M. Buttenheim
2005	171	Contraceptive Use in the United States	Improving Contraceptive Use: An Investigation of Factors Associated with Inconsistent and Incorrect Contraceptive Method Use in the United States	Unintended pregnancies continue to occur at a high level in the U.S. – 49% in 1995. Contraceptive failure rates and method discontinuation rates are also very high. In order to identify strategies for helping women become more continuous, consistent and effective contraceptive users, we investigate women’s contraceptive use patterns and the factors contributing toward gaps in method use and incorrect use. This paper is based on a nationally representative telephone survey of 2,000 women at risk of an unplanned pregnancy, fielded in 2004. We identify which use patterns (sporadic use and nonuse) and which problems (incorrect and inconsistent use) are most common and potentially most important in contributing to risk for unintended pregnancy. We also examine the impact of socio-economic, personal, relationship and service provision factors hypothesized to be associated with method use patterns and with inconsistent or incorrect use.	Jennifer	J. Frost	Susheela	D. Singh	Lawrence	B. Finer
2005	171	Contraceptive Use in the United States	Contraceptive Use among Hispanics on the U.S.-Mexico Border and Hispanics Throughout the United States	This study compared samples drawn from a postpartum survey of Hispanic women at Thomason Hospital in El Paso, Texas and a comparable subsample of the 1995 NSFG. Contraceptive users in the El Paso sample relied primarily on hormonal methods while women in the NSFG sample relied predominantly on condoms and, to a lesser degree, the pill. The proportion of women who used contraception before having their first child in the Thomason sample was two-and-a-half times lower than the proportion of contraceptive users in the NSFG sample. Multivariate results show that, for the Thomason sample, parity and age are strong predictors of both contraceptive use and pill use, but where the woman was born and educated do not predict these two outcomes. We speculate that women who live on the border have greater access to hormonal methods through over-the-counter pharmacy purchases in nearby Mexico, making them the most common methods used.	Kristine	 Hopkins	Sarah	 McKinnon	Joseph	E. Potter
2005	171	Contraceptive Use in the United States	Contraceptive Use in the United States, 2002 Single and Dual Use among Racial and Socio-Economic Groups	This paper presents national estimates of single and dual contraceptive use and method choice in 1995 and 2002, based on Cycles 5 and 6 of the National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG). The paper focuses on differences and trends among Hispanic, Black, and Non-Hispanic white women, classified by education, income, receipt of public assistance, and other socio-economic indicators. This focus helps to understand trends and differentials in birth and pregnancy rates in the 1990’s.  	  	Methods---Data were collected based on in-person interviews with 12,571 men and women 15-44 years of age in the civilian non-institutional population of the United States in 2002. This report is based on the sample of 7,643 women interviewed in 2002.     	Results--- The following measures of use will be discussed: The proportion who have ever used each method;  Use at first intercourse; and current contraceptive use, including current use of more than one method.	William	D. Mosher	Joyce	C. Abma	Anjani	 Chandra
2005	172	Social Stratification and Inequality	The Rising Significance of Education for Health?	This paper uses data from the National Health Interview Survey to track trends in self-reported health by education level in the United States over the past 20 years. Results corroborate the well-known finding that self-reported health is strongly associated with education level. In addition, new findings show that differences in health by education level have increased since the mid-1980s, especially among adults over age 50. Educational differences in health among younger adults have remained largely unchanged. These findings are disconcerting for policy-makers wishing to eliminate disparities in health between subgroups of the U.S. population, but are generally consistent with predictions of prior theory and research. They also bolster the claim now popular in the inequality literature that formal education is becoming an increasingly important stratifying force in contemporary American society.	Brian	 Goesling
2005	172	Social Stratification and Inequality	Wealth Inequality and the Prospects for Increasing Intergenerational Transfers	Analyzing cohorts from the Health and Retirement Survey between 1992 and 2002, we (1) investigate the components of the growth of wealth inequality across households in the 1990s and (2) assess cohort changes in the frequency, intensity, and determinants of intergenerational transfers. Based on these results, we then offer a range of predictions about the increasing prospects for the self-perpetuation of wealth inequality across family dynasties.	Stephen	L. Morgan	John	C. Scott
2005	172	Social Stratification and Inequality	Training the Nation's Elites: National - Private Sector Differences in Japanese University Education	National universities were originally established in Japan as an institution to educate the nation’s elites and a recruiting ground for government ministries. The prestige hierarchy of national universities was dismantled in the postwar period through the massive expansion of private universities. Do quality differences between national and private universities still persist? Are national university graduates still more likely to represent the nation’s elites? Using a 1995 cross-sectional dataset, we find that national university graduates achieve higher earnings growth and higher rates of return than do private university graduates. Our findings lend support to the ‘elite’ view proposed by Becker (1993), under which higher ability individuals (in this case national university graduates) have more to gain from university education than lower ability individuals.	Hiroshi	 Ono
2005	172	Social Stratification and Inequality	Social Changes and Educational Stratification in Hong Kong, 1991-2001	Education plays an important role in social stratification in modern society both as an avenue of social mobility and as a tool for social reproduction. This paper examines the effect of family backgrounds on school enrollment and attainment in Hong Kong from 1991 to 2001, during which the city has undertaken dramatic economic and political transformations and social changes. Based on the 5% samples of population census and by-census data in 1991, 1996, and 2001, I restrict the analysis to school-age cohorts between 8 and 20, and construct a data set matching individuals’ education records with their parents’ backgrounds for each year. Significantly temporal changes are found with respect to the effect of parents’ education, occupation and employment status, income, as well as immigration status, on school participation and progression. These changes are discussed in the context of education expansion, the transition to China’s rule, and Asian financial crisis.	Xiaogang	 Wu
2005	173	Comparative Studies of Achievement	Mathematics and Science Achievement in Malaysia	Malaysia’s preferential policies have reduced the educational attainment gap between ethnic groups. However, we know less about their effects on ethnic differences in academic achievement. Here, we explore reasons for ethnic influences on eighth-grade achievement using the Third International Mathematics and Sciences Study Repeat Project (TIMMS-R). We use respondents’ reported home language to identify Malay and non-Malay students. Non-Malay perform significantly better than Malay students. We then controlled for students’ educational expectations, perceived usefulness and reasons for doing well in the subject, all of which were positively associated with achievement. In addition, we took into account parental education, family structure, and mother’s perceived usefulness of the subject. We found evidence that engagement in extra classes after school leads to higher science achievement, once controlling for school characteristics. And after-school employment may lower achievement. Nothwithstanding these controls, a large gap persists between the achievement of Malay and Non-Malay students.	Hui-Peng	 Liew	David	 Post
2005	173	Comparative Studies of Achievement	Explaining Cross-National Variation in the Effect of Sibship Size on Educational Achievement	Although an inverse relationship between the number of siblings and educational outcomes has been one of the most consistent patterns found in social science literature, evidence also suggests substantial variation across countries in the magnitude of the sibship-size effect. Using data from PISA, I examine the relationship between sibship size and educational achievement among 15-year-olds across 40 countries. Two-level hierarchical linear models (HLM) are used to assess the extent to which the effect of additional siblings on educational achievement varies across countries. I explore sources of the cross-national variation by modeling within-country slopes of sibship size as a function of country-level characteristics. I particularly focus on the roles that prevalence of extended family, the degree of governmental support for families, and country’s economic level play in shaping the effect of sibship size. This study extends recent discussion on the significance of institutional contexts for influencing educational stratification.	Hyunjoon	 Park
2005	173	Comparative Studies of Achievement	Gender Equality in Educational Achievement: An East-West Comparison	Data on educational enrollment show gender parity of pupils attending primary and secondary schools in transition countries. The aim of this paper is to examine whether this gender balance in educational access translates also into gender equality in educational achievement. Besides a comparison of gender differences in mean achievement for transition and OECD countries we discuss differences in boys’ and girls’ achievement distributions and determinants of gender inequality. We test for the robustness of results by carrying out the analysis with three different international surveys on learning achievement and functional literacy during compulsory schooling: the Trends in International Maths and Science Study (TIMSS), the Programme of International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Programme of International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).	Sylke	V. Schnepf
2005	173	Comparative Studies of Achievement	School Quality, Family Background, and Student Achievement: The Case of Cebu	The paper investigates the effects of school quality characteristics on the achievement of Filipino adolescents. The rich data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (CLHNS) allows us to control for student’s ability, family background and community characteristics. The analysis of the sensitivity of the results to the omission of key exogenous variables reveals that ignoring either a measure of the child’s ability or community characteristics does not lead to statistically significant changes in the estimated coefficients. In contrast, omission of family background characteristics introduces a considerable bias. Bootstrap test statistics indicate that this bias is statistically significant. Even larger bias is introduced when one fails to control for both family background and student’s ability. Failure to control for family background characteristics inflates estimated effects of school quality and, as the result, spuriously improves statistical significance of the estimates making them significant at 5% or even 1% significance level.	Yaraslau	 Zayats
2005	174	Population Genetics and Population Development	Neurodegeneration - A Brick Wall for Population Aging: Multiple Genetic Interactions Predict Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease	Neurodegeneration is a brickwall to population aging. Alzheimer's brain pathology is almost universal, emerging in middle age and often symptomatic among the elderly. Individuals vary in the rate that changes accumulate, which has genetic determinants, e.g. APOE genotype. We investigated 180 patients and 120 spouse control subjects. A latent classification statistical model, i.e. GoM, identified five risk groups from information on age, sex, disease status, and multilocus genotypes (APOE, APOE promoter, APOCI, LDLr, cystatinC, cathepsinD). Onset age varied for three high-risk sets: 1) CST3:GA and CTSD:CT (      	Elizabeth	 Corder	Rong	 Huang	Shirley	 Poduslo
2005	174	Population Genetics and Population Development	Month of Birth Influences Life Span of Mediterranean Fruit Flies, Rats and Mice	Month of birth influences life span and disease in humans. Nutrition of the mother during pregnancy and/or virus infections in-utero early in life have been proposed as underlying causal mechanisms. In this study we ask the question whether the month-of-birth effect in life span also exists in other species than humans and in particular, whether it exists in laboratory animals that are used as control groups in experiments. These animals live under strictly controlled environmental conditions and should not be subject to seasonal changing dietary conditions and exposure to virus infections. We use data from large experiments on Mediterranean fruit flies with thousands of animals, as well as smaller experiments on rats and mice. In all three species we find a significant month-of-birth pattern in life span that is not only consistent among the species but also shares similar characteristics with the pattern observed among humans.	Gabriele	 Doblhammer	Vladimir	N. Anisimov	Anna	V. Semenchenko
2005	174	Population Genetics and Population Development	Estimating Heritability of Different Types of Cancer	The aim of this study is to investigate the role of genes and environment in the susceptibility towards breast, prostate and colon cancer and to compare the estimates of heritability in the propensity to develop these diseases. We apply an interdisciplinary approach merging models developed in the field of demography and survival analysis – so-called frailty models – and models coming from the quantitative genetics and epidemiology, namely genetic models. This approach is applied to cancer data coming from the Swedish Twin Registry. The genetic-environmental decomposition of the cancer propensity is obtained in two steps. First, we apply a correlated frailty model in order to obtain an estimate of the population heterogeneity (frailty) in the susceptibility towards the disease and of the correlation between individual propensities within a twin pair. Second, different genetic models are compared in order to decompose the frailty variance into its genetic and environmental components.	Isabella	 Locatelli	Andreas	 Wienke	Paul	 Lichtenstein
2005	174	Population Genetics and Population Development	Modeling NLSY Fertility Patterns Longitudinally and Biometrically: Evolutionary, Genetic, and Social Interpretations	Using fertility patterns and kinship information from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), we fit biometrical models to partition genetic, shared environmental, and nonshared environmental variance associated with fertility differences in the NLSY females. Those females -- who were aged 35-42 in the 2000 data -- have mostly completed childbearing. Our model is a multivariate longitudinal model linking early fertility, early middle fertility, middle fertility, and late middle fertility. Our analysis shows different genetic sources underlying early and later fertility, and strong shared environmental influences only for early fertility. These findings are interpreted in relation to Fisher's Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection, and also in relation to a theory developed by Udry (1995) explaining how the amount of reproductive choice constrains the link between fertility preferences and the biological expression of those preferences.	Joseph	L. Rodgers	David	 Bard
2006	2	The Obesity Epidemic: Evidence and Hypotheses	Dynamics of the Global Nutrition Transition		Barry	M. Popkin
2006	2	The Obesity Epidemic: Evidence and Hypotheses	Obesity in the U.S.: Trends and Competing Explanations	Obesity has been termed an “epidemic” by CDC and others. This paper reviews the evidence that obesity has increased dramatically in the US since 1980 and details the relative impact on different sex and race groups. Researchers have proposed a number of hypotheses about what social factors have driven this trend, including perspectives rooted in economics, epidemiology, clinical medicine and political science. Some of these hypotheses will be described. The evidence in support of the novel hypothesis that declining sleep hours in the US are contributing to weight gain will be highlighted.	Diane	S. Lauderdale
2006	2	The Obesity Epidemic: Evidence and Hypotheses	Unequally Obese: Individual- and Area-Level Associations with Income		Virginia	W. Chang
2006	2	The Obesity Epidemic: Evidence and Hypotheses	WHO says Obesity is an Epidemic? How Excess Weight Became a Public Health Crisis	This paper examines how and why obesity came to be considered an epidemic, or even a global pandemic, in the mid-to-late 1990s. (Why not decades earlier? Why at all?) Four decades’ worth of medical journal articles and bestselling diet books are reviewed to identify developments that paved the way for the concept of the obesity epidemic. These include (1) the diffusion of BMI as a standard measure of weight-for-height; (2) acceptance of World Health Organization-recommended BMI cutoffs to define excess weight; (3) the appearance of reliable, widely-known estimates of obesity prevalence, based on nationally representative surveys; and (4) the gradual dissipation of a number of prejudices, driven partially by psychoanalytic theories, that predicated a wide gulf between a deviant obese minority and a non-obese majority. The focus is on adult obesity in the United States, though if time permits childhood obesity and/or international obesity will also be addressed.	Hanna	 Grol-Prokopczyk
2006	3	Adult Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Adult Mortality in Southern Africa Using Deaths Reported by Households: Some Methodological Issues and Results	Censuses in developing countries quite often ask households to report of the number of deaths in a period immediately prior to the census but these data don’t seem to have been used much to produce estimates of adult mortality in Southern Africa in recent years. This paper analyzes potential biases in these data and applies a combination of the generalized growth balance and synthetic extinct generations method to data adapted from censuses in Zimbabwe to produce estimates of mortality. These estimates are compared with and found to be broadly similar to those of other researchers. The results are interpreted in the context of similar applications to data from Swaziland and Botswana.	Rob	 Dorrington	Ian	M. Timaeus	Simon	 Gregson
2006	3	Adult Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Adult Mortality in a Rural Area of Senegal: Trends and Causes of Death	Adult mortality in developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa is difficult to estimate because of the lack of reliable data. This is true for the overall level of mortality and also for mortality due to specific causes of death. In this presentation, we provide original estimates of adult mortality in Mlomp, a rural population of Senegal which has been monitored for twenty years. Though remaining at a relatively low level, global mortality increased slightly during the early '90s. In this study, we focused on the description of the causes of death among adults to determine which causes are responsible for raising the mortality level: accidents and external causes bring about many deaths among adults who work and travel, and cancer mortality appears to have increased in the last twenty years. All these causes and diseases more specifically concern men, who have higher levels of mortality than women.	Géraldine	 Duthé	Gilles	 Pison
2006	3	Adult Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Levels and Trends in Adult Background Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper examines recent levels and trends in adult mortality from all causes of death with and without AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa. After reviewing the existing literature, we consolidate existing estimates and build on community studies and biomedical cohort data to infer national levels and trends in background adult mortality (i.e., from causes other than AIDS). This comparative study and consolidated analysis of adult mortality from all causes in countries with low or very low HIV prevalence as of 2003 is expected to provide insights on recent levels and trends in background mortality for adults in sub-Saharan Africa – including countries experiencing higher HIV prevalence rates. For this later group of countries, the use of adult mortality estimates by HIV status (based on biomarker or verbal autopsies) will enable us to validate and potentially develop adjustment factors to revise national adult mortality estimates in the absence of AIDS.	Patrick	 Gerland	François	 Pelletier	Thomas	 Buettner
2006	3	Adult Health and Mortality in Developing Countries	Adult Health and Mortality in the Gambia: Relationships between Anthropometric Status and Adult Mortality Risk	Relationships between adult mortality and anthropometric status have received considerable attention in developed countries. Less is known about these relationships in the developing world. This paper analyzes relationships between anthropometric status and adult mortality in a rural Gambian population, using height, weight and haemoglobin as the measures of interest. For haemoglobin there is a linear negative relationship with mortality risk for both sexes: individuals with higher haemoglobin have lower mortality. BMI is broadly negatively related to mortality risk for both men and women, though overweight individuals suffer a slightly increased risk of death. The relationship between height and mortality differs between the sexes. For men, there is no relationship. For women there is a U-shaped relationship, with women of average height having the lowest mortality.	Rebecca	 Sear
2006	4	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, and STDs	The Structure of Sexual Networks and the Spread of HIV/AIDS in Rural Malawi	Studies of the role of sexual networks in fostering the spread of HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa have usually relied on data from individual-centered surveys and local network designs. In this paper, however, we report analyses using complete population data on the sexual networks of approximately 700 young adults living in two villages of Malawi. Precise images and measures of network structure are derived from reports of relationships gathered during computer-assisted interviews. The study also includes the collection of biomarkers of HIV infection, and thus enables us to describe in detail the position of HIV-infected individuals within these sexual networks. Using this unique dataset, we empirically explore the role of connectivity patterns in explaining the “uneven spread” of HIV across communities in Sub-Saharan Africa. We also draw some of the implications of the observed network structures for the design of programs aimed at preventing the diffusion of HIV.	Stephane	 Helleringer	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2006	4	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, and STDs	Interaction Effects in the Sexual Spread of HIV/AIDS	As HIV continues to exact its toll on populations around the world, improved understanding of the factors that operate to produce or suppress epidemics remains crucial. This paper employs a biobehavioral macrosimulation model to assess the interaction effect between two of the most critical behavioral determinants of the sexual spread of HIV: the rates of sexual partner change and patterns of sexual mixing between population subgroups. Results simulated under two rates of partner change scenarios and under various degrees of assortativeness in sexual mixing patterns reveal that when the rate of partner change is high, greater assortativeness tends to decrease the ultimate size of the epidemic, but the opposite relationship is shown in simulations with relatively low rates of partner change. This interaction effect, which further depends on underlying HIV transmission probabilities, is consequential for the size and shape of the epidemic curve and identification of high-risk population subgroups.	Sara	 Hertog
2006	4	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, and STDs	The Effects of Male Incarceration Dynamics on AIDS Infection Rates among African-American Women and Men	We investigate the connection between incarceration dynamics and AIDS, with particular emphasis on the black-white AIDS rate disparity. Using case-level data from the CDC (1982-2001), we model the dynamic relationship between male and female AIDS rates and the proportion of men in the age/state/race-matched cohort that are incarcerated. We find very strong effects of male incarceration on both male and female AIDS rates. The dynamic structure of this relationship parallels the incubation time between HIV infection and onset of full-blown AIDS documented in the medical/epidemiological literature. These results are robust to controls for year and age*race*state fixed effects. Our results reveal that high black male incarceration rates explain a substantial share of the racial disparity in AIDS among women and men. We estimate two-stage-least-squares models of AIDS using intra-state changes in sentencing regimes as instruments for incarceration rates. We find large, significant TSLS effects of incarceration on AIDS rates.	Rucker	C. Johnson	Steven	 Raphael
2006	4	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, and STDs	Migration and Sexuality: A Comparison of Mexicans in Sending and Receiving Communities	Despite its significance for health and well-being, there is little quantitative information measuring the changes in sexual behavior accompanying migration. Drawing from original data collected in Durham, NC and four sending communities in Mexico, this paper compares sexual practices and attitudes across migrants and non-migrants in order to disentangle the sexual practices prevalent in communities of origin from those that arise in conjunction with migration. Our findings illustrate profound changes in sexuality accompanying migration with marked differences by gender and marital status. For men, certain sexual practices, such as the use of commercial sex workers and secondary partnerships, increase significantly with migration. Among single women, migration facilitates the formation of short term relationships. The impact of migration on sexuality is also reflected in attitudinal changes regarding gender roles and condom use. We discuss the implications of these findings for Latino health in both the U.S. and abroad.	Emilio	A. Parrado	Chenoa	A. Flippen
2006	5	Aging in Developing Countries	Explaining Gender Differences in Functional Health and Mortality among Older Adults in Beijing	This paper examines gender differences in the transitions in functional health and mortality over a five-year period among older adults (55+) in Beijing, and the extent to which they can be explained by a detailed set of social, economic, psychosocial and physiological factors. Data come from the 1992 and 1997 waves of the Beijing Multidimensional Longitudinal Study of Aging (N=3,257). We use the regression-based Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition approach to examine the relative importance of the mediating factors in explaining the effect of gender. Preliminary analysis shows strong gender differences in functional status and mortality. Among mediating factors, health behaviors play a particularly large role in explaining men's higher probability of dying, while socioeconomic conditions and health care access play a large role in explaining women's greater tendency to experience functional declines over a five-year period. We will compare our findings to those reported in previous studies conducted in the West.	Toshiko	 Kaneda	Zachary	 Zimmer	Xianghua	 Fang	Zhe	 Tang
2006	5	Aging in Developing Countries	Relation of Birth Month and Elderly Health Status in Latin American and Caribbean Countries	In theory, month of birth is an instrument that can help identify the effects of early growth on adult health, independent of more recent life course factors. If this is true and if early childhood nutritional status is an important predictor of adult health status, then we should expect to find a relation between month of birth and adult health. Building on Doblhammer’s research in the developed world, we use data from three major studies on aging from Puerto Rico, Mexico and Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) cities to examine the relation between birth month and elderly health. We estimate the effects of month of birth on (1) mortality in Mexico and for selected LAC countries using Waaler-type surfaces; and (2) morbidity outcomes including self-reported health, diabetes, obesity, heart disease and ADLs/IADLs using multivariate methods. We discuss our results and their implications using Doblhammer’s research as a benchmark.	Mary	 McEniry	Alberto	 Palloni	Ana	Luisa  Davila	Alberto	 Garcia
2006	5	Aging in Developing Countries	Social Security and Couples' Joint Retirement Decisions in Brazil	In recent years, a large number of studies investigated the  relationship between social security benefits and male retirement decisions in developed countries. However, couples' retirement decisions and the patterns of retirement in emerging economies are much less studied. This paper uses Brazilian data to examine how social security financial incentives and personal characteristics affect one's own  and spouse's retirement decisions. I find that couples synchronize retirement, and that they respond similarly to their own characteristics. Moreover, I find that  wives are more responsive to husbands' incentives than  vice-versa. Policy simulations show that equalizing male and female normal retirement ages would have a large impact on male retirement but a small direct impact on female retirement.	Bernardo	L. Queiroz
2006	5	Aging in Developing Countries	The Sex and SES Paradox in Health Status and Mortality among Elderly Populations	Adult males have higher mortality than females, while, paradoxically, health status indicators often show the contrary: males are better off than females. Mortality indicators are hard, indisputable data. Health indicators, however, are often based on “soft” data, dependent on definitions, interpretations, and subjective self-reports. Based on panel data for elderly Mexicans (the MHAS study) and biomarkers for elderly Costa Ricans (CRELES), we conclude that self-reported indicators of health may be misleading. The sex gap showing elderly women with poorer health than men is to some extent a spurious result of differential age structure, survival selection, and sex-bias in self-reports. The paper also explores whether the huge socioeconomic gap in self-reported health suffers problems analogous to the sex gap. Elderly Costa Ricans do not show the inverse gradient in health by socioeconomic status (SES) in important biomarkers. This finding contradicts results obtained when using self reported indicators.	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Xinia	 Fernandez	Ericka	 Mendez	Guido	 Pinto
2006	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Labor Force Patterns of Mexican Women in Mexico and United States: What Changes and What Remains?	The current study explores factors affecting the economic participation of Mexican women in two contexts, Mexico and the U.S., using the 2000 Public-Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS), the 2000 Sample of Census of Mexico and hierarchical linear models. The main purpose is to describe differences in the labor force patterns of Mexican immigrant women (first and 1.5 generations) in the U.S compared to the Mexican and American mainstream, taking into account individual and household characteristics, including human capital and the labor market and place of residence. We explain differences between profiles using the perspective of selective assimilation. We expect to find evidence supporting the idea that the 1.5 generation labor force profile is completely different from non-Hispanic White and Mexican women, but very similar to the first generation.	María	Adela  Angoa-Pérez	Antonio	 Fuentes
2006	6	Immigrant Adaptation	Blurring the Faith? Religious Intermarriage across Immigrant Generations	This paper examines religious intermarriage across 6 immigrant origin generations: the foreign born arriving at age 15 or later; the 1.5 generation; the second generation with two foreign born parents; the 2.5 generation; the third generation; and the fourth-plus generation. Data on the currently married population age 20 and older are taken from the 2002 Statistics Canada Ethnic Diversity Survey. We offer three main conclusions. First, religious intermarriage increases with each successive generation through the third generation. Second, logistic regression analysis reveals the persistence of this pattern of rising religious exogamy despite controlling for inter-generational differences in socio-demographic variables. Third, generational differences in religiosity and in parental-respondent religious similarity underlie the greater religious intermarriage of the 2.5 and third generations relative to those generations that are closer to the migration experience.	Monica	 Boyd	Diana	 Worts	Michael	 Haan
2006	6	Immigrant Adaptation	The Chilling Effect: Public Service Usage by Mexican Migrants to the United States	A major shortcoming of most prior research on immigrant's use of social services is the inability to disaggregate findings by legal status. Data from the Census and Current Population Survey only distinguish between citizens and other foreigners, and very few data sets contain information sufficient to identify undocumented migrants with any reliability. The one exception is the Mexican Migration Project, which has compiled information on taxes paid and services used by Mexican migrants in all legal statuses for more than two decades. In this paper, we use these data to examine patterns and determinants of service use and tax payment. Our findings illustrate that rates of service usage dropped since 1986, while rates of tax payment and health insurance coverage rose. The net effect, we argue, has been a sharp decline in the use of unreimbursed services by Mexican migrants to the United States.	Katharine	M. Donato	Douglas	S. Massey	Brandon	 Wagner
2006	6	Immigrant Adaptation	A New Model of Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants in the U.S., 1970 to 2000	To measure true intergenerational mobility, the status of the first generation must be compared to their children, the second generation, when they reach a comparable age of maturity some 25 to 30 years later. Questions have also been raised about differences between the 2nd and 2.5 generations. This paper reports new findings from an NICHD-sponsored study of the temporal dynamics of assimilation in America. A new model design is developed that links 1970 and 1998-2002 data to probe more deeply the process of intergenerational mobility, using indicators of educational attainment, poverty status, and homeownership. Questions addressed include how much the second generation in 2000 has closed the gap with a third or higher generation reference group compared to the gap experienced by their “parents” in 1970 and how the relative progress of the second generation varies between those with one immigrant parent and two immigrant parents.	Dowell	 Myers	Julie	 Park	Seong	Hee  Min
2006	7	Demography and Life Course Studies	Disability in the Transition to Adulthood: A Latent Pathway Analysis	This project investigates the role of disability in the transition to adulthood. Specifically, the research will model pathways in the transition to adulthood by focusing on similarity and difference in the order and timing of school leaving, entry into and continuity of paid employment and marriage, and the onset of parenthood. Our research addresses two specific issues: the ways in which disability shapes the transition to adulthood and the interaction of sex, disability and transitional experiences in young adult attainment. The data used in this research are from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health. First, we use a two-stage latent class approach that allows us to formally model heterogeneity in the structure of the transition to adulthood for disabled and non-disabled adolescents. Second, we examine the conjoint role that sex, disability and pathway into adulthood play in shaping occupational attainments in early adulthood. Implications are discussed.	Gina	 Allen	Ross	 Macmillan
2006	7	Demography and Life Course Studies	Fatherhood, Union Status and Men's Work Lives	The proposed paper will focus on coordination across domains of life, specifically on the association of fatherhood and work in men’s lives, with attention to how this association differs by men’s union status. The first research aim is to update estimates of how three key events in men’s pathway to adulthood, the transition to “first” job, the transition to marriage and the transition to biological fatherhood are sequenced during men’s transition to adulthood. The second research aim of the proposed paper is to go beyond an examination of particular transitions and to provide a more detailed description of how men's work trajectories change when they make the transition to fatherhood and whether or not these changes vary by whether or not the man is married or in cohabiting union at the time of fatherhood.	Nan	M. Astone	Jacinda	K. Dariotis	Freya	L. Sonenstein
2006	7	Demography and Life Course Studies	Structuring the Transition to Adulthood: An Entropy Analysis of the Early Life Course in the United States, 1880 to 2000	Social institutions and norms structuring the transition to adulthood have changed significantly over the course of the 20th century in the United States. However, life course methodologies have not quantified these changes or evaluated differences in the structure of the transition to adulthood between gender, race, and nativity groups. I present a new method – the entropy analysis of status combinations of synthetic cohorts - which uses indicators of school attendance, employment, household relationships, marriage, and parenthood from the 1880 through 2000 U.S. censuses to identify three distinct historical periods of the transition to adulthood. These periods are characterized by distinct age boundaries and levels of differentiation within age-segments of the young adult life course. The results support the argument that the life course has become more standardized, but that more recently it has become more complex as these institutions have been restructured and social norms have relaxed.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2006	7	Demography and Life Course Studies	Socioeconomic Status, Health, and Psychological Well-Being: Findings from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study	The Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) has followed 10,000 high school graduates for since 1957 and assembled rich social, economic, psychological and health data. In 1993 and 2004, we ascertained Carol Ryff's six subscales of psychological well-being. Although the scale dimensions are nominally distinct, in work to date with the WLS, the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), and the Study of Midlife in the U.S. (MIDUS), we have learned that at least four of the scales are virtually indistinguishable in cross-section (Springer and Hauser 2005), that there is little consistent life course variation in them (Pudrovska, Hauser, and Springer 2005), and that levels of well-being are nearly as persistent across a decade as basic personality variables (the Big Five). In this paper, we identify social, economic, psychological, and health correlates of well-being subscales and assess the extent to which the several subscales have distinct relationships with these correlates.	Robert	M. Hauser	Tetyana	 Pudrovska	Kristen	W. Springer
2006	8	Race, Ethnicity, and Health	Immigration and Health in the Older Mexican-Origin Population: Evidence from the Hispanic Established Populations for the Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly and Mexican Health and Aging Study	In this study, we focus on reports of various dimensions of health among Mexican-origin individuals 65 and older in the United States and Mexico. We employ data from the Hispanic Established Epidemiologic Study of the Elderly and Mexican Health and Aging Study to assess group health differences in these two domains and assess the relative impact of culture, immigration status, nativity, and structural factors on different patterns of physical and psychological health. The results reveal that both immigrant and native born Mexican Americans report more chronic conditions than elderly Mexicans residing in Mexico, but they report fewer symptoms of psychological distress. Longer residence in the U.S. is associated with higher BMI scores. The discussion addresses the possibility that access to care influences reports of diagnosed conditions and touches upon issues of comparability in cross-cultural research and the difficulty in clearly distinguishing cultural and systems-level factors in the measurement of health.	Ronald	 Angel	Jacqueline	L. Angel	Terrence	 Hill
2006	8	Race, Ethnicity, and Health	Back with a Vengeance: The Re-emergence of a Biological Conceptualization of Race in Research on Race/Ethnic Disparities in Health	The debate over the role of race/ethnicity in determining disease susceptibility has been refreshed in the nearly 10 years since it was declared that race was arbitrary biological fiction. Whether or not researchers took heed of this claim at the time, the idea that race/ethnicity does indeed have a genetic basis is enjoying a dramatic resurgence in recent years, largely due to advancements in the Human Genome Project and related technologies. For those scientists who long believed race/ethnicity does meaningfully correlate with genetic variation, these recent developments have been hailed as an affirmation. For others however, there is a palpable sense that we are rushing headlong back into the nineteenth century.   This paper proposes to review the new developments in genetics that have reinvigorated debates on the relationship between race and health and also to address their relevance to the demographic study of race/ethnic disparities in health.	Reanne	 Frank	Danielle	 Frank
2006	8	Race, Ethnicity, and Health	Education and Mortality Risk among Hispanic Adults in the United States	A substantial amount of demographic research has focused on the epidemiologic paradox, the finding that, in spite of a socioeconomic status (SES) that is similar to blacks, Hispanics demonstrate mortality rates more similar to whites. However, this research has tended to focus on aggregate-levels of socioeconomic status and has neglected to measure the direct effect of SES for Hispanics. Thus, the primary purpose of this study is to quantify the individual-level effect that education has on Hispanic mortality risk so that we can determine if, indeed, SES has less of an impact on Hispanics than on other groups. Using data from the National Health Interview Survey-Multiple Cause of Death linked data set for 1986 to 1997 we conclude that the effect of education on the risk of death is substantially different (weak and nonsignificant) for most Hispanic groups compared with its effect on non-Hispanic whites and blacks (strong and significant).	Sarah	 McKinnon	Robert	A. Hummer
2006	8	Race, Ethnicity, and Health	Ethnic Differentials in Responses to Self-Reported Health: An Application of Item Response Theory (IRT)	Despite its utility as an overall summary indicator of health, self-reported health (SRH) has limited value in comparative studies of health inequalities. The SRH variable suffers from problems in measurement comparability, due to linguistic differences, cultural differences, variations in interpretation of the question, and the response set. Item response theory (IRT) offers a method to test the meaningfulness of the self-reported health measure and to compare its categorical cut-points across different groups. In this paper, we apply a Graded Response Model (GRM), a generalization of the two-parameter logistic IRT model, to study the measurement of self-reported health using data from the 1998 Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and the 2001 Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS). Category response curves for each response level of self-reported health are drawn for: White-Americans, African-Americans, Mexican-Americans, and Mexicans with and without controls for age, gender and education.	Rania	 Tfaily	Beth	J. Soldo
2006	9	Demographic Consequences of Shocks and Natural Disasters	Tsunami Mortality in Aceh Province, Indonesia	Cluster sample surveys of a total of nearly 1,600 Indonesian households in eight coastal districts in Aceh Province were conducted between February and August 2005. Completed analysis of 388 Aceh Barat and Nagan Raya Districts showed that 61.8% of households reported one or more family members as dead or missing (here, presumed dead) as a result of the tsunami, with an overall mortality rate of 13.9% (95% CI: 12.4-15.4). Risk of death was greatest in the youngest and oldest age groups and among females. Data from additional surveys are now being analyzed but are expected to show similar patterns of higher risk among females and among the youngest and oldest age groups.	Shannon	 Doocy	Abdur	 Rofi	Gilbert	 Burnham	Courtland	 Robinson
2006	9	Demographic Consequences of Shocks and Natural Disasters	The Impact of a Disaster on Life in Sumatra: Evidence from Before and After the December 26 Tsunami	On December 26, 2004 the Indonesian province of Aceh was struck by a tsunami that caused unparalleled devastation. This paper documents the costs to individuals, families, and communities, and describes the ways in which they reconstruct their lives and livelihoods in the aftermath of the disaster. We draw on data from a project that interviewed, in 2005, a subset of households first interviewed in 2004 as part of a large-scale cross-sectional survey. Our focus is on households in communities that sustained damage from the tsunami, but we also conduct interviews with a group of comparison households living inland and further south. Our results confirm the tsunami’s terrible toll with respect to mortality, the trauma experienced by those who lived through it, and the myriad ways in which it has disrupted people’s lives.	Elizabeth	 Frankenberg	Jed	 Friedman	Nick	 Ingwersen	Jenna	 Nobles	Fadia	 Saadah	Wayan	 Suriastini	Cecep	S Sumantri
2006	9	Demographic Consequences of Shocks and Natural Disasters	Tracking Migratory Behavior of Hurricane Katrina Evacuees: A Three-Stage Sample of New Orleanians	The proposed study will report on Phase I of a larger research project designed to track and analyze migratory behavior among New Orleanians displaced by Hurricane Katrina, which triggered the largest, most complete urban evacuation in U.S. history. While the social scientific literature on migration and urbanization has a long tradition, this genre has never before addressed such a large, unplanned social experiment as the mandatory evacuation of an entire city. The primary objectives of the proposed paper are to identify a multi-stage sample of evacuees; design and implement a survey that will collect data on their short-term migratory behavior (to be fielded in Fall/Winter 2005); and to test hypotheses about this behavior to assess how well extant theories and perspectives predict or must be amended to understand extreme scenarios of mass internal migration.	James	 Elliott
2006	9	Demographic Consequences of Shocks and Natural Disasters	Chernobyl Exclusion Zone Population as the Model for Health Consequences of Technogenic and Natural Disasters	The population of Chernobyl Exclusion Zone (EZ) is a unique plausible model for research of biopsychosocial and health consequences of technogenic accidents and natural disasters. Persons who violated the prohibition to live in the Chernobyl EZ (unsanctioned self-returners or those who never left) are a unique cohort for this goal exposed to a combination of different extreme environmental stresses: psychological, social, external and internal (radionuclides via inhalation, contaminated land, water, and natural food) irradiation, heavy metals, chemicals, psychological response-disposition to alcohol and smoking, etc. In specific prospective clinical, lab, instrumental and field studies for two cohorts of ~400 and 250 persons from Chernobyl EZ on the base of integral analysis of the changes in all organism systems under extreme stress exposure, the high prevalence of cerebro- and cardiovascular diseases, neuropsychiatric and chronic fatigue syndrome spectrum disorders, and atypical brain accelerated aging pathologies were revealed.	Sergiy	V. Volovyk	Konstantin	 Loganovsky	Dimitry	 Bazyka	Volodymyr	 Bebeshko
2006	10	Family Instability and Child Well-Being	Risk and Resilience and the Transition to Cohabitation, Parenting, and Marriage During the Emerging Adulthood Stage of Development	Transitions to cohabitation, parenting, and marriage in the period from ages 18 - 25 are thought to prevent creating a stable life structure. Research shows early family transitions are detrimental to later socioeconomic achievement and marital stability. Although long-term outcomes may be negative, we assume individuals who make early family transitions envision benefits such as gaining social capital. We examine whether risk and protective factors are associated with early family transitions and whether those transitions lead to variation in depression. After a transition, we identify (1) why some highly depressed individuals experience a decrease in depression while others remain depressed; and (2) why some individuals with low depression remain stable while others experience an increase. Following the transition, depression decreased in nearly half the cases due to a range of factors. Although early family formation may have a long-term negative impact, the immediate effect tends to be a reduction in depression.	Alan	 Booth	Beth	 Rustenbach
2006	10	Family Instability and Child Well-Being	Breaking Up the Empty Nest: Implications for Grown Children	This study uses data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine differences in socioeconomic outcomes between young adults whose parents dissolve their marriages during the children’s transition to adulthood and young adults with other family backgrounds. The study is motivated by previous research that has examined the consequences of marital disruptions that occur when children are younger and by evidence of the increasing importance of parental assistance in children’s transitions into adulthood. Research has not carefully considered whether empty nest marital disruptions confer disadvantages beyond the home. We hypothesize such disruptions might hinder parents’ ability to provide time, financial or co-residence assistance to their adult children. To address concerns regarding endogeneity in the multivariate analyses, we estimate models of family structure jointly with models of the children’s subsequent socioeconomic attainments. Our empirical analyses reveal that parents’ living arrangements are associated with children’s subsequent family incomes, earnings and marriage behavior.	Julie	 Kraut-Becher	David	C. Ribar
2006	10	Family Instability and Child Well-Being	Influences of Family Structure, Conflict, and Change on Transitions to Adulthood	The past half-century has seen extensive changes in both “typical” family structures and the transition experiences of youth en route to adulthood. This paper examines these related changes. We investigate the influence of family structure and functioning during childhood on transitions to adulthood, including academic success and risk-taking behaviors. Our analysis relies on data from three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH). It takes advantage of rich, prospective measures of parent relationships and change in relationships over time. We examine differences in child outcomes by family structure, but also acknowledge the importance of variation in intact families for child wellbeing, distinguishing between high and low conflict marriages. Preliminary findings suggest that conflict in intact families is related to young adult transitions in ways similar to single- and step-parent families. Moreover, its association appears (for some outcomes) to be independent of subsequent marital disruption.	Kelly	 Musick	Larry	 Bumpass	Ann	 Meier
2006	10	Family Instability and Child Well-Being	Family Structure and Income during Childhood and Subsequent Prosocial Behavior in Young Adulthood	This paper (i) examines a substantive question rarely addressed by the literature on associations between family structure / income in childhood and subsequent outcomes, and (ii) offers a new method to construct empirical specifications of those associations. Substantively, we estimate models of young adults’ prosocial behavior (charitable giving, volunteering, and the emphasis young adults place on teaching their children to help others) as a function of family structure / income during stages of childhood. The models are estimated using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. The new method requires the researcher to clearly specify a set of restrictions on the underlying child development process. We show that such restrictions have been implicitly and unknowingly imposed by the specifications used in past research and that past restrictions have not always been sensible. We then propose several sets of a priori sensible restrictions and use Bayesian model selection to choose among them.	Mark	 Wilhelm
2006	11	Migration, Immigration, and Population Shifts within the U.S.	What about the Illegal Aliens?	What should be done about  illegal aliens living in the United States? Some advocate amnesty; others strongly believe that illegal aliens should be sent home; and still others are unsure about what to do. Before deciding upon a particular course of action or policy, it seems worthwhile to first examine a few relevant and fundamental issues, such as the number and characteristics of these people and the views of the American public regarding illegal aliens. After addressing such issues, the focus of this paper moves to an analysis of the various options that have been taken and are currently being put forth to deal with illegal migration in the United States. The paper concludes with an assessment of possible government policies and actions likely to be adopted in the near future that may effectively address the increasingly politically sensitive question of what to do about illegal aliens.	Joseph	 Chamie
2006	11	Migration, Immigration, and Population Shifts within the U.S.	Immigration Reflections in the Population Profiles of US Urban Areas: Pattern and Process with Particular Attention to Mid-size MSAs	This paper strives to balance knowledge and understanding of immigration to US urban areas by shifting focus to mid-size MSAs, rather than the largest MSAs and ports of entry. This new focus reflects empirical processes ongoing since the early 1980s whereby immigration effects on US urban areas have crept inland and down the urban hierarchy, exemplified by the recent identification of “new immigrant gateways”. The first task classifies MSAs according to their mix of foreign born, yielding four distinct profiles differentiated by time era of entry, ethnic composition of foreign born, place characteristics drawing immigrants, and operant migration processes. The second task addresses process directly, giving particular attention to resettlement programs/agencies (VOLAGS), a major force in altering the geography of relocation and its spatial impact, an aspect given virtually no attention previously. In addition to systematically filling in knowledge on the topic, we propose a major modification to the standard migration model.	Lawrence	A. Brown	Tamar	 Mott	Edward	 Malecki
2006	11	Migration, Immigration, and Population Shifts within the U.S.	New Citizens and Internal Migration	This analysis explores foreign-born settlement and internal migration as portrayed by changing residence before the date of naturalization. The data are drawn from a project that utilized linked immigrant and naturalization records as a multi-cohort retrospective data source. As the foreign-born population has increased, subsequent migrations are of greater relevance, especially because the foreign-born population has been concentrated in certain states and metropolitan areas and is becoming more dispersed to nontraditional receiving areas. The primary focus is on migration experiences of immigrants who were adults at lawful admission. These findings are discussed in the context of recent research on U.S. population redistribution, especially from the 2000 Census.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield
2006	11	Migration, Immigration, and Population Shifts within the U.S.	Welfare Rules, State Economics, and Life Course Transitions in the Interstate Migration of Immigrants	This study extends prior research on the interstate migration of U.S. immigrants by testing the impact of state variations in TANF immigrant eligibility rules and individual and family life course transitions on migration behavior. Utilizing longitudinal individual- and family- level migration, human capital, and life course transitions data from the 1996-1999 and 2001-2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, integrated with state welfare rule data from the Urban Institute and state economic conditions data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, we apply a discrete-time event history approach in a nested logit model to estimate both departure decision and destination choice models of immigrants. The results afford new evidence on alternative explanations for the interstate migration of immigrants.	Gordon	F. De Jong	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Matthew	S Hall
2006	12	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Motivation for In-Kind Assistance Adult Children Provide Parents	When adult children provide care for aging parents, they often incur psychic and monetary costs. While the nature of parent care and the profile of care giving children are well known, we still lack insight into why adult children undertake parent care without compensation or compulsion. In this paper, we exploit a novel, direct- question approach using data from an experimental module from the 2000 Health and Retirement Study. This module consisted of questions on perceived motivations for assisting parents. Preliminary analysis indicated that transfers are often influenced by perceived family pressure and familial norms of obligation. In this paper we extend our previous research by (1) deriving a scoring algorithm of the 3 orthogonal domains of (i) self-esteem; (ii) obligation; and, (iii) parental relations from the 20 point-blank items; and (2) evaluating the predictive validity of the indexes in a model predicting subsequent care giving behaviors.	Donald	 Cox
2006	12	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Norms of Filial Responsibility for Aging Parents across Time and Generations	This investigation examines the normative expectation that adult children should be responsible for the care of their aging parents, and how this norm changes over the adult life-span, across several decades of historical time, in relation to generational position in families, and between successive generations. Analyses were performed using four waves of data from the USC Longitudinal Study of Generations between 1985 and 2000. A three-level hierarchical linear model was estimated using 4,527 observations from 1,627 individuals nested within 333 families. Results reveal that filial norms weakened after midlife, in response to parental death, and over historical time, yet strengthened in later-born generations. Findings are discussed in terms of the malleability of filial responsibility over the life course.	Daphna	 Gans	Merril	 Silverstein
2006	12	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Do you Care? Altruism and Inter-Generational Exchanges in Mexico	Drawing on longitudinal survey data from the Mexican Family Life Survey, we estimate models of transfers between non-coresident family members. Financial and time transfers from adults to their non-coresident parents are examined as are transfers of time and money and the inter-generational transmission of education from parents to adult children. The conceptual framework highlights the importance of individual preferences and control over decision-making. The empirical models explore the role of characteristics of each individual, his/her spouse and both their parents including indicators of relative power of each. A unique feature of the study is the inclusion of measures of preferences -- altruism, reciprocity and patience -- especially collected to exploit experimental methods from the behavioral economics/psychology literature. These methods involve subjects being given money to allocate and then paid based on those decisions. The performance of these measures in explaining inter-generational exchanges are contrasted with survey-based measures of preferences.	Duncan	 Thomas
2006	12	Generational Exchanges and Relationships	Predictors of Attitudes about Support in Later Life among Rural Chinese	Traditionally, people in rural China prefer to depend on their children, particularly their son, in their old age. Children are social and economic resources for the elderly. However, China's birth control policy has greatly challenged the traditional support arrangements in later life, and therefore has influenced stated support preferences. These attitudes have, in turn, affected compliance with the birth control policy. In this paper, I compare attitudes about support in later life among rural Chinese in households that have illegal children (non-compliant households) and in households that do not have any illegal children (compliant households). I find that non-compliant household members prefer to depend on sons more so than compliant household members. Compliant household members prefer to depend on self/spouse and government more than non-compliant household members. Different attitudes are also found across age, gender, and educational attainment.	Yue	 Zhuo
2006	13	Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Assessing the Causal Effect of Gendered Market Structures on Wage Attainments and in Evaluating the Gender Wage Gap: An Intention-to-Treat Analysis	Previous research has documented a persistent gender wage gap. On average, women earn less than men, and  empirical evidence indicates that gendered market structures play an important role in creating this gap. Recent research, however, has cast doubt on this conclusion, suggesting that the effects of gender structures on wages dissolve with properly specified models. In this paper we seek to inform this debate by using Hirano, Imbens, Rubin, and Zhou’s (2000) formulation of the intention-to-treat design to assess causal effects. By considering gender-of-job as treatment and gender-of-person as the mechanism encouraging respondents to obtain gendered jobs, we obtain the compliers average causal effect of gender-of-job on wages, and isolate that portion of the gender wage gap due to gender-of-job. Using data from 1988 and 2000 Current Population Surveys, we show that a substantial amount of the observed gender wage gap can be causally attributed to gendered market structures.	Scott	 Eliason	Melissa	 Bonstead-Bruns	Jennifer	C. Lee
2006	13	Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Employment and Earnings of Foreign Born Asian Men and Women in the United States, 2000	While differential labor market experiences for men and women in the United States have been reasonably well documented, there has not been a comparable body of research for immigrants. Rising levels of immigration call for an analysis of gender differences in the labor market outcomes of foreign born men and women relative to one another and to natives. Immigrant women face a double disadvantage of being both female and minority group members. However, research disaggregated by gender and countries of origin have been lacking, particularly for foreign born Asians, even though it is well acknowledged that they are growing in number and there is a substantial and increasing number of women immigrants from Asia. This paper investigates and compares the employment prospects and earning profiles of Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese and non-Hispanic white men and women in the United States for the year 2000.	Veena	 Kulkarni
2006	13	Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Double Disadvantage? African American Same-Sex Couples: Evidence from Census 2000	Individual and household data from Census 2000 is used to examine the earnings opportunities afforded to a large sample of African American women and men in same-sex couples. The Census' Public Use Microdata Series (PUMS) is used, specifically, to document and examine race and gender wage differences among members of same-sex couples and to examine sexual orientation group differences (controlling for gender) among African Americans. We find that African American men in same-sex couples earn 10-16% less than white men in same-sex couples and about 5% less than African American men in different-sex couples. However they earn 9-10% more than African American women in same-sex couples. African American women earn 9-10% less than white women in same-sex couples and about 5% less than African American women in different-sex couples, though the latter result is very sensitive to the model specification.	Lisa	 Saunders	M.V.	Lee  Badgett	Gary	J. Gates
2006	13	Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Gender Differences of Immigrant Scientists/Engineers Earnings: A Random-Effect Growth Curve Model	In this paper, we employ a random-effect growth curve model on a longitudinal data set of scientists/engineers to model the earning differences between males and females among the immigrant scientists/engineers. Four waves of SESTAT data were arranged into a pooled-cross section time series so that repeated measures of scientists/engineers for each individual in a two-year interval could be used for analysis. Our results show that an unobserved random effect explained nearly 30 percent of the variance on the overall earning differences across individuals. We also find that foreign-born scientists are not necessarily at a disadvantage for both overall earning and earning growth rate. Citizenship status, however, plays a significant role on foreign-born scientists/engineers’ overall earning disadvantage, but not in the growth rate. Although women do experience disadvantages in both overall earning and on earning growth rate, there is no evidence to support the position that foreign-born woman scientists are more disadvantaged than their native counterparts.	Yuying	 Tong
2006	14	Mathematical Demography	Migration-Fertility Trade-Off and Aging in Stable Populations	Fertility is below the replacement level in all European countries, and population growth is expected to decline. Increasing life expectancy will accentuate concomitant aging. Migration has been seen as a possible means to decelerate aging. We introduce a stable open population model in which net-migration is proportional to births. In this case the migration-fertility trade-off can be studied easily. We show that while migration can increase the growth rate, and tend to make the age-distribution younger, it also has an opposite effect due to its typical age pattern. We capture the effect of the age-pattern of net-migration in a migration survivor function. The effect of net-migration on growth is quantified with data from 17 European countries. We show that some countries already have a level of migration that will lead to stationarity. For countries with asymptotically declining populations, migration still provides opportunities for slowing down aging.	Juha	 Alho
2006	14	Mathematical Demography	Explaining the U-Shape of Age-Specific Mortality	The age-shape of mortality is U-shaped for many species, declining from birth to sexual maturity, and then rising in adulthood (Finch, 1990; for mammals, see Caughley, 1966). Although there are exceptions, the U-shape is sufficiently common to invite explanation. Here we show why the optimal life history of a species with determinate growth is likely to have this shape, building on a literature which showed these optimal patterns through numerical simulation (Cichon, 1997; Cichon and Kozlowski, 2000). Our approach assumes a physiological technology characterized by a linear budget constraint for energy at each age. We also incorporate intergenerational transfers, so that a young organism can allocate more energy than it produces. Using dynamic programming to solve the optimization problem, we find the forces shaping the optimal age-shape of mortality, and show the conditions under which it will be U-shaped.	Cyrus	 Chu	Ronald	 Lee
2006	14	Mathematical Demography	Life Expectancy and Lost Life Expectancy	Consider e†(y) = ∫eo(x,y)f(x,y)dx, where eo(x,y) is remaining life expectancy at age x in year y and f(x,y) is the life table distribution of deaths. e† can be interpreted as remaining life expectancy lost due to death. It is correlated with the standard deviation of the distribution of lifespans and is a measure of the homogeneity of a population’s life chances. If e† is small, then most people die at roughly the same age. Our paper explores the properties of e†, from a mathematical perspective and also in terms of empirical data. In particular we investigate the relationship between e† and life expectancy at birth and at various older ages. Our most interesting and important finding is that the population with the longest life expectancy in the world in some year is generally also the population with the lowest value of e† in that year.	James	W. Vaupel	Zhen	 Zhang
2006	14	Mathematical Demography	An IPAT-type Model of Environmental Impact Based on Stochastic Differential Equations	This work adds to the literature examining human-driven climate change within the framework of IPAT-based models. Starting from the well-known IPAT identity, we develop a stochastic differential equations model that describes the  trend of the environmental impact, expressed as CO2 emissions, on the basis of the dynamics of population and affluence. Our theoretical scheme has then been used to develop a model for the assessment of the costs that a country has to bear, if committed to respect an international agreement on emissions reduction. We show that the adherence to an environmental treaty may be traced back to a problem of cost valuation in a risk situation: this allows us to exploit the mathematical tools developed in the field of finance to determine the expected investment that a country is supposed to make in order to reduce its emissions of a certain amount, within a well-defined temporal frame.	Emilio	 Zagheni	Francesco	C. Billari
2006	15	Historical Perspectives on Inequality	Was There a Revolution? Stratification over the Very Long Term in Liaoning, China, 1749-2005	To assess the impact of political change in China after 1949 on stratification patterns, we examine changes in intergenerational social mobility in Liaoning Province between 1749 and 2004. We analyze a unique 250 year panel dataset that combines household registers for more than 250,000 individuals between 1749 and 1909 with linked data on a sample of more than 10,000 twentieth century descendants of the register population gathered from retrospective surveys. We examine long-term trends in the association between parents' and child’s attainment chances to test whether or not policies after 1949 weakened the importance of parental characteristics, as is often claimed. We then examine the effect of the Revolution on the social composition of elites by examining whether or not prominent families after 1949 were ‘new’ in the sense that they were previously undistinguished, or were ‘old’ in the sense that they were successful before the twentieth century.	Cameron	D. Campbell	James	Z. Lee
2006	15	Historical Perspectives on Inequality	Impact of War and Military Service on Income Inequality in Northern Vietnam	During the 1940s-1970s Vietnam experienced nearly continuous wars. Military service was almost a rite of passage for young men growing up during these decades. Evidence indicates that families during wartime viewed military service as a locus for upward mobility, as the socialist regime promised veterans various incentives, including educational benefits, employment preference, and Communist Party membership. While this series of wars over the span of three decades has left a profound imprint on the early life course trajectories of men in Vietnam, there is surprisingly little research detailing the long-term consequences of military service. Based on the Vietnam Longitudinal Survey, this study examines the effects of military service on the subsequent earnings of veterans and non-veterans. I consider variations in the effects of preexisting characteristics, veteran status, age at entry into the military, and duration of service. I also attempt to take into account the potential effect of unmeasured selectivity.	Puk	Bussarawan  Teerawichitchainan
2006	15	Historical Perspectives on Inequality	Is the Glass Emptying or Filling Up? Reconciling Divergent Trends in High School Completion and Dropout	Most people understand that the rate at which young people complete high school increased dramatically until the 1970s or 1980s, and has increased gradually ever since. This understanding is based entirely on data from the Current Population Survey (CPS), and from status- and event-dropout measures that are derived from the CPS. However, researchers using a variety of techniques to compare the number of high school diplomas that are issued each academic year to the number of young people eligible to receive them have found that the high school completion rate has actually declined modestly (but quite steadily) since at least the early 1970s. Our paper is an effort to reconcile these apparently contradictory findings. We hypothesize that this discrepancy is primarily due to (1) differences in the way GED recipients are classified; and (2) misreporting of high school graduation status by CPS respondents.	John	R. Warren	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners
2006	15	Historical Perspectives on Inequality	Social Inequality in Early 20th-Century Puerto Rico: Population as a Mediator	This study investigates the relationship between economic transitions, population responses, and resultant changes in the stratification system. Multilevel regression techniques are used to estimate the relationship between economic production and social inequality within geographically-defined areas and to test the hypothesis that the association between economic production and within-area social inequality is positively conditioned by population. Early twentieth century Puerto Rico offers a compelling case since this period of the island’s history marks momentous shifts in political governance and economic interests with resultant changes in land use, population distribution, and social inequality. U.S. interests produced a shift in land use practices through the expansion of the sugar industry and the considerable reduction in coffee cultivation and subsistence farming. The transition unfolded over time and was experienced differentially within space, I argue, according to ecological factors associated with societal organization including economic production.	Katherine	J. C. White
2006	16	Integrating Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS Preventions	Integrating the Fields of Sexual and Reproductive Health and HIV/AIDS	The global AIDS epidemic continues to expand. In Africa, the impact of AIDS deaths is affecting development and will be felt for generations. Women and girls are now disproportionately affected. The HIV/AIDS field and the sexual and reproductive health (SRH) field must better coordinate efforts to prevent sexual transmission of HIV/AIDS, apply gender perspectives to HIV/AIDS programs, and provide sexual and reproductive health services to HIV-positive couples. We review major activities undertaken to link the fields, highlight “values” each field brings to collaboration, and point out gaps in the AIDS response insufficiently addressed by either field. Actions must ensure rights protection, understanding of the range of sexual behaviors that drive the epidemic, and appreciation for weakened health systems that deliver services to the world’s poor. We offer specific recommendations to address identified gaps and to foster better synergy and effectiveness in a linked HIV and SRH response.	Joan	 Kaufman	Lisa	 Messersmith
2006	16	Integrating Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS Preventions	Integrating Reproductive Health, Family Planning and HIV/AIDS Services: Can It Work?	In 2001, the Kenya Ministry of Health (KMOH) designed an integrated service delivery approach – AMKENI - to respond to the recent fertility stall and upward trends in mortality observed in Kenya. Implemented in Western and Coast provinces of Kenya, AMKENI operates through three main strategies: a) improving the capacity of health facilities to provide quality, integrated reproductive health and HIV/AIDS services; b) promoting healthier behaviors and use of services; and c) strengthening the KMOH’s decentralized training and supervision. This paper evaluates AMKENI achievements over the 2001-2004 period. Data are from a 2004 random sample survey covering 2,010 households, 2,117 women 15-49, and 34 health facilities in AMKENI and non-AMKENI areas. This evaluation points to significant improvements in the quality of care at AMKENI facilities. It also demonstrates that there were substantial positive changes in family planning, HIV/AIDS preventive behavior, and safe motherhood practices among women involved in AMKENI activities.	Pierre	 Ngom	Cathy	 Toroitich Ruto	Maureen	 Kuyoh	Ndugga	 Maggwa
2006	16	Integrating Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS Preventions	Do On-Site Family Planning and HIV Services Increase Client Loads in Ethiopia?	Integrating reproductive health services is often endorsed as a means to increase clients’ ease of use while maximizing scarce health care resources. We used multivariate linear regression to examine whether Ethiopian health facilities offering higher levels of HIV and family planning service integration are more likely to yield higher HIV or family planning client volumes than facilities with lower levels of service integration. For health facilities in our sample, both HIV and family planning monthly client loads increase incrementally and significantly with each higher level of integration, compared with facilities offering neither family planning nor HIV services. This positive association persists after adjusting for region, facility type, number of staff and availability of other health services. These data suggest that integration of HIV and family planning services may increase both HIV and family planning client loads, and that higher levels of integration have larger effects on client loads.	Heather	M Bradley	Getnet	 Mitike	Amy	 Tsui
2006	16	Integrating Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS Preventions	Integrating Reproductive Health Counseling into Prenatal and Postnatal Care: Findings from the Men in Maternity Study in Delhi	This study called the Men in Maternity Study (MIM) tested a new model of maternity care integrating family planning (FP) and STI prevention messages into couple and individual counseling provided to consenting pregnant women and their husbands during routine prenatal and postnatal visits.  Using a quasi-experimental non-equivalent control group design, the response of 327 couples from 3 intervention clinics, and 302 couples from control clinics were compared through a pre- and post-intervention survey. This paper presents the intervention and key findings related to postpartum FP intentions, knowledge and practices of men and women as well as reports of STI/HIV related risky behaviors and knowledge of preventive practices. Results showed that there was a statistically significant increase in condom use, and knowledge of dual protection at six months postpartum, although patterns of FP method use remained the same and STI/HIV related risk perception and knowledge of prevention remained low.	Leila	E. Caleb Varkey	Anurag	 Mishra	Emma	 Ottolenghi	M.	E. Khan	Anjana	 Das	Dale	 Huntington	Susan	E. Adamchak
2006	16	Integrating Family Planning, Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS Preventions	Has Donor Prioritization of HIV/AIDS Control Crowded out Funding for Reproductive Health and Other Health Causes?	As attention by bilateral and multilateral donors to the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS increases, advocates for other health issues affecting the poor have expressed concern that this prioritization may adversely affect funding for other health and population causes. The precise influence, however, has not been evaluated empirically. This paper attempts to do so. I calculate the amount of funding given by major bilateral and multilateral donors over sixteen years for six broad, historically prominent health agendas: HIV/AIDS prevention and control; reproductive health and population; the control of infectious diseases other than HIV/AIDS; basic healthcare; health sector strengthening; and nutrition. Preliminary results show that the picture is far from black and white. While crowding effects do appear to exist for the United States, when aid from all donors is considered, the increase for HIV/AIDS is less marked, and the decrease for other health and population causes less pronounced.	Jeremy	 Shiffman
2006	19	Timing of Childbearing: Life Course and Relationship Contexts	The Pill and the College Attainment of American Women and Men	This paper considers the educational consequences of the increased ability of young women to delay childbearing as a result of the birth control pill. To identify the effects of the pill, I utilize quasi-experimental variation in U.S. state laws governing access to contraception among female adolescents during the 1960s and 1970s. Inference based on these laws indicates that, by lowering the incidence of early fertility, unconstrained access to the pill increased the enrollment rate of college-age women by almost 5 percentage points. Further, early pill access was associated with an increase in college completion rates of approximately 0.9 percentage points among women over thirty. Finally, I analyze the educational outcomes of men in relation to the contraceptive laws governing their likely female partners during adolescence. The results suggest that higher education opportunities for men might also have been constrained by undesired early fertility among their female partners.	Heinrich	 Hock
2006	19	Timing of Childbearing: Life Course and Relationship Contexts	The Institutionalization and Pace of Fertility in American Stepfamilies	This paper compares nonparametric fertility rates for American women in stepfamilies and intact-families using data from the June 1995 Current Population Survey. Results show that childbearing behaviors in stepfamilies resemble those in intact families. Regardless of stepfamily status, the timing and level of fertility for second and third marital births are identical for all women at the same lifetime parity. Fertility patterns are also similar for all first marital births, except a constant difference of three years in the pace of fertility. These findings are consistent with (a) the institutionalization hypothesis of stepfamily processes; (b) lifetime parity as the primary determinant of female fertility; and (c) women in stepfamilies attempting to catch up on their lost fertility outside of marriage.	Jui-Chung	Allen Li
2006	19	Timing of Childbearing: Life Course and Relationship Contexts	Do Siblings' Fertility Histories Influence Each Other?	Individual fertility decisions are most likely shaped not only by their own characteristics and life course paths, but also by social interaction with others through social networks. In practice, however, it is often difficult to disentangle the role of social interaction from other factors like individual and family background variables. We propose to measure social interaction through cross-sibling effects on fertility. Continuous-time hazard models are estimated separately for a woman’s first and second birth intensities. In addition to individual socioeconomic and demographic variables and a sibship-specific unobserved factor, siblings’ three first birth events and their timing enter as time-varying covariates. We use data from longitudinal population-wide Norwegian administrative registers. The data set includes the siblings’ fertility, education, income and marital histories. Our results indicate that cross-sibling effects are relatively strong for the respondents’ first births, but weaker for the second parity transition.	Torkild	 Lyngstad	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz
2006	19	Timing of Childbearing: Life Course and Relationship Contexts	The Role of Age at First Birth on Married Mothers’ Labor Force Transitions: A Life Course Perspective	This paper explores how the timing of the transition to parenthood is associated with later labor force transitions among married mothers with children. Using the SIPP 1996 panel, I find that married mothers who begin family building at early ages are more likely to exit the labor force than those who begin “on-time,” consistent with neoclassical economic theory. However, I also find that married mothers who begin childbearing at late ages are more likely to exit the labor force than those who begin “on-time,” which contradicts neoclassical economic theory. The life course perspective provides a rationale for differential impacts on labor force participation depending on the age at first birth due to its attention to the timing of events and their consequences. Models are then stratified by age at first birth to examine how the co-variates differentially influence married mothers’ labor force exits depending on the age at first birth.	Kristin	 Smith
2006	20	Death: Trends, Distributions, Inequality	A Decomposition of Life Expectancy Levels and Trends	Life expectancy at birth has risen in the past due to declines in juvenile, background and senescent mortality. To interpret past trends a new procedure for decomposing life expectancy is proposed. This decomposition divides the level of life expectancy at a given point in time into three components which quantify the roles of juvenile, background and senescent mortality. The procedure is applied to historical data from 16 high income countries for all available years, separately for females and males. The observed large increases in conventional life expectancy before 1950 are found to be primarily attributable to reductions in juvenile and background mortality. After 1950 the rate of improvement in life expectancy slowed because declines in juvenile and background mortality slowed, but senescent mortality declined more rapidly than before, thus becoming the main cause of rising life expectancy at birth. The role of smoking in the past half century is also quantified.	John	 Bongaarts
2006	20	Death: Trends, Distributions, Inequality	Ten Years after Kannisto: Further Evidence for Mortality Decline at Advanced Ages in Developed Countries	Väinö Kannisto showed convincingly in the mid-1990s that mortality is decreasing remarkably for people at advanced ages since the 1950s and especially since the 1970s. His calculations were based on data until about 1990. Since then 10 more years of data are available. Using the Kannisto-Thatcher-Database on old-age mortality, we studied whether, for women and men above 80, this progress continued during the 1990s. Mortality levels for women and men continue to decrease without any signs of slowing since Kannisto's calculations. By estimating average annual improvements in mortality, we show that the pace in survival improvements even accelerated during the 1990s in comparison to the 1980s. If mortality rates were now close to a biological minimum, we should expect a slower decrease for countries  with the highest life expectancy. We discovered, however, that in those countries average annual improvements are larger than in other developed countries.	Roland	 Rau	Eugeny	 Soroko	Domantas	 Jasilionis	James	W. Vaupel
2006	20	Death: Trends, Distributions, Inequality	What Can Be Learnt by Studying the Adult Modal Age at Death?	Averaging all individual life durations in a unique value, life expectancy at birth remains one of the most popular longevity indicators. Its main feature is a high sensitivity to changes in infant mortality. However, this historical advantage becomes less obvious when mortality chiefly concerns elderly populations. In this context, the specificity of the modal age at death (M), determined only by adult mortality, provides a good account of the most common longevity. For instance, M reached 91 years for women in Japan in 2002, about six years more than the life expectancy at birth. We claim that decomposing the question of human longevity into two components - how many babies become adult and how long adult life spans are – will provide meaningful insights. Using all the data available in the Human Mortality Database (HMD), we illustrate our proposal with various life table functions at M.	Jean-Marie	 Robine	Siu	Lan Karen  Cheung
2006	20	Death: Trends, Distributions, Inequality	One Hundred Years of US Racial Inequalities in Mortality: A Decomposition of the Distribution of Deaths by Age Group, 1900-1999	This paper develops an interdisciplinary framework for studying historical trends in social inequalities in health for western European industrialized countries and the US. I argue that inequalities in longevity within and between subpopulations, defined by social group status, will vary with epidemiological changes in the total population mortality regime. These inequalities in longevity are hypothesized to correspond with changes in the degree of within group variance at the population level from the beginning of one mortality regime through a transition to a second. I hypothesize that changes in mortality in specific age groups (associated with mortality regime changes) determine the changes in subpopulation and total population heterogeneity in the age of death. This theoretical model is empirically tested by decomposing the changes in the distribution of deaths by age in ten year periods from 1900 through to 2000 for US white and non-white men.	Margaret	M. Weden
2006	21	Youth Educational Inequality	Scholarly Culture and Academic Performance in 43 Nations	Children growing up in cultured homes with many books perform much better in school than children from bookless homes. Data are from the OECD's PISA project with representative national samples in 43 nations with over 200,000 cases. We analyze the combined reading scale, highly correlated with science and mathematics achievement; it has a standard deviation of 100. Multi-level regression controlling reliable multiple-item measures of parents' education, occupational status, wealth, and cultural aspirations shows that a child from a family having 500 books would score 112 points higher than his or her peer from an otherwise similar home containing only one book. The standardized effect is .26, larger than parents' occupation (.17), wealth (.13), or education (.07). Books are significant in every country separately (at p	Jonathan	 Kelley	Mariah	 Evans	Joanna	 Sikora
2006	21	Youth Educational Inequality	Academic Resilience among Low SES High School Students	High school students from low SES backgrounds are at particular risk for failing to graduate, yet many do graduate. This paper examines academic resilience, defined as graduating from high school, among these students. We examine relationships between students’ individual resources and their likelihood of graduating from high school and whether these relationships are moderated by external support from parents, teachers and peers. Using data from NELS:88, a low SES sample was created in which SES was based on family income, family structure and parental education. Three sets of individual factors are examined: academic performance, academic attitudes and psychosocial factors. External moderating influences include parents' educational expectations, teacher support, and peers’ attitudes toward education. Findings suggest that some forms of external support moderate the relationships between student attributes and the odds of high school completion but other relationships do not vary across levels of support.	Anne	K. Driscoll
2006	21	Youth Educational Inequality	Neighborhood and School Effects on Children’s Development and Well-Being	Academic skills acquired during childhood are associated with higher educational attainment and occupational status throughout the life course (Warren, Sheridan, and Hauser 2002). Child behavioral problems shape how well children do in school and in other spheres of life (McLeod and Kaiser 2004). Average levels of achievement and behavioral problems, however, are not equally distributed across different social groups. For example, children of parents with lower socioeconomic status, as measured by parental education, parental occupational status, and household income, receive lower reading and math achievement scores than those of parents with higher status (Fryer and Levitt 2004; Phillips and Chin 2004). In this paper, we use new data from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (L.A.FANS) and the Child Development Supplement to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID-CDS) to examine the relative contributions of families, neighborhoods, and schools to children’s development and well-being.	Jinsook	 Kim	Alair	 MacLean	Anne	 Pebley	Narayan	 Sastry
2006	21	Youth Educational Inequality	Neighborhood and School Factors in the School Performance of Immigrants’ Children	This study applies Jencks and Mayer’s (1990) theoretical models to investigate neighborhood effects on the school performance of the children of immigrants. Our sample includes non-Hispanic Black and non-Hispanic White adolescents, as well as adolescents from three Latino groups (Mexican, Cuban, Puerto Rican), and two Asian groups (Chinese, Filipino). Using cross-classified random effects modeling, we examine the effects of the school – a neighborhood institution – alongside other neighborhood factors. Our results suggest that neighborhood SES and school SES are positive factors, but poor school climate and the proportion of foreign-born and limited English-proficient neighbors are negative factors in the school performance of immigrants’ children. Neighborhood and school factors account for very little of the school performance gap by ethnicity and nativity status.	Suet-ling	 Pong	Lingxin	 Hao
2006	22	Social and Environmental Consequences of Migration	Work, Welfare, and the Financial Well-Being of Poor Women after Migration	The objective of this research is to study the employment and income outcomes of migrant women in the U.S., particularly with respect to outcomes by migration type, marital status, family income, and welfare receipt. Using pooled individual-level data from the 1996 and 2001 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation merged with state-level data from the Welfare Rules Database and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, this study uses difference-in-difference models to examine the impacts that moving within or across state borders, being married versus unmarried, being poor versus non-poor, and receiving versus not receiving TANF benefits have on changes in employment and income among U.S. women. Descriptive data show differences between interstate and intrastate movers and non-movers with respect to outcomes of interest. Intrastate movers worked a higher percentage of months throughout the SIPP panel, compared to non-movers, while these numbers are more similar between interstate movers and non-movers.	Shelley	K. Irving
2006	22	Social and Environmental Consequences of Migration	Obligation and Opportunity: The Influence of Gender, Earnings, and Household Obligations on Thai Migrants’ Remittance Behavior	Longitudinal data collected among a sample of rural-urban migrants in Thailand are used to assess the impact of gendered socioeconomic constraints upon remittance behavior. Measuring remittance both as a dichotomous and interval-level outcome, we estimate a series of ordinary regression and logistic regressions, each corrected for sample selection bias, which demonstrate that, compared to male migrants, female migrants exhibit a greater incidence of remitting, larger amounts of monetary remittance, and remitting in a manner that appears more responsive to economic demands experienced in both origin and destination households. The relative generosity of female remittance is also exhibited in the more sizable amounts they remit to origin households per baht earned. Our findings contribute to existing research on the logic of remittance by showing how the capacity to remit and the experience of economic demands differentially inform male and female migrants' remittance behavior.	Kim	 Korinek	Barbara	 Entwisle
2006	22	Social and Environmental Consequences of Migration	The Other Face of Migration: How Do Labor Migration and Remittances Affect Children's Education in South Africa	This paper studies the effect of remittances sent home by South African labor migrants on their children’s schooling outcomes, using data from the 1993-1994 Integrated Household Survey, a national probability sample of about 9,000 South African households. We find that about 30% of the Black households surveyed, but only small fractions of households of other racial groups, have received remittances in the previous year. Most of the analysis is thus restricted to Black households. In such households, receipt of remittances substantially increases the likelihood that children are in school and reduces gender inequalities in schooling. The benefits of remittances are largely restricted to rural households. Finally, migration remittances seem to increase community-level inequalities regarding schooling. The paper includes a number of sensitivity tests designed to assess bias due to endogeneity; some of these tests exploit a second wave of data collected in 1998 for a subset of the original sample.	Yao	 Lu	Donald	J. Treiman
2006	22	Social and Environmental Consequences of Migration	Social Consequences of Forced Urban-Rural Migration in China: Sibling Model for Send-Down Experience	During the Cultural Revolution, a large proportion of Chinese youth in cities were forced to go to the countryside as a result of the state’s “send-down” policy. Local government policies typically dictated a formulaic assignment of send-down (such as keeping the oldest, or the youngest, child in city) with no apparent rationality when a family had more than one child. Thus, the comparison of siblings who were sent down with those who were not constitutes an ideal research design that mimics a true experiment. Comparison between two siblings, with one having been sent down while the other having not, allows us to study the true influence of send-down experiences on later life chances. We use the fixed-effects model for the statistical analyses.	Yu	 Xie	Yang	 Jiang
2006	23	Union Formation	Maximizing Status or Homophily? How Individuals Choose among Socially Distant Partners under Varying Marriage Market Conditions	Social distance, a measure of how “close” individuals prefer to be to others with dissimilar characteristics, is often used to highlight salient social boundaries. Few studies have examined the context of socially distant marriages, or how women make tradeoffs in mate characteristics when marrying such partners. This paper determines how attraction varies as a function of partner characteristics under conditions of male scarcity and surplus. I examine whether individuals attempt to maximize status, maximize homophily, or exchange status. Schoen’s harmonic mean is used to determine the magnitude of mutual attraction independent of the population composition. This analysis uses multivariate linear regression as well as MSA level fixed effects. Preliminary findings indicate that white marriages are more responsive to the sex ratio context.	Audrey	N. Beck
2006	23	Union Formation	Mexican Migration and Its Effect on the Union Formation Patterns of Women in Sending Communities	Mexican migration is characterized by the circular migration of men and the permanence of women in sending communities. The sex-selective nature of Mexican migration diminishes the gains to marriage for non-migrant wives by forcing them to assume additional household responsibilities during their spouses’ absences and decreases the number of marriageable men in local marriage markets. Despite the altering effects of male migration on factors previously shown to influence union formation, little is known of the association between male migration and women’s entry into unions. This paper explores the relationship between male migration and women’s union formation. It finds that women living in municipalities with a high prevalence of male migration are less likely to enter into a union compared to their counterparts in low migration regions. Moreover, the negative association between male migration and women’s entry into unions is predominantly mediated by the change in the number of marriageable men.	Kate	H. Choi
2006	23	Union Formation	Income Inequality and Educational Assortative Mating in the United States: Accounting for Trends from 1940 to 2003	The association between husbands’ and wives’ educational attainments has increased markedly since 1960. Although educational assortative mating may cause household inequality, income inequality may itself affect educational assortative mating. Growing earnings inequality widens the economic gaps among education groups and may account for couples’ increasing tendency to marry along educational lines. We evaluate this argument with Census and CPS data on the education of couples and income distributions of men and women from 1940 to 2003. We also consider other trends that may affect assortative mating, including the relative earnings of men and women, immigration, and the timing of schooling and marriage. Trends in the economic returns to schooling and reduced gender inequality in earnings account for most of the change in educational assortative mating since the early-1970s. From 1940 to the early-1970s, assortative mating trends are mainly the result of changes in the timing of school leaving and marriage.	Robert	D. Mare	Christine	R. Schwartz
2006	23	Union Formation	Casting a Wider Net? Marriage Timing and Partner Choice	In recent decades, marriage markets in the U.S. have been undergoing rapid changes: age at marriage has increased steadily and newly married couples are much more likely today to have the same levels of educational attainment compared to the past. While growing parity in educational attainment between men and women makes educational homogamy demographically possible, changes in marriage timing may play an important role. In this paper, we examine how variation in marriage timing contributes to rising educational homogamy. Using NLSY79 and NLSY97 panel data, we argue that increasing diversity in age at marriage has created fragmented marriage markets – one for the less educated and one for their more educated counterparts who marry at later ages. We pay special attention to the context in which men and women do not marry or form “mismatched” marriages in terms of age and educational attainment.	Kevin	 Shafer	Zhenchao	 Qian
2006	24	New Methods and Analysis of Spatial Data	Spatial Demography: An Opportunity to Improve Policy Making at Diverse Decision Levels	This article compiles the work previously done on demography incorporating spatial models and has 5 goals. First, it highlights areas that have recently incorporated space in the analysis, and those that still lack applications. Second, it indicates the additional gain introduced by spatial techniques in demographic analysis, and different questions  that demographers may answer through the use of these techniques. Third, it discusses the prospects for  Spatial Demography to become established as a sub-field, given the current training (or lack of training) provided by population centers, data availability, and the willingness of  donor institutions to fund spatial applications in the social  sciences. Fourth, it provides a comprehensive description of  the potential use of spatial analysis in demography, and  the most important techniques that demographers should be aware of. Finally, it demonstrates that policy making is  likely to improve and become more cost-effective if a  spatial approach is adopted.	Marcia	C. Castro
2006	24	New Methods and Analysis of Spatial Data	Small-Area Population Forecasting: A Holistic Theory-Based Spatio-Temporal Approach	Existing demographic forecasting techniques for small areas generally are not guided by theoretical models or demographically-driven conceptual schemes. In this study we propose and test a theory-based spatio-temporal approach to small-area population forecasting. In particular, we develop five indices (demographics, accessibility, developability, desirability, and livability) and apply a spatio-temporal regression model to examine population change at the Minor Civil Division (MCD) level in Wisconsin since 1970. For each MCD, the population growth rate for 1980-1990 is regressed on its growth rate for 1970-1980, its independent index variables in 1980, and neighborhood characteristics in 1980 and growth rates for 1970-1980. The estimated coefficients and spatial parameters are then used for projecting population in 2000. The accuracy of forecasts is assessed against 2000 census counts by some statistical measures, graphic plots, and residual maps. This proposed study helps meet policy demands for better small-area population forecast techniques.	Guangqing	 Chi	Paul	R. Voss
2006	24	New Methods and Analysis of Spatial Data	The Spatial Distribution and Correlates of Poverty: Lessons from Global and Small-Area Scale Analyses	Recent advances in spatial data, methods of data integration, and methods of analysis allows for new insight on the patterns and underpinnings of poverty in the developing world. This paper compares two analyses that are similar in their efforts to understand the spatial patterns of poverty and their biophysical correlates, but which differ in their scales (coarse-moderate to moderate-high) and extents (regional to global) of analysis. Several implications of the scale and extent differences will be addressed: data quality issues; methods for data integration and use of spatial methods to generate tabular data for statistical analysis; models of spatial analysis including accommodation of real and artifactual spatial dependence; and computation limitations and solutions to overcome these. In addition, the analytic results will be compared with recommendations for future spatial demographic analysis.	Mark	R. Montgomery	Adam	 Storeygard
2006	24	New Methods and Analysis of Spatial Data	Measuring the Timing and Pace of Fertility Decline in Brazil Using a Bayesian Spatial Estimation Procedure	Using Bayesian spatial statistical methods, we develop and apply a procedure for fitting logistic curves to the fertility and mortality transitions taking place in 511 small regions of Brazil over a forty year period. Between 1960 and 2000, fertility fell dramatically in Brazil, but this transition started at different times, and proceeded with differential speed in different parts of the country. The nature of these differences, and the degree to which they are associated with differences in the local development trajectories, are pertinent to major debates concerning the determinants of this phenomenon. With a remarkable store of microdata from five censuses and this method, we are able to test some of the major hypotheses advanced by authors such as Coale, Cleland and Wilson, and Bongaarts and Watkins. This method can be applied in other historical and contemporary settings with the sparse time series of estimates available from censuses.	Joseph	E. Potter	Renato	M. Assuncao	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Suzana	M. Cavenaghi
2006	25	Religion and Families	Modernization, Religious Schooling, and Economic Attitudes: Evidence from Bangladesh	This paper examines perceptions and attitudes of graduates of modernized madrasas on issues of economic and demographic importance in Bangladesh. We report preliminary findings from a recent survey on teachers and female graduates of rural schools and modernized madrasas. We investigate how attitudes toward desired fertility, working mothers, higher education for girls, and various political regimes vary by school type and teacher attributes. We find some evidence of attitudinal gaps by school type. Religious education is associated with attitudes that are conducive to democracy; madrasa graduates oppose a military regime and favors Islamic rule. On the other hand, when compared to their secular school peers, they have perverse attitudes on matters such as working mothers, desired fertility and higher education for girls. Exposure to female and younger teachers leads to more favorable attitudes among graduates. We conclude by discussing the policy implications of these findings.	Mohammad	N. Asadullah	Nazmul	 Chaudhury	Amit	 Dar
2006	25	Religion and Families	Normative or Economic Behavior? Religiosity and Women's Employment in Israel	This study is aimed at exploring the extent to which religiosity affects the economic logic that rules the relationship between women’s work and their fertility. Economic theory emphasizes the contradiction between work and fertility that holds in the absence of friendly family policy. We argue that normative forces may offset rational calculations and affect women’s behavior regarding childbirth and work. Our study focuses on Israel, a socially diverse country with high levels of both fertility and female employment. Strong religious commitment encourages large families in Israel. The analysis is based on a survey that includes multidimensional biographical perspective and allows is to unveil interactions between individuals’ educational, occupational, residential, and familial characteristics. It is based on logit and duration analysis. Preliminary results suggest a significant difference in the impact of education on fertility between religious groups, but as far as market involvement is considered, the economic logic seems to prevail.	Olivia	 Ekert-Jaffe	Haya	 Stier
2006	25	Religion and Families	Family, Religion, and Multiculturalism: Challenging Implications on Women's Economic Behavior	This paper examines competing influences of religion and family characteristics in women’s economic behavior in Australia’s multicultural context. Using special tabulations of the 2001 full census data and logistic regression, multivariate analyses in this paper will reveal how important the implications of family characteristics (couple status, presence of child and age of child at home, partner’s income) and religion (Islamic affiliation) are on women’s work.     The multicultural and multiethnic setting of this research also enables us to assess the notion of whether women’s (inferior) status in Islamic context is influenced by values associated with gender roles derived from religion itself as women under this investigation came from socio-culturally and economically diverse parts of the world.     Furthermore, challenging implications of family and religion are explored in comparison with those characteristics highlighted in assimilation and human capital approaches (migration characteristics including duration of residence in the destination society, individual investments including education, English competence).	Yaghoob	 Foroutan
2006	25	Religion and Families	Gendered Relationships and Localized Islam: The Meaning of Marriage(s) and Divorce(s) among the Swahili of Coastal Tanzania	This paper incorporates methods and theory from the field of demographic anthropology to address marriage and divorce in the context of the dynamic relationship between Islam, gender and culture among Muslims on the Swahili coast of Tanzania. A crucial aspect of understanding these processes is to explore the complex and multidimensional nature of relationships between men and women in Swahili society. The Swahili people are recognized for their high divorce rates; indeed, divorce and multiple marriages over the life-course are described as the typical experience for Swahili people. This research examines divorce from a gendered perspective and clarifies cultural models and meanings of marriage and divorce among Swahili women and men. The primary finding of this research is that Swahili women do have options outside of marriage and that divorce has consequences for both men and women (economically, socially, and politically within their communities) that need to be explored.	Susi	 Krehbiel
2006	26	Developmental Trajectories of Children of Immigrant Families	Welfare and the Children of Immigrants: Transmission of Dependence or Investment in the Future?	This study examines the intergenerational effects of welfare receipt among immigrant families, by focusing on the relationship between the receipt of welfare within immigrant families and three key outcomes among the young adult native-born children of immigrants—educational attainment, adult welfare use, and adult labor force participation. Using data from multiple years of the Current Population Survey (CPS), I apply a grouping estimation procedure to generate intergenerational correlations in welfare receipt between an immigrant parent cohort and the young adult (ages 19 to 23) second generation in the United States. To more fully evaluate the relationship between welfare receipt and adult children’s outcomes, multivariate techniques and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1997-2002) are used to examine the relationship between prior adolescent welfare exposure and the subsequent outcomes of the young adult children of immigrants.	Kelly	 Balistreri
2006	26	Developmental Trajectories of Children of Immigrant Families	Social Context and Health-Risk Behaviors among Immigrant Adolescents in Los Angeles	In the last two decades, immigrants, and particularly Latino immigrant groups such as Mexicans, have begun to fan out across the country, initiating new immigrant-receiving areas at the same time that older ones are being altered by increased immigrant suburbanization. These geographic shifts underscore the need for a more complete understanding of the role of social context in helping or hindering immigrants and their children. This analysis explores the possibility that family context and residential location directly alter the adaptive trajectories of Latino youth. Data for this analysis come from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (LAFANS). We employ multivariate multilevel Rasch models to estimate the effects of individual, family and neighborhood-level influences on two scales of adolescent health risk-behaviors (substance use and delinquency).	Reanne	 Frank	Magdalena	 Cerda	Maria	 Rendon
2006	26	Developmental Trajectories of Children of Immigrant Families	Welfare Leaving and Health Trajectories among the Children of Immigrants and Natives	Using a unique longitudinal data set representing approximately 1,000 young children in Chicago during the period of welfare reform (1995-2001; the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods, PHDCN), this study investigates (a) how welfare-leaving affects changes in young children’s physical health over time; (b) whether these associations differ for children of immigrants versus natives; (c) whether any differential patterns can be explained by differential access to health insurance and medical care or different patterns of parental employment and income; and (d) whether patterns differ for pre-school versus school- age children. We find that the children of immigrant welfare leavers fare significantly worse in terms of their physical health trajectories than either native leavers or immigrant stayers. These effects, moreover, seem to be concentrated among infants and preschoolers (versus school-age children). Potential mediators are examined and policy implications discussed.	Ariel	 Kalil	Danielle	A. Crosby
2006	26	Developmental Trajectories of Children of Immigrant Families	Trajectories of English Language Acquisition among Foreign-Born Children in Spanish-Language Households	The rapidity and extent to which immigrant non-English language children in the United States learn English has important short-term and long-term consequences for their immediate situation and for their future. In this paper I model trajectories of English language acquisition among foreign-born children living in Spanish-language households. The results show, as expected, that English acquisition increases with length of residence in the United States with the increases being largest during the first handful or so of years after arrival in the country. However, the results also show a clear trend by age at entry. The older children are when they enter the U.S., the less rapid their early progress in acquiring proficiency in English.	Gillian	 Stevens
2006	27	The Demography of Mental Health	Poverty and Adolescent Mental Health: The Role of Maternal Psychological Resources	Limited research has been conducted assessing maternal depression and mastery as predictors of adolescent mental health. Much focus has been targeted towards the familial context among young children. This study seeks to assess the impact of maternal psychological well-being on the depression and anxiety levels and social withdrawal in a sample of young adolescents between the ages of 10 and 14 (N=1265). Analyses using structural equation modeling find that the effects of experiencing poverty on adolescent outcomes are mediated by maternal depression and sense of mastery. When maternal mastery and depression are regressed on poverty and background characteristics, being in poverty is the strongest predictor of maternal psychological well-being.	Bridget	J. Goosby
2006	27	The Demography of Mental Health	Parental Mental Health and Child Development: The Effects of Assortative Mating	Although the negative impact of parents’ mental illness on child health is well-documented, this relationship has rarely been examined in the context of non-married families. Using the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS) this analysis exploits the full range of relationship types, including married, cohabiting, and non-resident relationships, to examine the independent and multiplicative effects on children of having one or two unhealthy parents. Results show that maternal mental illness has a strong, positive relationship with behavior problems in children, indicating that healthy fathers are poor buffers of unhealthy mothers, regardless of family type. In families where fathers spend more time with their children they exacerbate maternal illness when they are also unhealthy; however, in families where unhealthy fathers are less involved in their child’s life they are less likely to exacerbate existing maternal illness. Few gender differences are found in these effects.	Sarah	O. Meadows	Sara	 McLanahan	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2006	27	The Demography of Mental Health	The Prevalence of Major Depressive Episode, Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Substance Dependence among Urban American Fathers: Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study	This paper constructs a profile of the mental health conditions of a population sample of urban American fathers. The study participants are men in the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. The results indicate that the prevalence of major depression among these men is substantially higher compared to results from other national studies. Beyond the substantive findings, one of the most important contributions of this paper concerns the investigation of participant non-response. Multiple imputation (MI) strategies are used to impute missing values. MI is a principled imputation technique that produces improved estimates and confidence intervals that properly reflect the uncertainty of the missing data. MI also has the advantage of retaining the full sample size, which is critical for fine-grained analyses across sub-groups.	These findings suggest that studies that do not account for non-response bias may produce conservative estimates of psychopathology among men, especially poor men and men of color.	Marilyn	 Sinkewicz
2006	27	The Demography of Mental Health	Mental Illness as a Barrier to Marriage among Urban Unmarried Mothers	We use augmented data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing survey to (1) investigate the prevalence of diagnosed mental illness among mothers giving birth out-of-wedlock; and (2) estimate the effects of mental illness on marriage and childbearing using proportional hazard models.  Measures of mental illness are obtained from the survey respondents' prenatal medical records. We use these data along with the rich survey data to estimate marriage and fertility models that control for city fixed effects, baseline levels of human capital (including physical health), and parents’ baseline cohabitation status.   Preliminary results indicate that over 10% of unmarried mothers have been diagnosed with a mental illness prior to their child’s birth, and that in this population mental illness is strongly associated with delays in marriage but has no effect on fertility.	Julien	O. Teitler	Nancy	E. Reichman
2006	28	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Schooling Differentials and Health and Mortality in Denmark: To What Extent is Schooling a Marker for Background Differentials versus Directly Affecting Health and Mortality?	Schooling differentials are a major component of socioeconomic differentials. Schooling also generally is positively associated with better health/mortality outcomes. But these associations do not measure how much schooling causes better health/mortality outcomes. Schooling may be proxying in part for unobserved endowments including family background and genetics that have causal effects. This study’s principal goals are (1) to describe associations between schooling and health/mortality; and (2) to investigate causal impacts of schooling on health and mortality using data on Danish twins. These data in combination with appropriate econometric modeling promise a quantum increase in understanding of causal effects of schooling on health/mortality outcomes. Both goals will examine whether there are significant differences (a) between females and males, (b) across birth cohorts, (c) for health-related behaviors versus health/mortality outcomes, (d) for physical versus mental/psychological health, and (e) between effects of adult schooling on their own versus their children’s health.	Jere	 Behrman	Vibeke	 Jensen	Dorthe	 Pedersen	Inge	 Petersen	Paul	 Bingley	Kaare	 Christensen
2006	28	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Accounting for Changes in Health Inequalities in Smoking and Obesity in the United States, 1960-2000	We analyzed trends from 1960-2000 in absolute and relative inequality among age, gender, race, and education groups for smoking and obesity. Smoking was primarily patterned by gender and age in 1965. Over the next 38 years both absolute and relative inequality declined for gender but increased dramatically across education groups. Most of the change in inequality in smoking was due to differential declines in smoking, but changes in the distribution of social groups also had an impact. For example, changes in the size of educational groups accounted for 16% of the increase in relative inequality across education. For obesity, the decline in relative inequality and the increase in absolute inequality across age groups was due to disproportionately faster increases in obesity among those ages 18-24, while declines in absolute and relative educational inequality were primarily due to faster-than-average growth in obesity among those with at least some college education.	Sam	 Harper	John	 Lynch
2006	28	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Feeling Better? Trends in General Health Status	Using data from the 1982-2003 National Health Interview Surveys, we determine if recent improvements in old-age disability have been mirrored in changes in self-reported general health status (GHS); if GHS trends are similar for younger and older adults; and if changes in GHS among older Americans have been uniform across demographic/socioeconomic groups. For those 70 plus, there has been a decline in the proportion reporting poor/fair health that is similar in magnitude to the decline in disability (roughly 2 percent a year). People 18 to 29 and 45 plus also have been reporting less poor/fair health, while there has been no significant change for those 30 to 44. Some subgroups of the 70 plus population have not experienced the progress of the broader older population. Those 85 plus have seen no improvement and those with less education and lower income have not gained as rapidly as more advantaged groups.	Linda	G. Martin	Robert	 Schoeni	Vicki	A. Freedman	Patricia	 Andreski
2006	28	Socioeconomic Differentials in Health and Mortality	Socioeconomic Differences in Mortality among U.S. Adults: Insights into the Hispanic Paradox	Despite a myriad of studies focused on social disparities in health, little is known about SES differentials in mortality among Hispanics. The authors use Poisson regression models based on data from the 1989-1994 waves of the NHIS, with linked mortality through 1997, to estimate death rates for Hispanics and whites by age, sex and SES. Deaths rates vary significantly by education and income for whites and for Hispanic subgroups defined by nativity and nationality. However, with the exception of Puerto Ricans, the effects of education are more modest for Hispanic groups than for whites. The ethnic differences in mortality patterns by income are less notable than those for education. The findings reveal that the mortality advantage for Hispanics is concentrated at lower levels of SES, with little or no advantage at higher levels. We propose several mechanisms that may underlie these patterns of mortality.	Cassio	M. Turra	Noreen	 Goldman
2006	29	The Demography of Disability	Disability and Residential Mobility among the Elderly: Changes from the Eighties to the Nineties	In 1991, Speare, Avery and Lawton showed that, during the eighties among the American elderly, disability triggered residential mobility, institutionalization, and the need for living in a more complex living arrangement. The loss of ability over time was an even a better predictor for the latter two situations. The United States has experienced a decrease in disability prevalence and an increase in the mean age of disabled people. The aim of this paper is to analyze whether the impact of disability on residential mobility and institutionalization changed during the last decades of the 20th century. It compares residential mobility, institutionalization, and living arrangements among people 70 years old or older in 1984 (LSOA I ) with people of the same age in 1994 (LSOA II). The evidence shows that disability at the baseline has a stronger effect on residential mobility and on living with others during the 1990s than during the 1980s.	Gilbert	 Brenes
2006	29	The Demography of Disability	Demographic and Health Predictors of Disability Change and Non-Change in Late Life	For older, non-disabled people, what variables predict change or constancy in disability status over a two-year time period? Do these same variables predict change or constancy for people with an IADL or ADL disability?  Three waves of data from the LSOA II are used to analyze the effects of age, sex, education, marital status, prior disability status, and self-rated health on disability transitions. Age, prior disability status, and self-rated health generally are stronger predictors of disability transitions than sex, education, and marital status. Predictors of transitions differ for independent and disabled people. Among disabled people, variables have similar effects whether the disability is IADL or ADL. Predictors of stable states differ for all three disability statuses: health variables are the strongest predictors for independent people; most variables are significant but of limited magnitude for IADL disabled people; and only prior ADL disability is a significant predictor for ADL disabled people.	Michelle	 Cheuk
2006	29	The Demography of Disability	Health Conditions, Disability and Self-Rated Health in Older Americans	This study analyzes the causal linkages among three health measures – health conditions, disability, and self-rated health – in older Americans. The research, building upon a sociological perspective, uses data from the first wave of the Survey of Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD). We model the influences of six specific health conditions (hypertension, diabetes, cancer, heart disease, stroke, and depression symptoms) on an older person’s self-rated health, both directly and indirectly by means of physical and social functioning. While the presence of each condition has strong adverse impact, comorbidity exerts an even more significant influence on functional status and self-rated health. While one’s self-rated health, among those with stroke, is substantially affected by disabilities that accompany this disease, indirect effects are less significant for the rest of the health conditions. The results have implications for future studies on population health in older persons.	Xian	 Liu	Charles	 Engel, Jr.	David	 Armstrong	Han	 Kang
2006	29	The Demography of Disability	Evaluating Survey Questions Used to Identify Disability: An Application of the International Classification of Disability, Health and Functioning (ICF)	This paper uses a conceptual model of disability derived from the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) (WHO, 2001) to assess and categorize survey questions. The first part presents the ICF concepts and shows how current survey questions on disability map to ICF concepts. The second part uses the ICF framework to examine the estimates of the population with a disability across national surveys. The national surveys we use include the American Community Survey (ACS), the decennial Census long form, the CPS, the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), and the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The final part of the paper uses the conceptual model to assess several current efforts underway to develop new survey questions—including the Bureau of Labor Statistics disability questions to be tested in the February 2006 CPS and new questions being developed for the 2008 ACS.	Robert	 Weathers	Andrew	J. Houtenville	S.	Antonio  Ruiz-Quintanilla
2006	30	Migration in Developing Countries	Urban Out-Migration, Poverty and Structural Adjustment in Burkina Faso: An Event History Analysis (1980-1999)	Recently the pace of urban growth slowed down in sub-Saharan Africa. Literature on urbanization and migration has linked this slowdown to the decline of rural out-migration and, in some countries, the increase of urban out-migration (i.e. urban to rural migration). This last trend is contrary to standard migration patterns, especially in developing countries. This new phenomenon has been explained in the literature as resulting from rising urban poverty, especially in context of structural adjustment programs (SAPs). This pervasive explanation, however, which is intuitively acceptable and grounded on various theories, has not been empirically established and remains to be proved. Using data from the Migration Dynamics, Urban Integration and Environment Survey of Burkina Faso (EMIUB, 2000), a unique national data source on migration, this paper aims to establish the determinants of urban out-migration in Burkina Faso testing the impact of SAPs and poverty on urban out-migration.	Cris	 Beauchemin
2006	30	Migration in Developing Countries	Elder Parent Health and the Migration Decisions of Adult Children: Evidence from Rural China	Recent research has shown that participation in migrant labor markets has led to substantial increases in income for families in rural China, yet we find that younger adults are much less likely to work as migrants when a parent is ill. Poor elder parent health has less impact on probability of employment as a migrant, however, when an adult child has other siblings who may be available to provide care. Our results suggest that improving or introducing pension and health insurance systems for rural residents in the developing world may be important not only for improving the welfare of the elderly, but also for easing constraints on the labor supply decisions of adult children.	John	T Giles	Ren	 Mu
2006	30	Migration in Developing Countries	Education, Gender, and Migration in Rural Nepal	Although sociologists have identified education as a catalyst of social change, the exact mechanisms through which education works are unclear. For example, research has reported disparate results for the effects of education on migration. In this paper, I construct a theoretical framework that identifies economic, social, and ideational pathways through which education may affect migration, and how these relationships differ by gender. Using life history calendar data from the Chitwan Valley Family Study from Nepal, I create separate event history models for men and women, including measures of educational achievement, enrollment, and community-level proximity to schools. Results indicate that educational achievement has positive effects and enrollment has negative effects on out-migration. The positive effects of achievement are stronger for men. The effect of access to schools and other community services is mixed.	Nathalie	 Williams
2006	30	Migration in Developing Countries	Migration and Urbanization of Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Case of Nairobi City, Kenya	Urban population growth in sub-Saharan Africa is driven by migration of young adults seeking better livelihoods in cities. This study contributes to understanding the dynamic process of rapid urbanization amidst increasing urban poverty in African cities by describing demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of migrants, identifying push and pull factors, and determining the relative magnitude of rural-urban and urban-urban migration streams using rich data from the ongoing longitudinal health and demographic surveillance study in the slums of Nairobi covering 60,000 people. The results show that while a significant proportion of the population has lived in slums for many years, there is considerable turn-over of the population, with 40% of immigrants coming from other urban areas. Most immigrants come to Nairobi to escape rural poverty, but end up living in slums characterized by poor environmental sanitation, overcrowding, social fragmentation, unstable livelihoods, poor health outcomes, and high levels of insecurity.	Eliya	M. Zulu	Adama	 Konseiga	Eugene	 Darteh	Blessing	  Mberu
2006	31	Demography of Crime	Parental Criminality among Head Start Children: Associations with Children’s Problem Behaviors	A theory on criminality and self-control argues that influences on children begin at an early age by way of parental involvement and the nature of child-rearing. This paper uses data from the Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) 2000, conducted between 2000 and 2003, to examine the relationship between parent criminality and Head Start children’s social-emotional development including their social skills and problem behaviors such as aggression, hyperactivity, and withdrawn behavior. We also examine the nature of parental involvement and child-rearing in families with an incidence of parental criminality because of the potential mediator roles that these practices might hold on the relationship between parental criminality and the likelihood of aggressive and other behaviors among young children. Research findings establishing the relationship between parental criminal behavior and child’s behavior argues for a potential intervening role of Head Start to ease the effects of parental criminal activities and children’s anti-social behavior.	Soumya	 Alva	Nicholas	 Zill	Yair	 Ziv
2006	31	Demography of Crime	Inequality in Crime across Place: Exploring the Role of Segregation	While many studies have examined the effects of racial residential segregation and disadvantage on crime, the connections among these factors have not been conceptualized and empirically evaluated in a fashion that fully elucidates their interrelationships. To do so, we examine whether and how neighborhood crime is a function of local area conditions and aspects of the overall urban context--particularly segregation. Two hypotheses are tested: (1) neighborhoods in more segregated cities have higher robbery rates than those in less segregated cities; and (2) the influence of neighborhood disadvantage on local robbery rates varies depending on citywide segregation. Using data for census tracts within 75 cities, we show that local robbery rates are significantly higher in more segregated cities, and citywide racial segregation interacts with neighborhood disadvantage to influence robbery rates. We discuss the implications of these findings in light of the central structural role of race in U.S. society.	Lauren	J. Krivo	Ruth	D. Peterson	Danielle	C. Payne
2006	31	Demography of Crime	The Criminal Careers of Young Men	This paper formulates and estimates a dynamic, life cycle model of education and criminal behavior. Every period, individuals optimally decide whether to engage in criminal activities or to invest in human capital, either in the form of full-time school or accumulating experience through learning by doing. The estimated model sheds light on the relationship between education and crime and it allows me to test competing explanations advanced in the literature. Specifically, some researchers have suggested that schools primarily serve the function of keeping kids off the street. Others highlight the role of schools in raising the opportunity costs of criminal behavior. The model is also used to evaluate alternative policies associated with the availability of criminal records, improving our understanding of criminal record stigma as a cost borne by ex-offenders and also as an expected cost taken into account by those considering engaging in crime.	Juan	 Pantano
2006	31	Demography of Crime	The Ecological Fallacy of the Abortion-Crime Thesis	Recently some scholars have asserted that abortion legalization lowered crime through time lagged effects. While economists have both substantiated and challenged these findings, sociologists and demographers have been mute on the topic. We show that the link between abortion and crime is the result of omitted variables bias and researchers' inability to distinguish between age-period-cohort effects. We correct these problems and use propensity score matching and quasi-experimental methods to retest the causal argument in the case of homicide. Using data from the NSFG, Census, CDC, SHR, Donahue and Levitt, and Fryer et al., we find that when period-cohorts are compared, abortion legalization did not have any measurable effect on crime once race, sex, the sex ratio at birth, divorce rates, contraceptive use, and the crack-cocaine epidemic are controlled. Our findings suggest that any drop in crime is the result of a mixture of unmeasured period and cohort effects and not abortion.	Bryan	L. Sykes	Dominik	 Hangartner	Earl	 Hathaway
2006	32	The Effect of Social Structure on Fertility-Related Behavior	Family Background, Contemporary Constraints, and Fertility in Egypt	Long-standing fertility theory posits that fertility is determined in part by ideals and desires formed during childhood. The extent to which these are expressed in realized fertility is a function of constraints operating during the reproductive years (economic, social, biological). Family background factors, especially characteristics of the family of origin (such as number of siblings), are often neglected in research on fertility in contemporary developing countries, perhaps because the DHS offers limited measurement of such factors. This paper analyzes extensive information collected on a sub-sample (n=3286) of respondents in the 2003 DHS in Egypt who were re-interviewed in 2004. The analysis examines the inter-relations among fertility ideals, fertility desires, and realized fertility. In regression analysis, effects on all three of these fertility measures are estimated for a large set of explanatory variables, including family background factors, indicators of current social and economic constraints, and perceptions of the costs/benefits of children.	Rania	 Roushdy
2006	32	The Effect of Social Structure on Fertility-Related Behavior	Conflicts between Women's Intentions and Behaviors: Mode of Delivery in Brazil	In Brazil, the cesarean rate is high in the public sector (~30%) and astronomical in the private sector (>70%). However, since the large majority of women in both sectors say they prefer vaginal delivery, women’s delivery intentions are in conflict with this outcome. In the private sector, moreover, most cesareans are scheduled in advance. Our study sought to illuminate this apparent contradiction, and recruited pregnant women in four Brazilian cities, interviewing each three times: twice during pregnancy and again after birth. Interviews covered woman’s preferences about mode of delivery and the outcome of the delivery, including whether and why a cesarean was scheduled in advance. Our results indicate that the large majority of scheduled cesareans were not performed for a compelling medical justification. While some elective cesarean sections may be scheduled for the convenience of the woman, in Brazil it seems that the physicians’ interests are paramount and are often in conflict with women’s intentions.	Kristine	 Hopkins	Anibal	 Faundes	Ignez	H.O. Perpétuo
2006	32	The Effect of Social Structure on Fertility-Related Behavior	On the Structural Value of Children: The Birth of a Child as a Means to Improve the Social Environment of Its Parents – Theory and Empirical Evidence from Bulgaria	Personal networks receive increasing recognition as structural determinants of reproductive behavior. However, the network approach can also be utilized to explain personal motivations for having children. By using theories of interpersonal exchange and the value of children it is agued that children alter their parents’ social networks thereby improving their parents’ living situation and their access to supportive resources. Individuals perceive this potential improvement as a structural benefit and therefore consider this value in their fertility-related decisions. Data from Bulgaria, collected in 2002, support this argument. For married or cohabiting women, the birth of a first child is significantly motivated by expectations of improving family relationships, and male intentions for a second child are promoted by an expected increase of security in old age. Females and males with an intimate friend, however, associate a first child with the expectation of increasing closeness with their partner.	Christoph	 Buehler
2006	32	The Effect of Social Structure on Fertility-Related Behavior	Theoretical and Methodological Problems in Researching Short-Term Fluctuations in Fertility: The Model for Evaluating the Impact of Societal Instability	Fluctuations in fertility for short-term periods often remain unexplained. There has yet to be a clear understanding of the social factors that produce such phenomena. Some of these fluctuations are caused by societal instability. This paper introduces theoretical and methodological approaches for researching the impact of this instability on fertility behavior, with major focus on the effect of social and political instability. The paper contains a model that incorporates premises of the extended uncertainty reduction theory. The model attempts to link macro-level societal instability with micro-level perception of it in the form of uncertainties and fertility decision-making. Different types of instability are distinguished. Finally, tools for predicting fertility rates that correspond with each type of instability are presented.	Yuri	 Frantsuz
2006	33	Child Well-Being in Developing Countries	Gender, Poverty and Physical Abuse in Schools in Bangladesh	This paper analyzes the patterns and correlates of physical abuse among school adolescents with teachers as perpetrators. In particular, the paper assesses variability in the prevalence of physical abuse among school adolescents to explore the role of poverty and gender. The data for the present analysis are taken from a nationally representative survey of young people between ages and 10 and 24 living in 20,000 households conducted in 2005 in Bangladesh. The results of the analysis shed light on the role of gender and poverty in the schooling experience as reflected in reports of violence in schools. These results have direct implications for formulating school policies with regard to corporal punishment. The results may also offer some insight into factors that contribute to high levels of reported violence in Bangladeshi society.	Sajeda	 Amin	Quamrun	 Nahar
2006	33	Child Well-Being in Developing Countries	In the Margins: Social Inequality in Children’s Educational Outcomes in India	Indian society has long been stratified along the axes of caste, ethnicity and religion. Not surprisingly, this inequality is reflected in educational attainment. However, the precise mechanisms by which this inequality manifests itself remains open to debate with a variety of hypotheses being advanced such as poverty, child labor, lack of access to schools, teacher discrimination and lack of parental interest in education. Unfortunately, there is little empirical research examining these hypotheses.   	This paper utilizes a newly collected nationwide survey data for 40,000 households to examine social inequality in children’s educational outcomes for 8-11 year old children with a specific focus on reading skills, arithmetic skills and writing skills.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Cecily	 Darden	Amaresh	 Dubey
2006	33	Child Well-Being in Developing Countries	On the Quality of Health Care and Educational Outcomes in a Developing Country	This paper investigates early childhood human capital investment in a developing country. We consider the effect of quality of health care prior to school enrollment on subsequent educational outcomes using a high quality randomized survey from the Kagera region in Tanzania. Special focus is given to interactions between quality of health care and household specific shocks such as an adult death within the household. Our initial results indicate a positive relation between access to immunization within the community and health outcomes measured by the body mass index. Furthermore, we find that height significantly affects the probability of attending primary school.	Marianne	 Simonsen	Flora	 Kessy
2006	33	Child Well-Being in Developing Countries	Does Son Preference Influence Children's Growth in Height? A Comparative Study of Chinese and Filipino Children	We compare children's growth trajectories in height in China and the Philippines, two countries with very different histories of child gender preference. Our goal is to assess the effect of son preference on gender differences in physical development. We use data from the Chinese Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS) longitudinal study and the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (CLHNS). By adopting a multilevel growth modeling approach, we take advantage of the panel design of both the CHNS and the CLHNS. The combination of individual growth modeling methodology and repeated measure data makes it possible to deal with measurement errors as well as a variety of additional interesting research questions.	Shige	 Song
2006	34	Panel on Longitudinal Surveys of Immigrants in Canada and the United States	The U.S. New Immigrant Survey		Guillermina	 Jasso	Mark	R.  Rosenzweig	James	P. Smith
2006	34	Panel on Longitudinal Surveys of Immigrants in Canada and the United States	The Value of the U.S. New Immigrant Survey for Immigration Researchers		Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2006	34	Panel on Longitudinal Surveys of Immigrants in Canada and the United States	The Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Canada		Margaret	 Michalowski
2006	34	Panel on Longitudinal Surveys of Immigrants in Canada and the United States	The Value of the Canadian Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants for Immigration Researchers		Alan	B. Simmons
2006	35	Statistical/Computational Techniques in Demography	The Impact of Duration on Disability Transitions: Evidence from the Cardiovascular Health Study	We used the Cardiovascular Health Study to investigate whether fitting a Semi-Markov Process (SMP) model using the stochastic EM algorithm (SMP-EM) to estimate total duration in left-censored data yields improved estimates of the effect of duration in a health state on the odds of recovery or decline. Health was categorized into two functional states (active and disabled) using measures of limitations in Instrumental Activities of Daily Living and Activities of Daily Living. The results indicated that the SMP-EM approach yielded better estimates of the relation of duration in a health state to the odds of recovery or decline, as compared to the multi-state life table model or SMP without the EM. The value of the EM is greater, the shorter the follow-up period.	Liming	 Cai	James	 Lubitz	Nathaniel	 Schenker	Paula	 Diehr	Alice	 Arnold	Linda	 Fried
2006	35	Statistical/Computational Techniques in Demography	The Population Life Table	The population life table (PLT) is a stationary population conceived as a cohort that is initialized, normalized and indexed at population age zero (0). The PLT can be viewed from the perspective of: i) a population extinction model in which all cohorts are survived forward without replacement until the youngest cohort becomes the oldest and dies out after ω-years; or ii) a heterogeneity model where each age class constitutes a subcohort with frailty schedules corresponding to the age- and cohort-specific mortality schedules but re-indexed to population age. We will present the formal analytical framework (including the new life table identity) as an extension of an earlier paper by Müller et al (2004) and example applications in demography (new perspectives on comparative life tables) and ecology (estimating age structure).	James	R. Carey	Hans	 Muller	Jane-Ling	 Wang
2006	35	Statistical/Computational Techniques in Demography	Using the Heterogeneity Model and the Lee-Carter Method to Estimate Mortality Surfaces at Old Ages	Death rates cannot be measured reliably at old ages, yet their values are necessary in studies such as population forecasts. In estimating the true values of death rates at old ages, general smoothing techniques cannot apply to extremely old ages at which there are too few survivors, and they also involve arbitrary choice between smoothness and fitting. To avoid the arbitrariness, we call for the Lee-Carter method that is designed to distinguish persistent trends and disturbances in mortality change. To extend estimates to any age, we utilize the heterogeneity-mortality model. Composing cohorts born in long periods, we obtain the robust estimate of heterogeneity variance, and subsequently the targets are extended from mortality curves to surfaces. Identifying the baseline mortality surface, we eliminate disturbances using the Lee-Carter method and derive estimates of the true values of cohort mortality. We provide examples using data from 17 low-mortality countries.	Nan	 Li	James	W. Vaupel
2006	35	Statistical/Computational Techniques in Demography	Nonparametric Estimation of Disability-Free Life Expectancy Using Period Life Table and Cross-Sectional Disability Survey	Increased prevalence of chronic impairment characterizes aging populations. Are additional years of life spent in poor health? Robust estimation of disability-free life expectancy (DFLE) is essential for addressing this question. Thirty years after publication, Sullivan's method remains the most widely used method for estimating DFLE. Sullivan's method simply partitions the total number of person-years lived in an interval by the proportion disabled in that interval. We prove Sullivan's method imposes previously unnoticed assumptions. To improve upon Sullivan's method, we relax this assumption and derive nonparametric bounds of DFLE. A bootstrap method is used to compute balanced confidence intervals for the bounds. Finally, we apply the proposed methodology to estimate DFLE for the 1999 U.S. population using the data from the period life table, National Health Interview Survey, and National Nursing Home Survey. We find important race, sex, and education differentials in DFLE and proportion of remaining life spent without disability.	Samir	 Soneji	Kosuke	 Imai
2006	36	The Social and Economic Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Adult Mortality and the Long-Run Impact on Households	The goal of this study is to understand how households are affected in the long-run by health shocks due to HIV/AIDS, drawing on analysis of a 2004 re-survey of the panel of respondents originally surveyed in the Kagera region of Tanzania in 1991-1994. This study will add to our understanding of coping processes and long-term outcomes of this major health shock and address important questions: Do long-run coping mechanisms differ from short-run adjustments? Are some types of households buffered from shocks more than others? Does AIDS increase poverty despite short-run coping and is AIDS a poverty trap for future generations?	Kathleen	 Beegle	Joachim	 De Weerdt	Stefan	 Dercon
2006	36	The Social and Economic Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Orphanhood and Adolescent HIV Risk Behaviors in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa	Although orphanhood is believed to be a risk factor for unsafe sexual behaviors among adolescents in developing countries—particularly girls, there are few studies documenting the relationship. Most orphan research focuses on infants and very young children, who may be at risk for HIV through vertical transmission from mothers or increased vulnerability to sexual abuse. The effects of orphanhood on adolescent HIV risk behaviors are, however, understudied. Using longitudinal data from a population-based survey of 14-22 year-olds in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, interviewed in 1999 and followed up in 2001, we find that controlling for age and household expenditure and size, relative to non-orphans, paternal orphaned females (p≤.05) and males (p≤.01) have higher odds of debuting earlier sexually, maternal orphaned females are less likely to discuss condom use with recent sexual partners (p≤.05), and maternal orphaned males report being less confident they can use a condom correctly (p≤.05).	Kelly	 Hallman
2006	36	The Social and Economic Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Poverty and the Impact of AIDS on Older-Age Parents: Evidence from Cambodia and Thailand	This paper examines the impact of the AIDS epidemic on the material and social well-being of the parents of adults who die of AIDS in Cambodia and Thailand. The focus is on how this impact interacts with poverty, primarily at the household level but also in association with societal levels of poverty. The analysis examines how poverty conditions the routes through which adult child loss impacts parents, including caregiving during illness, paying for medical and living expenses, opportunity costs, funeral expenses, loss of filial support, and fostering orphaned grandchildren. In addition, the interaction between the poverty status of parents and community reaction is explored. Thai data come from individual case information provided by key informants and survey interviews with AIDS and non-AIDS parents. Cambodian data come from a population based survey of older persons and a purposive sample of older persons who experienced an adult child death.	John	 Knodel
2006	36	The Social and Economic Consequences of HIV/AIDS	Long-Term Impacts of Orphanhood on Education Attainments and Land Inheritance among Adults in Rural Kenya	Few studies have investigated the impacts of orphan status into adulthood. This paper estimates the impacts of past orphan status into adulthood by using a rural household survey in Kenya in 2004. We identify past orphan status by asking ages of household members when they lost parents, if they have. We compare two stock variables that parents provide to their children in rural areas, education and land, between former orphans and non-orphans. Among men aged 20-60, we find that former maternal orphans have lower school attainments and sizes of inherited land than former non-orphans. This relationship does not hold among former paternal orphans. The results of this study have policy implications for current orphans.	Takashi	 Yamano
2006	37	Racial Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	A Temporal Investigation of College Attendance and Destinations of First Generation Students	This paper uses two national datasets to assess temporal changes in college attendance and destinations of first generation high school graduates between 1982 and 1992. We show that the increased likelihood of first-generation college attendance was not restricted to 2-year institutions, but also involved 4-year institutions, including selective colleges and universities. The results suggest that although all first generation students benefited from the expansion of higher education, students from different groups were “channeled” to different destinations. While first generation white and Asian students enjoyed improved chances to attend the more competitive destinations, Hispanic first generation students’ rise in attendance rate was mostly limited to 2-year and 4-year non-competitive institutions. Because these trends are especially pertinent to immigrant states, we use data from Texas to illustrate the pipeline from high school educational aspirations to actual college destinations.	Sigal	 Alon	Marta	 Tienda
2006	37	Racial Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	The Effect of Source Country on the Academic Achievement of Foreign-Born Students in New York City Public Schools	Many of today’s immigrant students outperform or equal their native-born peers on traditional measures of school performance. Yet there are substantial, currently under-explored, differences among the foreign-born by their country of birth. This study uncovers and explains these source-country differences using a rich dataset that combines demographic and academic information on the census of New York City elementary and middle school students with information about their schools, surrounding immigrant communities (drawn from Census data), and source countries (drawn from the UN Statistics Division). We examine differences in immigrant test score performance by source country and determine the relative influence of the following characteristics: student (e.g., poverty); school (e.g., teacher experience); co-ethnic immigrant community (e.g., % of Haitians in NYC who are married); and source country economic and social indicators (e.g., GDP). Preliminary results indicate large source-country differences in test scores that are not explained by student and school characteristics.	Dylan	 Conger
2006	37	Racial Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	Networks to the Future: Summer Job Contacts and Job Quality for College Students	Students take on jobs or internships during the summer to get a glimpse at possible career choices and perhaps to pave the way toward obtaining a job in that organization following graduation. Because little is known about the types of summer jobs students hold while in college or how they obtained these jobs, this paper looks at job search methods, types of summer jobs, and earnings for a sample of nearly 4,000 black, white, Asian, and Hispanic students from 28 colleges and universities. Of particular interest is the use of school-based contacts to obtain employment, since it is these contacts that have the greatest potential to level the playing field for students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Students who found their summer jobs through these institutional contacts had significantly higher earnings and held positions with higher occupational prestige than students using most other methods.	Mary	J. Fischer
2006	37	Racial Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	Social Capital and Racial Inequality in Labor Force Participation	Though sociologists have long theorized about the role of social capital in producing individual level economic outcomes, considerable problems with the measurement of social capital at the community-level have plagued its empirical testing. However, with the release of recent datasets on social capital, the Social Capital Benchmark Survey and the Community Indicators Project, it is now possible to measure social capital more precisely for 89 communities in the United States. Building on this recent development, we extend prior work examining racial inequality in labor market outcomes by adding a community-level social capital component and investigating its influence on racial inequality in employment at the individual level.	Colleen	 Heflin	Seok-Woo	 Kwon
2006	38	The Macroeconomics of Population Aging: International Comparisons	Demographic Change, Savings, and International Capital Flows: Theory and Evidence	Falling mortality and fertility rates, in conjunction with the post-World War II baby boom in developed countries, are generating a period of unprecedented population aging. Since savings rates, labor supply, and worker productivity vary with age, demographic change affects aggregate economic outcomes – via both accounting and behavior mechanisms. We build a benchmark theoretical model that generates predictions regarding retirement, aggregate savings, investment, and international capital flows. The model provides a framework for estimating how demographic factors have affected national savings rates and international capital flows. We find that (a) the effect of increased longevity is to increase age at retirement in countries without mandatory retirement and to increase savings in countries with mandatory retirement; (b) pay-as-you-go systems lower aggregate savings; and (c) models that omit longevity and institutional arrangements from the empirical specifications give incorrect estimates of the effect of changes in the age structure on aggregate economic outcomes.	David	 Canning	Rick	 Mansfield	Michael	 Moore
2006	38	The Macroeconomics of Population Aging: International Comparisons	Workforce Aging and Economic Productivity: The Role of Demand for Labor	The aim of this paper is to study the sensitivity of projected  economic productivity (measured by output per worker) for the G7 countries with respect to projected labor force participation rates, the age-productivity profiles of workers and the degree of substitutability of workers at different ages. Simulations suggest that in a pure labor economy, the assumption of imperfect substitution of workers at different ages implies a dividend from workforce aging during the next decades. Workforce aging implies that the actual age distribution of the workforce can be expected to shift closer to the optimal age distribution generating a dividend in terms of aggregate productivity. Simulations suggest  that the dividend is likely to be non-trivial in magnitude,  although the size of the effect depends very much on the values of elasticities of substitution, about which little is known.	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Thomas	 Fent	Ross	 Guest
2006	38	The Macroeconomics of Population Aging: International Comparisons	The Dynamics of Age Structure, Dependency and Consumption	This paper considers the evolution of the population age structure and consumption, focusing on the relationship between fertility and economic dependency due to intergenerational transfers. We develop a new continuous-time overlapping generations model that captures these dynamics. Authors such as Bloom, Canning and Sevilla (2001) highlight the short-term consumption benefits of reduced youth dependency after a reduction in fertility. However, the quantitative predictions of our model suggest that the fertility rates exhibited by highly-developed nations are so low that they will ultimately lead to an increase in transfers to the elderly that more than offsets this “demographic dividend.” As mortality rates fall among the elderly, an even higher share of income will need to be diverted toward old-age support. We demonstrate that workers respond by further reducing their fertility, leading to an even deeper demographic deficit.	Heinrich	 Hock	David	N. Weil
2006	38	The Macroeconomics of Population Aging: International Comparisons	Growth and Longevity from the Industrial Revolution to the Future of an Aging Society	The paper compares two radically different methods to evaluate how age structure and life expectancy may have contributed to the historical evolution of GDP per capita in Sweden. One method is based on simulation of a theoretical model mapping population structure and survival  functions into income growth through an education mechanism. This model is calibrated on Swedish population data back to the 18th century. The other model, based on the same variables is estimated on post-war global data (111 countries, 45 annual observations). The  estimation results show that increasing life expectancy prolongs the positive effects of increasing shares of the population in working ages. The estimated relationship is used to backcast income growth in Sweden back to the Industrial Revolution. The path of the simulation model falls well within the 95% confidence interval of the backcast, which in turn tracks the Maddison GDP/cap estimates back to around 1870.	Thomas	 Lindh	Bo	 Malmberg	David	 de la Croix
2006	38	The Macroeconomics of Population Aging: International Comparisons	Aging, the Lifecycle, and Macroeconomics: An International Perspective	This paper will analyze the macroeconomic effects of changes in population age structure that arise because productivity and consumption vary over the lifecycle. The paper draws on a comparative international project covering the populations of Brazil, Chile, China, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, and the United States. Analyses of recent household surveys, administrative records, national income and product accounts, and other data sources yield estimates of age profiles of consumption, production and age reallocations achieved primarily through familial support systems, public transfer programs, and capital accumulation. These data will be used to simulate the changes in support ratios due to projected changes in the population age distribution and to assess the implications for capital accumulation, labor productivity, and economic growth. We will consider how variations in the policy environment, i.e., the systems for reallocating resources across age, influence the economic implications of population aging.	Andrew	 Mason	Ronald	 Lee
2006	39	Advances in Methodology	Mortality Selection and Cohort Differences in Patterns of Cognitive Aging	This paper focuses on the problem of unmeasured heterogeneity in cohort-specific aging functions resulting from mortality selection. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study we examine the possibility of cohort effects on estimates of functions that describe normal cognitive aging. An examination of cohort-specific slopes and intercepts in latent growth curve models of aging functions suggests the existence of significant differences, net of schooling, in cohort-specific intercepts in functions describing normal cognitive aging. One explanation for these cohort differences in intercepts is mortality selection, given the heterogeneity among existing cohort survivors in susceptibility to death and disease. We propose that controlling for cohort differences in expected age at death reduces the observed differences in intercepts, and that it may be important to account for heterogeneity in cohort experiences—including residues of historical experiences, but also variables linked to survivorship in both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of cognitive aging.	Duane	 Alwin	Ryan	 McCammon	Linda	 Wray	Willard	 Rodgers
2006	39	Advances in Methodology	Mapping the Exact Relations between Overall Inequality and Inequality between Subgroups	Social scientists study two kinds of inequality: overall inequality (as in income inequality) and inequality between subgroups (as in racial inequality). This paper analyzes the connections between these two kinds of inequality. The paper proceeds by exploring a set of two-parameter continuous probability distributions. We define a general inequality parameter, which governs all measures of inequality (such as the Gini coefficient), and we link the general inequality parameter to the gap between the means of subdistributions. In this way we establish that as overall inequality increases, inequality between subgroups increases also.	Samuel	 Kotz
2006	39	Advances in Methodology	A Bayesian Approach to the Problem of Anticipatory Covariates in the Analysis of Retrospective Demographic Data	Some of the most important explanatory variables in retrospective demographic data, such as educational level and social class, are measured at the interview time but are used in investigations of behavior in life segments that occur before the interview. An interesting question would then be to what extent the changes in the behavior under study can be attributed to changes (misclassification) in the distribution of individuals across the various levels of, say education; and to what extent they reflect real differences in the behavior of interest. The present study uses Bayesian approaches in order to utilize available information in defining appropriate priors and estimating posterior patterns of relative intensities of the event of interest across the levels of the anticipatory variable. The issues addressed are illustrated by estimating effects of education and social class on entry into and exit from family unions among Swedish men born in 1936-64.	Gebrenegus	 Ghilagaber
2006	39	Advances in Methodology	Two-Sided Estimation of Mate Preferences for Similarities in Age, Education, and Religion	We propose a two-sided method to simultaneously estimate men's and women's preferences for characteristics of potential mates using cross-sectional data on married and single persons. Mean preference coefficients determine the average degree to which measured characteristics of individuals affect others' evaluations of them as marital partners. The model also accounts for variation of preferences around the means and for limitations in information about members of the opposite sex. Fixed effects are used to control for characteristics not present in our data that may be observed by the opposite sex. By assuming voluntary matching, we estimate preferences without having to specify details of the matching process, making our method robust to unknown features of the process. We apply the method to data from the first wave of the National Survey of Families and Households to estimate men's and women's preferences for relative age, education and religious affiliation characteristics of potential mates.	John	Allen  Logan	Peter	D. Hoff	Michael	A. Newton
2006	40	Work, Child Care and Fertility	The Impact of Economic Variables on the Timing of Births and Parity Progression Ratio: A Question Revisited for an Individual Panel of French Women	The question of impact of women’s salaries on the timing of births and parity progression has gained a renewed interest: with increasing unemployment spells for men, the traditional dominating substitution effect (which has introduced a drop in fertility with rising women’s wages since a child become much more costly) can be cancelled by (i) the income effect (a high salary also has the consequence of releasing/loosening budget constraints which prevent the number of children per family from increasing); and (ii) generous maternity leaves. In this paper we thoroughly investigate these relations, using a multi state dynamic duration model implemented on long term individual panel data–with instrumented individual salaries and taking into account unobserved heterogeneity in two manners. We test economic versus demographic models. There is indeed a negative impact of women’s wages on the timing of births for every parity. Maternity leaves nevertheless partly compensate for this negative impact.	Olivia	 Ekert-Jaffe	Rémi	 Mougin
2006	40	Work, Child Care and Fertility	Fertility and Its Consequence on Family Labor Market Participation	While a large body of literature focuses on how  fertility affects female labor market participation, there are relatively few studies that examine the effect of fertility on male labor market outcomes. Even if the burden of child care falls mainly on women, an exogenous increase in fertility is likely to change the optimal allocation of time, therefore, the labor supply decision of both women and men in a household. This paper examines how an exogenous increase in fertility affects the labor market participation of a woman and a man in a household in Indonesia. The finding is that women reduce their working hours in response to higher fecundity. On the other hand, higher fecundity does not lead to men increasing or decreasing their working hours. Further, there is no evidence that fertility affects female or male earnings.	Jungho	 Kim	Arnstein	 Aassve
2006	40	Work, Child Care and Fertility	Does More Support in Children's Care Make a Difference in Working Women's Fertility?	Women have always been devoted to the care of their children, and they keep primary responsibility even when they are involved in the labor market. Partner cooperation, family networks, and institutions can provide women with support, relieving some of the burden of childcare tasks. A greater source of support may improve fertility expectations. This paper aims at verifying this hypothesis in Italy, a country with very low fertility. Women’s, even mothers', participation in the labor market has recently become remarkable. We intend to verify whether women receive more help when they work, both from their partner and the family network and from institutions, and whether greater support improves fertility expectations. We utilize the ISTAT Survey on Births, which allows the study of both the actual fertility of women who had a child 18-24 months before the interview, and their fertility expectations.	Antonella	 Pinnelli	Francesca	 Fiori
2006	40	Work, Child Care and Fertility	Recent Childbearing and the Search for Employment: How Do Migrants Differ?	Although the relationship between childbearing and female employment has been extensively examined, few studies have investigated whether the impact of childbearing on female labor force outcomes varies by migration status. Such studies are needed because migrants have unique child bearing patterns and, unlike non-migrants, have limited access to kin-based child care options. This study focuses on recent mothers who are unemployed and examines how the likelihood of seeking employment during the year following child-birth varies by migration status. Our preliminary results show that, while migrant women had a lower likelihood of seeking employment than non-migrants, immigrant women who were never married were least likely to do so. Furthermore, some household demographic characteristics have a differential impact on the likelihood of seeking employment that is conditional on migration status. The results also suggest that disparities in the likelihood of seeking employment are associated with child care options and socioeconomic status.	Kevin	J.A. Thomas
2006	41	Cohabitation in International Perspective	Unmarried Cohabitation and Family Formation in Japan	Recent studies have documented a rapid increase in nonmarital cohabitation in Japan. In this paper, we use nationally representative data to examine the relationship between cohabitation experience and the transition to marriage and parenthood among Japanese women. Using the results of discrete-time hazard models to construct synthetic cohort trajectories, we compare the transition to first marriage and first birth among women who have lived in a cohabiting union with those who have not. Cumulative marriage trajectories indicate that (a) cohabitation experience is not strongly associated with marriage timing and (b) differences in the transition to marriage at early ages likely reflect a higher incidence of premarital pregnancy among women who have ever cohabited. Cumulative first birth trajectories suggest that nonmarital unions are heterogeneous, with cohabitation experience associated with a faster transition to parenthood through age 27 and a slower transition to parenthood thereafter.	James	 Raymo	Miho	 Iwasawa
2006	41	Cohabitation in International Perspective	Mortality of Cohabitants with Common Children versus Married with Children: A Study Based on Norwegian Register Data 1987-2003	The association between marital status and mortality has been analyzed in many studies. However, marital status is now a less-suitable indicator of social relations than a few decades ago, particularly in the Nordic countries. This paper uses event history techniques and Norwegian register data to estimate effects on mortality of consensual unions and parenthood, as well as marital status history. The longitudinal and individual-level data covers the whole population, while most other studies with similar data have analyzed very small sample sizes. The following questions will be addressed: 1) How do the cause-specific mortality rates among cohabitants with common children compare to those of the married?; 2) Have the differences diminished over time?; 3) Do the mortality risks of cohabitants with common children change if marrying each other?; and  4) Do the mortality risks after a break-up of cohabitation with common children differ from that of a corresponding divorce?	Svenn-Erik	 Mamelund
2006	41	Cohabitation in International Perspective	Meanings and Attitudes Attached to Cohabitation in Poland: Qualitative Analyses of the Slow Diffusion of Cohabitation among the Young Generation	In recent years, the European family has been undergoing many transitions, including a “shift from the golden age of marriage to the dawn of cohabitation” (van der Kaa, 1987). This process has not been uniform across Europe (e.g.: Kiernan, 2002). Poland, 15 years after the fall of the communist regime, follows many demographic trends of Western Europe but still reports an extremely low level of cohabitation (1.3% - National Census, 2002).   The aim of this paper is to investigate the meanings and attitudes attached to pre-marital cohabitation and to cohabitation as an alternative to marriage, thus addressing the issue of future of cohabitation in Poland. First, some relevant statistics concerning cohabitation will be presented, followed by an overview of survey results. The data will be enriched by qualitative analyses to gain an in-depth understanding of the virtual lack of cohabitation in Poland with its concurrent approval expressed in surveys.	Monika	 Mynarska
2006	41	Cohabitation in International Perspective	Cohabitation in Italy: Do Parents Matter?	Over the last two decades, Europe has witnessed the spreading of a new phenomenon: cohabitation. Whereas this modern living arrangement has become relatively widespread in most European countries, it has been rather hesitant in developing in Italy. The welfare state structure of this country, a high rate of unemployment, and tight housing are factors which hamper the diffusion of cohabitation. Researchers so far have assumed that traditionally strong family ties between parents and their adult children have been responsible for the slow spread of extramarital unions. Our research, however, produces different results: there is evidence that the educational degree of the mother influences to a large extent the transition to cohabitation of women in Italy. Using the Indagine longitudinale sulle famiglie italiane (ILFI) of 1997 and 1999, we estimate multiplicative intensity models for the transition to (i) cohabitation as first relationship; and (ii) direct marriage of women in Italy.	Christin	 Schroeder
2006	42	Influences of Health on Socioeconomic Status	Reciprocal Relationships between Nonstandard Work and Health in the United States	In the last several decades labor market opportunities have changed as employers have pursued a model of “flexible work,” separating employees into a core group with stable, continuous and secure jobs, and a peripheral group employed in involuntary and at-will nonstandard jobs. Nonstandard employment has been identified as an emerging population health issue, but existing evidence for health effects is mixed. Using longitudinal data from a nationally-representative sample of U.S. adults and a sample of single mothers who received TANF in 1997, this analysis explores the characteristics of workers in nonstandard (and standard) employment and the consequences for subsequent health. Using unique data on health and economic shocks, as well as repeated measures of respondents’ health over time, we also assess the degree to which health predicts employment arrangements. Finally, we distinguish between people who prefer working under nonstandard arrangements and those who would rather work under a standard contract.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Mary	E. Corcoran	Jennie	E. Brand
2006	42	Influences of Health on Socioeconomic Status	Reciprocal Relations between Parental Employment Experiences and Child, Mother, and Father Health	In this study, we assess physical health-based selection into unemployment and job loss, as well as the effect of these circumstances on physical health, focusing on health changes and changes in employment circumstances over a two-year period. Our study considers the health of fathers, mothers, and children and examines the employment circumstances of fathers and mothers in a nationally representative sample of two-parent married families. Doing so allows us to pose the question of whether, for example, mothers’ (or children’s) health affects fathers’ employment circumstances (and whether the converse is also true) and, further, whether the health consequences of job loss extend beyond the job loser him or herself. Further, we examine a wider array of employment circumstances than has been studied in previous research (including persistent unemployment, voluntary and involuntary job separations, and underemployment), and we also assess differences for low versus high-income families.	Ariel	 Kalil	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2006	42	Influences of Health on Socioeconomic Status	Why Do Unhealthy Children Do Worse in School? Understanding the Link between Race, Health and Education	This project considers childhood health as a determinant of educational disparities among older children and young adults. While poor health has often been studied as a consequence of childhood and/or family socioeconomic conditions, it is also clear that illness and poor health during childhood have lasting socioeconomic effects. What is less established is why poor health during childhood may influence educational outcomes later in life. I use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) Children and Young Adult files and the NLSY97 to examine mechanisms that may mediate the connection between children’s health and educational attainment in young adulthood. In addition, I consider the extent to which childhood health disparities account for racial disparities in educational outcomes in young adulthood. While childhood health disparities may contribute to educational disparities among the general population, they may also play a role in creating and maintaining the racial achievement gap that is so persistent in American society.	Margot	I. Jackson
2006	42	Influences of Health on Socioeconomic Status	Weight and Fertility: Complex Links between Overweight, Childbearing and Socioeconomic Status	Dramatic increases in obesity, especially among youth, have made it one of the largest public health crises facing the US. Increasingly, researchers are exploring the determinants of obesity, but the links between weight gains and the social facets of young people's lives have received little attention. In this study, we lay out theoretical reasons why obesity/overweight might be linked with nonmarital childbearing and age at first birth. We focus on young women since both the stigma of overweight/obesity and the consequences of nonmarital and early childbearing are greater for women. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth, we investigate the causal ordering of these relationships and consider whether obesity/overweight is associated with nonmarital and early childbearing due to the influence of socioeconomic status on them both. Our findings help disentangle how weight intertwines with aspects of family formation important for future socioeconomic position during the transition to adulthood.	Margaret	M. Weden	Michelle	L. Frisco	Ju-Hong	 Lee
2006	42	Influences of Health on Socioeconomic Status	Immediate and Longer-term Effects of Health on Socioeconomic Success	Iron deficiency is widespread throughout the developing world, particularly among older adults. We provide new evidence for the effect of iron deficiency on an array of indicators of socio-economic success drawing on a random assignment treatment control intervention we implemented. The Work and Iron Status Evaluation follows over 10,000 older adults in Central Java, Indonesia. Half the respondents received a treatment of 100 mg of iron every week for a year; the controls received a placebo. We focus on income, asset accumulation, physical and psycho-social health, and time allocated to work, leisure and family. Contrasting changes in these outcomes for treatments with changes in outcomes for controls, we measure the causal effect of iron supplementation on these indicators of socio-economic status shortly after supplementation started and when supplementation ended. To assess the longevity of these effects, we compare treatments with controls one year and two years after supplementation ended	Duncan	 Thomas	Christopher	 McKelvey	Bondan	 Sikoki
2006	43	Domestic Violence, Sexual Behaviors, and Reproductive Health	Are Attitudes towards Domestic Violence Associated with Risky Sexual Behaviors among Men and Women in Kazakhstan?	This paper utilizes data from the 1999 Demographic and Health Survey in Kazakhstan to examine associations between domestic violence tolerance among men and women and reported sexual behaviors, including multiple partnerships, contraceptive behavior, and frequency of intercourse. Using logistic regression, I find that lifetime condom usage declines significantly with increasing domestic violence tolerance for both men and women or all ages and marital statuses, and that recent condom use significantly decreases with increasing tolerance of domestic violence among men. The likelihood of multiple sexual partners in the last year increases significantly with increasing tolerance of domestic violence for young men and for unmarried women. Domestic violence tolerance does not seem to have a significant effect on sexual frequency. Using attitudes towards domestic violence as a proxy for power within intimate relationships, these findings highlight the association between the status of women and sexual risk of HIV and other STIs.	Annie	 Dude
2006	43	Domestic Violence, Sexual Behaviors, and Reproductive Health	Consent and Coercion: Examining Unwanted Sex within Marriage	Despite increased recognition of the pervasiveness of domestic violence and its association with reproductive health outcomes, many aspects remain poorly understood. One such gap concerns understanding and measuring sexual coercion. Sexual coercion exists along a continuum of behaviors, from threats and intimidation, to sex that may not be perceived as forced but is nonetheless unwanted, to rape. Yet most studies have looked primarily at forced sex. The few studies examining more subtle forms of coercion have shown that respondents, given the opportunity, specify experiences of sex that are not forced per se, but are unwanted. Such studies have indicated a considerably higher proportion of non-consensual sexual experiences than questions of forced sex alone elicit. In this paper, we present findings from a cross-sectional study in rural India on the extent of unwanted sexual experiences among young married women/girls, the various underlying factors, associated reproductive health outcomes, and methodological insights.	K.G.	 Santhya	Nicole	A. Haberland	F.	 Ram	Rabindra	Kumar  Sinha
2006	43	Domestic Violence, Sexual Behaviors, and Reproductive Health	Domestic Violence and Gynecological Morbidity in Uttar Pradesh, India	This study examines the impact of physical and sexual domestic violence on self-reported gynecological morbidity among married women of reproductive age (15-45) in Uttar Pradesh, India, using matched couple data from the 1995-96 PERFORM System of Indicators Survey. A logistic regression model is fitted, with experiencing symptoms of gynecological morbidity as the outcome. The key individual variable of interest is whether the husband reports physical and/or sexual domestic violence towards his wife (data on domestic violence is collected only from the husband). The study finds evidence of a positive relationship between experiencing domestic violence and a woman’s self-reporting of gynecological morbidity. Women who experience both sexual and physical violence are the most likely to report gynecological morbidity, although there is no independent effect of physical violence on gynecological morbidity. The results indicate a number of pathways, including physical and psychological, through which violence influences gynecological morbidity.	Rob	 Stephenson	Michael	 Koenig
2006	43	Domestic Violence, Sexual Behaviors, and Reproductive Health	Sexually Transmitted Infections and Violence against Women: A Lifecourse Perspective	Both childhood and adult victimization have been found to be associated with sexually transmitted infections, but studies have rarely looked at both events simultaneously. Because women who experience child abuse are more likely to be victimized as adults, having information on abuse both during childhood and adulthood would be important for understanding the relationship with sexually transmitted infection, which could allow for more targeted interventions. This paper examines the relationship between different forms of violence experienced by women and STIs using data from a case-control study of 301 women. In unadjusted analyses, women with STIs had higher mean childhood emotional abuse scores, more reports of childhood sexual abuse, and increased rates of emotional, physical, and sexual abuse as adults.	Corrine	 Williams	Ulla	M. Larsen	Laura	 McCloskey
2006	44	The Future of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic	Impacts of HIV and Population-Wide Treatment on the Elderly in a Simulated African Population	The HIV/AIDS pandemic is reshaping the populations of sub-Saharan Africa through increasing mortality and decreasing fertility. A two-sex, stochastic microsimulator is used to describe some of the HIV-related impacts on the structure of infected populations similar to those living in Southern Africa, with an emphasis on the consequences for the elderly and the effects of population-wide treatment. After 40 years of epidemic the growth rate is reduced to zero or below; the age structure converges on a younger shape; the number of orphans rises to 37 percent (maternal), 30 percent (paternal) and 22 percent (dual) of all children alive below age 15; and the percentage of adults aged 50 and older who have surviving grandchildren but no surviving children rises to 23 percent (females) and 13 percent (males). The impacts of preventative and antiretroviral treatment programs initiated in year 31 of the 40 year simulations are described and compared.	Samuel	J. Clark
2006	44	The Future of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic	HIV Prevalence and Orphan Household Distribution in a Rural Malawi District	Orphan population growth has generated considerable interest among researchers, leading to progress in identifying and resolving problems related to the measurement of orphans. This emerging literature lacks information related to the distribution of orphans. We cannot say, in any systematic way, how orphans are fostered, by whom, under what circumstances, with which siblings, and at what age. We draw on a household survey—including geocodes, data on respondent's HIV status, orphan rosters maintained by villages, and qualitative interviews. We explore issues related to the care and distribution of orphans, the prevalence and distribution of orphans and HIV, and orphan prevalence by variance in household material composition, as well as age and gender of head of household. We conclude by considering a number of methodological issues that arise from the analysis, focusing in particular on survey designs that could improve the identification and reporting of orphans and their residential arrangements.	Peter	C. Fleming	Alexander	 Weinreb
2006	44	The Future of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic	Population Dynamics and the Environment: Examining the Natural Resource Context of the African HIV/AIDS Pandemic	There is a lack of research on the interaction between demographic dynamics and household natural resource use in less developed regions. This information is especially important, however, given the centrality of the environment within rural livelihoods. Further, natural resources act as a buffer against household shocks, offering a potential means of generating income and/or meeting dietary needs. Herein, we focus on HIV/AIDS mortality as a household shock in rural South Africa; We contrast household resource use across households characterized by the death of a household member aged 15-49 relative to those without such mortality. As examples of potential impacts, the loss of an adult household member may yield changes as related to resource use resultant of lost income and/or lost labor; each entails opportunity costs with regard to the time allocation of remaining household members. The results contribute to our emerging understanding of the environmental dimensions of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.	Lori	M. Hunter	Wayne	 Twine	Aaron	 Johnson
2006	44	The Future of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic	Recent Age Patterns of Mortality in Tanzania: An Examination of the Impact of HIV/AIDS	Recent studies on mortality in Africa have found stagnations or reversals of mortality in countries where HIV prevalence is high. We use verbal autopsy (VA) data from three communities in Tanzania to examine causes of death and age patterns of mortality, and whether these patterns reflect a significant impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Age- and sex-specific death rates by cause are compared with estimates from national populations with similar mortality conditions. We examine the extent to which the observed age patterns of mortality conform to the existing model life table systems. Using standard age patterns of mortality from different causes, we investigate the impact of HIV/AIDS on the age curves and cause-of-death structure. Consistent with other studies, our findings show high levels of adult mortality for both men and women in their most productive ages, and that HIV/AIDS pandemic largely contributes to distortions in the underlying age patterns of mortality.	Robert	G. Mswia	Tukufu	 Zuberi
2006	45	Comparative Perspectives on Gender Inequality	Gender Inequality: An Assessment of World Trends in Economic, Political, Health, and Educational Gender Differences	Using population adjusted cross-national data, this research documents trends in global gender inequality from 1970 to 2000 using indicators covering economic, political, educational and health domains. Absolute gender inequality increased among paid adult workers, surviving adults, literate adults, total years of school attainment and life expectancy over the period measured. When measured by gender ratios and gender gini’s, relative inequality between females and males decreased for all indicators except life expectancy. There was, however, considerable variation in the rate of change among the indicators for which gender inequality decreased. By the year 2000 global gender inequality was highest among national legislators (gini=.704) and lowest in life expectancy at birth (gini=.019). Population growth simulations suggest that the effect of rapidly declining within-nation inequality on global gender inequality has been partially offset by rapid growth in countries where gender inequality is high.	Shawn	F. Dorius
2006	45	Comparative Perspectives on Gender Inequality	Gender Bias against Female Children in India: Regional Differences and their Implications for MDGs	The millennium development goals accorded highest priorities for achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment. South Asian countries and India are societies with strong patriarchal norms, a high degree of son preference and pervasive gender discriminations. Using National family health survey (1998-99) data, this paper adopts a multiple indicator approach to study gender bias on the basis of a series of female by male ratios with respect to school attendance, use of preventive and curative health care services and child nutrition status. Marked gender differences are demonstrated with respect to each of these indicators. The gender bias indices of immunization coverage and school attendance, however, indicate consistent sex differences, suggesting systematic neglect of female children. Considerable inequalities amongst the states are also demonstrated. Except in south Indian states, the odds of female children being underweight and discriminated against in preventive and curative care and in school attendance are significant.	Perianayagam	 Arokiasamy	Jalandhar	 Pradhan
2006	45	Comparative Perspectives on Gender Inequality	Disempowered by Whom? Gender vs. Generation	Research on gender has been greatly enhanced by the inclusion of decision-making questions in many household surveys. Our concern in this paper is that one potential line of research with these questions has been overlooked and that this neglect may limit our understanding of the results of earlier analyses. The questions actually tap into more than just a gender dimension of household decision-making. Women frequently respond that fathers-in-law or mothers-in-law have an important voice in these decisions. We argue that by ignoring the full dynamics of power distributions within a family, we may be conflating inequalities of gender with those of generation and thereby mis-specifying our models of empowerment. We use data from the new 40,000 household, India Human Development Survey, 2004-2005, to examine how a respondent’s lack of power is a function of gender and/or generation.	Mitali	 Sen	Sonya	 Rastogi
2006	45	Comparative Perspectives on Gender Inequality	Occupational Segregation in Post-Apartheid South Africa: The Interplay of Gender, Race, and Place	In South Africa, apartheid has exacerbated inequities in labor force outcomes, not just between the various races (Black Africans, Whites, Coloureds, and Asian-Indians), but also between the sexes. However, empirical knowledge of the interplay between these two systems of social oppression in determining occupational segregation remains somewhat scant. Using the 2001 Census, I will analyze occupational segregation in South Africa. The main objectives of the study are: 1) to describe the separate, and then interacting, roles of gender and race in determining an individual’s placement in gender segregated occupations; and 2) to analyze how micro-level determinants such as human capital and family structure interact with race and gender to influence an individual’s placement in gender segregated occupations across different geographical provinces.	Sangeeta	 Parashar
2006	45	Comparative Perspectives on Gender Inequality	The Concept of Shapley Decomposition and the Study of Occupational Segregation	This paper generalizes a decomposition procedure originally proposed by Karmel and McLachlan. The idea is to combine their approach with what is now known as the Shapley decomposition. Such a generalization offers a clear breakdown of the variation over time in occupational segregation (change in gross segregation) into one component measuring changes in net segregation and another one corresponding to changes in the margin, the latter itself including variations in the occupational structure and in the shares of subpopulations (e.g., genders) in the labor force. This new decomposition may easily be extended to cases where more than two categories are distinguished or when there are more than three dimensions. The results of the empirical illustration are based on Swiss data for 1970 and 2000 and prove the usefulness of the approach. They stress in particular that in several instances variations in gross and net segregation work in opposite directions.	Jacques	 Silber	Joseph	 Deutsch	Yves	 Flueckiger
2006	46	Social Insurance and Health	Welfare Reform and Indirect Impacts on Health	Recent welfare reforms led to significant changes in the safety net for low income families with children, beginning with state waivers from the former AFDC program, and culminated with passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act, which eliminated AFDC and replaced it with TANF. These reforms imposed time limits and financial sanctions, strengthened work requirements, enhanced financial work incentives, and limited the eligible population. The main goals of the reforms were to increase employment, reduce reliance on welfare, and encourage formation of two-parent families. We explore the effects of reform effects on health insurance, health care utilization, and health outcomes, using experimental data from five states' welfare waivers to evaluate treatment-control group differences in outcomes. Findings vary across state. Effects on health insurance coverage several years after random assignment are small and in line with findings from the non-experimental literature. Effects on utilization and health status are smaller and generally insignificant.	Marianne	 Bitler	Hilary	W. Hoynes
2006	46	Social Insurance and Health	Pent-up Demand and the Discovery of New Health Conditions after Medicare Enrollment	Recent evidence shows that those who obtain insurance coverage via Medicare at age 65 experience increases in the utilization of certain types of preventive and curative care that are larger than those experiences by the previously insured. Pent-up demand may lead to a “discovery effect” where new conditions are diagnosed once better access to medical care is available. Here, Cox models are used on a sample of respondents from the HRS to assess the differential rate of new diagnoses of chronic conditions upon enrolling on Medicare. Results indicate a higher rate of increase in the diagnosis of most chronic conditions among the previously uninsured relative to the insured upon obtaining Medicare coverage. Because failing to obtain a timely diagnosis can lead to improper disease management and poorer health outcomes, these results suggest that access to care for the uninsured prior to age 65 may improve health trajectories of Medicare recipients.	Jody	 Schimmel
2006	46	Social Insurance and Health	The Effect of Disability Insurance on Health Investment	This paper examines whether individuals are more likely to know their health status after the advent of disability insurance. The internal rate of return of knowing one's health status reflects both the opportunity cost associated with a medical visit and the expected benefits derived from any new information that results. A potential disability payment increases this internal return by increasing expected benefits. The rates of diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes among veteran males are examined before and after diabetes mellitus became a compensable disability under the Department of Veterans Affairs disability compensation program. I find that the diagnostic rate of diabetes increased considerably immediately after policy implementation, and that the onset of new diabetes cases can explain only a fraction of this growth.	Perry	 Singleton
2006	46	Social Insurance and Health	Are There Health Returns to Transfer Income? An Instrumental Variable Approach	Do redistributive income transfer programs improve the health of at-risk populations and work to reduce health disparities? Estimating the health returns of transfer income, and attempting to answer this question, can be very tricky because selection into different income transfer programs may lead to various forms of bias. In this paper, I use data from the March Current Population Survey to estimate the health returns of transfer income, attempting to factor out possible selection biases by using state-level policy variations as instrumental variables. More specifically, I run separate analyses for unemployment insurance and the Earned Income Tax Credit, using state variations in the policies that govern these programs as sources of exogenous variation.	Kate	W. Strully
2006	47	The Demography of California	Three Demographic Waves and the Transformation of the Los Angeles Region, 1970-2000		John	 Pitkin
2006	47	The Demography of California	Why is LAUSD's Enrollment Declining if the Los Angeles Region's Population is Growing?	Here we look into possible explanations for the Los Angeles Unified School District’s trend-bucking behavior by examining and contrasting LAUSD student population dynamics relative to the populations of LA City, LA County and Southern California. Our working hypothesis is that the population growth observed in these areas is not fueled by increases in households with school-aged children who would be candidates for attending LAUSD, but rather by increases in households with few or no children. Further, although we had been expecting a decline in LAUSD enrollment due to a decrease in LA County births since 1990, the decline has been happening at a faster rate then we would have expected if it were being driven by decreasing births alone. Preliminary evidence suggests that out-migration is taking place among households whose children would have historically attended LAUSD, and that this out-migration has been accelerating the rate of LAUSD's enrollment decline.	Valerie	 Edwards	Mary	 Prichard	Erick	 Posner	Michael	 Gainor
2006	47	The Demography of California	Eastward Ho! Population Movement to California's Interior and Beyond	The past decade has shown an an eastward surge from the coastal regions of California, including greater Los Angeles and San Francisco, toward the central part of the state. Central California now competes with surrounding state destinations like Nevada and Arizona for coastal out-migrants in search of affordable housing and a more suburban lifestyle. This paper employs US Census sources and IRS migration data to examine the size, race and class characteristics of these flows and, along with immigration, their impacts on the major regions of the state. The middle class flight from coastal California to its central region and other western states, is contrasted with a similar flight from expensive northeast metropolitan areas to farther flung exurbs and metro areas in faster growing southeastern states.	William	H. Frey
2006	47	The Demography of California	Political Demography of a Contested Future: Demographic Transition, Age Groups, and Ethnic Divisions	California is in the midst of a great demographic transition with several dimensions. From 1970 through 2030, the foreign stock is growing from a small percentage to more than 50% of the population, and the ethnic mix is passing from mostly white, to majority minority, and then majority Latino. Near the middle of the transition in 1990 through 2010, there is substantial political friction. Long established residents view immigrants as a burden and resist the decline of their own ethnic group. Whites have fallen to 32% of public school children, yet still hold a two-thirds majority among voters. Not yet seeing their interests tied to the rising generation, whites often vote against the interests of the incoming majority who are the future. This study integrates political opinion data with demographics of age, ethnicity, and nativity. A longer run demographic perspective helps place current decisions in better context.	Dowell	 Myers
2006	48	Residential Segregation	Inside the Black Box of 'White Flight': The Role of Suburban Political Autonomy and Public Goods	Why did white households relocate to the suburbs in response to black in-migration, despite the presence of many all-white neighborhoods within segregated cities? By moving, residents could avoid compromising with black arrivals on property taxes and public expenditures and sending their children to diverse public schools. I use housing prices to reveal the marginal willingness to pay for this suburban autonomy by comparing neighboring blocks that fall on either side of city-suburban borders in 1970. To account for fixed differences in the housing stock, for example due to zoning, I also examine relative changes in housing prices across borders over time. Housing prices in diverse jurisdictions are worth 1.5-3.0 percent less than their suburban neighbors. The correlation between race and poverty – and the resulting increase in city property tax rates – accounts for half of this relationship. Parental preferences for white classmates in local public schools are also important.	Leah	Platt Boustan
2006	48	Residential Segregation	The Durability of the Gautreaux Two Residential Mobility Program: A Qualitative Analysis of Who Stays and Who Moves from Low-Poverty Neighborhoods	This paper explores the durability of the Gautreaux Two housing mobility program, implemented in 2002, which gave low-income residents of Chicago public housing a special voucher providing them with the opportunity to move to more advantaged neighborhoods—neighborhoods in which at least 76.5 percent of households were non-poor and 70 percent were non-black. We conducted four waves of in-depth qualitative interviews with a randomly chosen sample of 91 families. Among those who moved, we compare those who made secondary moves to those who stayed at their Gautreaux placement addresses. There were several key factors motivating secondary moves, including feelings of social isolation, distance from kin, transportation difficulties, hassles with landlords, and substandard unit quality. We discuss why some secondary movers were able to maintain a level of neighborhood affluence similar to that of their placement neighborhood, while others returned to more disadvantaged neighborhoods, and we also offer policy implications.	Melody	L. Boyd	Kathryn	 Edin	Greg	J. Duncan	Susan	 Clampet-Lundquist
2006	48	Residential Segregation	Dynamic Models of Ethnic and Economic Segregation	Sociology has a long history of carrying out studies using cross-sectional data to describe patterns of segregation in large American cities. While descriptively valuable, this work has not revealed the causal mechanisms that drive neighborhood change. Insofar as change occurs through residential and social mobility, a dynamic approach is required. I develop a model that links the residential mobility of individuals to aggregate patterns of neighborhood change, and use this model to understand how trends in inequality and mobility behavior interact to produce and maintain segregated neighborhoods in Los Angeles. Preliminary findings suggest that, given existing levels of income inequality in Los Angeles, racial and economic factors that govern residential mobility have offsetting effects on racial segregation. Given a number of unresolved modeling issues, however, these findings should be used as an illustration of this approach rather than as a substantive result.	Elizabeth	E. Bruch
2006	48	Residential Segregation	Does Race Matter in the Search for Housing? Search Strategies, Locations, and Experiences	Studies of the causes of racial residential segregation typically focus on three main factors: economics, preferences, and discrimination. But few studies examine the actual housing search procedures and experiences of individuals. Because this is one place where economics, preferences, and discrimination play themselves out, such an analysis can shed light on how these individual level decisions contribute to the perpetuation or attenuation of residential segregation. This paper takes a first step toward this larger goal by testing for: (1) racial/ethnic differences in the resources and strategies used in housing searches; (2) racial/ethnic differences in the locations where people search; (3) whether perceptions of discrimination shape the housing searches of African Americans and Latinos; and (4) whether homeowners and renters differ. I analyze data from computer assisted personal interviews in Chicago (n=783) and Detroit (n=734), which used a multi-stage area probability sample design that over-sampled African Americans and Latinos (in Chicago).	Maria	 Krysan
2006	49	The Impact of Childhood on Adult Health	Environment Before and After Birth and Mortality in Old Age	A growing literature links conditions in infancy, early childhood, and maternal health during pregnancy to mortality in adulthood and old age. Some theorists argue that poor nutrition affects development, while others emphasize the long-run consequences of disease. We take advantage of life histories from three nineteenth-century communities to test hypotheses linking early life environment to old age mortality. Hypotheses involving nutrition imply that high prices around the time of birth should lead to higher mortality in old age, especially for those from poor families. Similarly, exposure to high mortality in early life should be associated with higher mortality in later life. In addition, we expect that different seasonal patterns of infant mortality will be reflected in patterns of longevity by month of birth, and we ask whether variations in prices and exposure to disease in infancy can explain the association between old age mortality and month of birth.	George	 Alter	Michel	 Oris
2006	49	The Impact of Childhood on Adult Health	Old–Age Mortality in a Life Course Perspective: Southern Sweden, 1829–1894	We have previously shown that the disease load experienced during the birth year had a significant net influence on old-age mortality. The question now is whether socioeconomic and other factors during the life course altered this pattern. Longitudinal data on individuals and households comes from five rural parishes in southern Sweden, 1829–1894. Immigrants into the parishes were traced back to their birth parish in order to garner information about the socioeconomic conditions of their early childhood. We use a Cox regression analysis approach with random effects to analyze mortality in ages 55+ years. The total number of deaths is 1,350. We find that the life expectancy at age 55 for those who were landless at the end of their working careers and had been exposed to a heavy disease load in the birth year was significantly shorter vis-à-vis the exposed that were landed.	Tommy	 Bengtsson	Göran	 Broström
2006	49	The Impact of Childhood on Adult Health	Epidemiological Evidence for Viral Exposure in Childhood as a Risk-Factor in Subsequent Influenza Pandemics	The influenza virus offers a simple model for examining Age-Period-Cohort factors in morbidity and mortality. Immuno-senescence is associated with age; the virus changes genetically on a “period” basis; and the acquired immune response is a function of cohort exposure, where the first exposure to influenza in childhood is particularly important. Laboratory methods can be used to analyze immuno-competence by cohort for small samples, but we demonstrate that mortality data can be used to assess the immuno-competence of population cohorts. We apply the technique to epidemics in the last 200 years and show that the impact of genetically new viruses on unexposed-cohorts represents an age-independent proportional increase in the mortality hazard that has declined from 20% to 5%. However, 1918 remains an exception in its scale, non-proportionality, and interaction with previous influenza experience. The results show a clear indication of the importance of childhood exposure and are relevant for pandemic planning.	James	E Oeppen	Chris	 Wilson
2006	49	The Impact of Childhood on Adult Health	Early-Life Conditions and the Onset of Cognitive Impairment among the Oldest-Old in China	Research in developed countries show that early-life conditions are associated with morbidity and mortality in later life. Our paper adds to this growing body of literature by examining the association between early-life conditions and the onset of cognitive impairment among the oldest old in China. We address two questions: (1) Are early-life conditions associated with the onset of cognitive impairment among the oldest old in China?; and (2) Do adult SES, social support, physical health, and lifestyle mediate the effect of early-life environment on cognitive impairment? We draw on two waves (1998-2000) of the Chinese Healthy Longevity Survey. Early-life environment is indexed by place of birth, father’s occupation, whether the subject went to bed hungry in childhood, and education of the subject. Results show that adverse early-life conditions significantly increase the risk of cognitive impairment among the oldest old in china after controlling for various adulthood risk factors.	Zhenmei	 Zhang	Mark	D. Hayward
2006	51	Understanding Mortality Change: Variance, Nonlinearities, Interactions	Using Biomarkers as Indicators of Frailty to Understand Deviation from the Gompertz Mortality Curve at the Oldest Ages	Deviation from the Gompertz mortality curve at older ages has been theorized to be the result of population heterogeneity in mortality risk, but little research has examined this issue empirically. Using mortality follow-up data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (N=16,697), we examine the population distribution of a set of biomarkers that represent traditional clinical risk factors for poor health outcomes; the summary measure of these biomarkers acts as an index of frailty or biological risk. Results demonstrate that mean levels of biological risk display a leveling at ages over 80 similar to observed declines in mortality. These biomarkers are associated with mortality so that individuals with the highest risk are systematically eliminated at all adult ages, leaving a more robust surviving population in the next age group. Thus, biomarkers of clinical risk provide a good indicator of the heterogeneity of the population for mortality risk.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Dawn	 Alley	Jung	Ki  Kim	Arun	 Karlamangla	Teresa	E. Seeman
2006	51	Understanding Mortality Change: Variance, Nonlinearities, Interactions	Cumulative Index of Age-Associated Health Disorders as a Major Indicator of Aging Processes and Mortality Risks in Elderly Populations: Results from Analyses of the National Long-Term Care Survey	We analyze the ability of a cumulative index of age-associated health and quality-of-life disorders, called a “frailty index” (FI), to characterize individual rates of biological aging in the elderly and, consequently, population heterogeneity in mortality models, using National Long Term Care Survey (NLTCS) data. We show that the FI in the NLTCS exhibits an accelerated increase with age resembling mortality-curve behavior. Such patterns suggest that FI may be a better indicator of aging than chronological age. Deficits accumulate faster in non-disabled elderly who, at younger ages, had a lower mean FI than in disabled individuals, who showed a higher FI at younger ages. We interpret this as a cross-sectional manifestation of compression of morbidity. Age-patterns for disabled and non-disabled males and females tend to converge at advanced ages. This suggests the existence of biological age limits associated with given levels of health-maintenance in the society.	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Igor	 Akushevich	Kenneth	C. Land	Konstantin	G. Arbeev
2006	51	Understanding Mortality Change: Variance, Nonlinearities, Interactions	Sex Mortality Differentials in the United States: The Role of Cohort Smoking Patterns	This paper demonstrates that, over the period 1948-2003, sex differentials in mortality in the age range 50-54 to 85+ widened and then narrowed on a cohort rather than on a period basis. The cohort with the maximum excess of male mortality was born shortly after the turn of the century. Three independent sources suggest that the turnaround in sex mortality differentials is consistent with sex differences in cigarette smoking by cohort. An age/period/cohort model reveals a highly significant effect of smoking histories on men’s and women’s mortality. This model suggests that improvements in mortality at older ages are likely to accelerate in the future.	Sam	 Preston	Haidong	 Wang
2006	51	Understanding Mortality Change: Variance, Nonlinearities, Interactions	The Secrets of Long Life from Longitudinal Data	In this paper we perform analysis of extreme longevity using longitudinal data collected in the Framingham Heart Study (FHS). For these purposes we identified sub-cohorts of individuals (males and females), having potential to live long life. We evaluated age trajectories of physiological indices for these sub-cohorts and compared them with those for the rest of the FHS participants. We found that average trajectories of such indices as well as survival curves in these groups of individuals differ significantly. Then we developed mathematical and computer models of human mortality and aging appropriate for the analysis of longitudinal data and evaluated dynamic characteristics of risk functions. We found that the notion of “normal” physiological state (corresponding to minimal risk) depends on age and estimated respective age trajectories. The relations between the dynamic properties of risk functions and changes in stress resistance with age are discussed.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Igor	 Akushevich	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Liudmila	 Akushevich	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva
2006	52	Health Disparities among Youth	Neighborhood Social Ecology and Health: Street Life Potential and BMI among Urban Youth	Jane Jacobs’ (1961) classic work emphasized the role of physical and ecological characteristics of urban neighborhoods in fostering beneficial environments for local youth. Neighborhoods with high population and commercial density generate more dynamic street activity. In turn, this street life draws attention, monitoring, and support for residents who make use of public spaces. Children and young adolescents who live in neighborhoods with well-monitored and maintained public spaces may be more likely to engage in outdoor physical activity, reducing the prevalence of obesity. Using data from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods, we find that street life potential (combining population density, commercial density, and the presence of adults on the street) is negatively associated with the prevalence of children with high body mass index in urban neighborhoods (controlling for prior BMI). This finding points to the importance of research on the link between social ecology and adolescent health.	Christopher	 Browning	Catherine	 Calder
2006	52	Health Disparities among Youth	Teenagers' Smoking Trajectories from Adolescence to Emerging Adulthood	This study seeks to examine factors on both individual- and community-levels that influence adolescent smoking trajectories (i.e., number of cigarettes smoked). Smoking trajectory has often been neglected in teen tobacco use research. Given that adolescents can have very different smoking histories, a close investigation of this issue can have significant implications for intervention efforts. This study utilizes data from three waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Then, drawing on social control, social learning, and social disorganization theories, three research hypotheses are tested by using multilevel nonlinear growth curve method to unravel the crucial factors that affect adolescent smoking trajectory. Adolescents who are more detached from family and school are expected to be persistent smokers. Those who have parents and friends smoking and those who live in more socially disorganized neighborhoods are expected to be at higher risk of having continuous smoking behaviors as well.	Yen-hsin	Alice Cheng
2006	52	Health Disparities among Youth	Race/Ethnic Disparities in Childhood Obesity: Environmental Influences	American children today are four times more likely to be overweight than they were in the mid 1960s, with variation across race/ethnic and gender groups. One-quarter of African American girls 6-11 were overweight, compared with 13% of white girls; one-quarter of Mexican boys 6-11 were overweight compared with 14% of white non-Hispanic boys. Overweight results from imbalances in energy intake and expenditure. We propose to review race/ethnic differences in the family and community that may be linked to this imbalance. We then conduct analyses of family and community factors associated with race/ethnic disparities in obesity using the PSID-Child Development Supplement and the Youth Media Campaign (CDC) data. These studies have information not only on child and parent height and weight but also on time use, expenditures on food and on physical activities, and family attitudes toward and barriers to physical activity.	Sally	C. Curtin	Suzanne	 Randolph	Wakina	 Scott
2006	52	Health Disparities among Youth	Inequality and Infant Health: A Multilevel Approach to Disentangling Correlates of Metropolitan/Nonmetropolitan Disparities in Low Birth Weight Infants	To date, research has not addressed geographic differentials in low birthweight status due to individual- and structural-level characteristics in the US. If the health care needs of infants and children in nonmetropolitan areas are to be understood, an analytic approach capturing how both individual- and contextual-level inequalities operate is needed. Prior research focusing on rural and urban differences in birthweight has mostly used dichotomous measures of residence. This proposed research utilizes multiple levels of rurality as one component of structural-level characteristics, along with individual-level characteristics, to predict low birthweight status. With variation in low birthweight status across groups and places in the United States, it is important to understand which children are at risk of poor health outcomes and to identify how local conditions contribute to these outcomes. The ECLS-B merged with county-level data will be used to examine this problem.	P.	Johnelle  Smith
2006	53	Biology and Demography	Longevity in Hunter-Gatherers: A Cross-Cultural Perspective	This paper examines mortality profiles obtained from ten hunter-gatherer societies from around the world. We compare patterns of survivorship, modal ages of adult death, and causes of death to argue that post-reproductive longevity is a robust feature of hunter-gatherers, and hence of the life-cycle of Homo sapiens.  It is not only a recent phenomenon caused by improvements in sanitation, public health and medical advances.  We also attempt to reconcile these results obtained from modern hunter-gatherers with the often conflicting results obtained from paleodemographic studies which attest to a more “nasty, brutish and short” lifespan. Finally, we integrate information on fertility, age-specific dependency and resource production to help explain the adaptive utility of longevity in humans.	Michael	D. Gurven	Hillard	S. Kaplan
2006	53	Biology and Demography	The Cost of Reproduction in the Gambia: Does Investment in Reproduction Decrease Women’s Survival Rates?	Life history theory predicts that where resources are limited, investment in reproduction will cause a decline in body condition and ultimately may lower survival rates. We investigate the relationship between reproduction and survival in women in rural Gambia. We use a number of different measures of reproductive investment: the timing of reproduction, intensity of reproduction and cumulative reproductive investment (parity). Though giving birth is clearly a risk factor for increased mortality, we find limited evidence that the timing, intensity or cumulative effects of reproduction have a survival cost. We find evidence for a positive correlation between investment in reproduction and survival rates, so that women who have invested heavily in reproduction have higher survival rates than women with lower reproductive investment. A potential confounding factor may be differences in health between individual women. But even when controlling for health, the positive correlation between investment in reproduction and survival remains unchanged.	Rebecca	 Sear
2006	53	Biology and Demography	Physiological Dysregulation and Changes in Health in an Older Population	Recent analyses have suggested that physiological dysregulation measured across multiple systems is predictive of diminished physical and mental functioning in non-clinical populations. Here, we extend this prior work by using data from a national survey in Taiwan to explore the association between an improved measure of physiological dysregulation and a broad range of health outcomes - survival, physical functioning, cognitive functioning, and depressive symptoms - ascertained three years after the assessment of the biological indicators. The specific biological parameters comprise both standard clinical markers and nontraditional measures; we examine the linkages between both sets of markers and health. By using data from a national survey of middle-aged and older individuals, which collects extensive health information at baseline and at the end of a three-year period along with biological measures at baseline, our estimates are less likely than those from previous studies to be plagued by biases related to sample selection and endogeneity.	Noreen	 Goldman	Cassio	M. Turra	Dana	A. Glei	Yi-Li	 Chuang	Maxine	 Weinstein
2006	53	Biology and Demography	Familial Transmission of Human Longevity among the Oldest-Old in China	This paper aims to investigate the relationship between exceptional longevity (survival to 100 years old and beyond) of offspring and longevity of parents, by using data from the first three waves of the Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey. Fixed-Attributes Dynamics methods and logistic models are applied to the data. Results of both methods show a relatively strong same-sex inheritance of longevity between parents and offspring, that is, a strong association of longevity between fathers and sons or between mothers and daughters, but weak or no association of longevity between fathers and daughters or between mothers and sons. Having both mother and father long-lived also contributes to children’s exceptional longevity.	Danzhen	 You
2006	54	Spatial Demography: How and Why Space Matters	Population and Employment Deconcentration and Employment Outcomes for Black Men		Roger	B. Hammer
2006	54	Spatial Demography: How and Why Space Matters	Amenities, Inequality, and Geography		Shaun	 Golding	Paul	 Van Auken
2006	54	Spatial Demography: How and Why Space Matters	Residential Segregation and Precarious Employment in Urban Mexico	Sociological studies suggested that Mexican metropolises are characterized by lower levels of socio-economic residential segregation than we could expect given their unequal income distribution. Data from the 2000 census supports this argument in the case of Guadalajara, the second largest Mexican city: the Index of Dissimilarity and Index of Exposure are low. It is well known, however, that they are not sensitive to spatial distribution of poverty – the checkerboard problem. This paper analyzes the spatial patterns of poverty and wealth in Guadalajara using Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis, showing clear differences in the socio-economic composition of city areas, and suggesting higher levels of segregation than those pointed by the Indices. In addition, I analyze the association between residential segregation and precarious employment using spatial regression models. They suggest the presence of spatial autocorrelation between geographical units, a process that could be partially explained by historical patterns of urban growth.	Landy	 Sanchez
2006	54	Spatial Demography: How and Why Space Matters	Spatial Analysis of County Population Change in the United States During the 1990s	The current study addresses the demographic and geographic aspects of population change in the United States during the 1990s. Census data and vital statistics are used to calculate natural increase rates and net migration rates for all 3070 counties in the contiguous United States. The components of population change are broken down into three race/ethnicity groups - black, Hispanic, and white - and a series of exploratory and regression analyses are conducted to examine the relationship between natural increase and net migration. The natural increase rates of blacks, Hispanics, and whites are each significant predictors of total net migration rates for a county. The data also provides evidence for spatial processes such as diffusion and regionalization in the patterns of population change.	Matthew	J Moehr
2006	55	Induced Abortion	Contraceptive Failure, Discontinuation and Abortion in Romania, 1994-1999: Levels, Patterns and Correlates	This study examines the levels and correlates of contraceptive failure and discontinuation in Romania, together with contraceptive failure consequences for induced abortion. Of special interest is the subset of women relying on withdrawal and the proportion of withdrawal failures resulting in abortion. We use data on women’s contraceptive use and their monthly reproductive behaviors collected in a multi-year calendar in the 1999 Romanian Reproductive Health Survey (RRHS). Weibull regression models are estimated to analyze the determinants of all-method and withdrawal discontinuation and failure. Overall, 19% and 28% of women became pregnant during the first year of using a contraceptive method and withdrawal, respectively. Around 85% of all-method and withdrawal failures ended in abortion, accounting for 35.2% and 24.1%, respectively, of all abortions reported in the 1999 RRHS. Due to high rates of contraceptive failure the practice of induced abortion remained widespread among Romanian women in this period.	Andreea	A. Creanga	Rajib	 Acharya	Saifuddin	 Ahmed	Amy	 Tsui
2006	55	Induced Abortion	Assessing Potential for Induced Abortion among Indian Women	Given the apprehension regarding the rise in induced abortion among Indian women, though not reported in surveys, this paper provides an indirect estimate of induced abortions among Indian women using the NFHS-2 data sets. It obtains the share of induced abortion attributable to sex selection in achieving desired sex composition of children and its use as a means of contraception to avoid unwanted births. Estimates reveal that induced abortion due to sex selection is 74 per 1000 live births and that due to contraception is 115 per thousand live births in India. On the whole, the estimates are consistent, suggesting a high level of use of abortion as a contraceptive method in the country.	Udaya	S Mishra	T	R. Dilip
2006	55	Induced Abortion	Did Induced Abortion Associate with Family Planning Policy in China?	The objective is to test if the family planning program caused in some extent induced abortion in China. Using  data from China’s Ministry of Health and data from the 1997 National Population and Reproductive Survey, we found that peaks of induced abortions occurred around the years 1983 and 1991. The rate of induced abortions in rural areas was much lower than that in urban areas, even though the implementation of family planning was heavily emphasized in rural areas. In general, the main cause of induced abortions was “unexpected pregnancy,” but the main cause of induced abortions in rural areas and for minority nationality was “inconsistency with the requirements of family planning policy.” The incidences of induced abortions per ever-conceived woman and the proportion of induced abortions per conception caused by inconsistency with the requirements of family planning were quite low.	Xiaochun	 Qiao	Chirayath	 Suchindran
2006	55	Induced Abortion	Modeling Abortion as a Process, with an Application to French Survey Data	We model the proximate determinants of induced abortion as a nested sequence of events and behaviors, unlike cross-sectional models that view abortion decisions as being made only in the moment. Our approach allows the investigation of the effect of combinations of background variables on the decision to have an abortion, which may take different directions as the process unfolds, and helps to explain phenomena such as the inverted-U shape of abortion with age. We illustrate the model using data from a reproductive health survey conducted in France in 2000.	Clementine	 Rossier	Nathalie	 Bajos	François	 Michelot
2006	56	Methodological Innovations in Fertility Research	The Estimation of Unwanted Fertility: Development of a New Method	The estimation of unwanted fertility is a major objective of demographic surveys, including the Demographic and Health Surveys [DHS]. Levels and trends in unwanted fertility are important input to the formulation of population policy, and they are used in the evaluation of family planning programs. Yet the existing methods, by common agreement, possess important deficiencies. We have developed a new method for the estimation of unwanted fertility that in most settings will suffer from less downward bias than existing methods (Casterline & el-Zeini 2005). The method is simple to apply and makes minimal data demands, in particular relying on the most valid and reliable attitudinal item (prospective fertility preferences). This paper addresses the remaining obstacles to widespread use of the new method: calculation of wanted and unwanted TFRs; robustness to trends in fertility preferences; sampling errors; and performance in diverse reproductive regimes, including various lifetime patterns of unwanted births.	John	B. Casterline	Laila	 El-Zeini
2006	56	Methodological Innovations in Fertility Research	Implementation of the Revised OMB Race and Ethnicity Standards in the U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Births: Results and Data	This paper will present the differences between multiple-race and single-race mothers on selected demographic and health items. Using birth certificate data from California, Hawaii, Pennsylvania, Utah, and Washington, which reported multiple-race data for 2003, data on selected demographic and health items (e.g., fertility, age at first birth, parity, marital status, country of birth, prenatal care, preterm birth and low birthweight) are analyzed comparing multiple-race mothers to single-race mothers. Univariate and bivariate analysis are performed to explore similarities and differences on selected items.	Brady	Eugene Hamilton
2006	56	Methodological Innovations in Fertility Research	Reconstructing Brazilian Birth Histories Based on Census Data: A Comparative Analysis of Two Methodologies	The main purpose of this paper is to apply two methodologies of birth history reconstruction to the Brazilian data, in order to compare the results and test their robustness. Other purposes are: (i) to create a time series of fertility indicators; and (ii) to apply the Kohler & Ortega method to disentangle tempo, parity, and quantum effects of fertility during the Brazilian strong fertility decline. Data come from the last three editions of the Brazilian Demographic Censuses: 1980, 1991 and 2000, which will allow the estimation of fertility measures from 1966 to 2000. The reconstruction of birth histories will represent a great advance in fertility studies, due to the absence of good birth histories in Brazil and the low quality of birth registration.	Adriana	 Miranda-Ribeiro	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto
2006	56	Methodological Innovations in Fertility Research	A Bayesian Approach to Combining Population and Survey Data for Male Fertility Estimation	Where survey data are used for the analysis of male fertility, data quality is a concern. Survey data are known to be worse for men than for women. Birth registration data, especially for non-marital births, are also available in less detail for men, and often with lower degrees of completeness. To address these estimation problems, male fertility rates estimated from survey data in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth are first evaluated against age-specific rates calculated from birth registrations and population estimates. Male birth reports by age and other variables reported commonly between men and women are then evaluated against female birth reports in the survey data. The information from these evaluations is used in Bayesian estimation allowing for successive relaxation of assumptions about the accuracy of the population data from birth registrations and the survey data. Reductions in variance and bias about the estimates are demonstrated.	Michael	 Rendall	Ryan	 Admiraal	Mark	S. Handcock	Kara	 Joyner	Elizabeth	 Peters	Felicia	T. Yang
2006	57	Implications of Gender Interactions and Ideologies for Reproductive Behavior	The Impact of Traditional Gender Interactions and Beliefs on Sexual and Reproductive Behavior of Young Women Living in a Slum Area of Belo Horizonte, Brazil	This study explored how traditional gender interactions and adherence to traditional gender beliefs influence sexual and reproductive behavior of impoverished young women living in a favela (slum) of Belo Horizonte, Brazil. We analyzed data from a survey performed on a random sample of 356 young women between 15 and 24 years old. We found that young women who held stereotypical beliefs regarding gender roles on family, economy and sexuality were more likely to have had sex and gotten pregnant than women with less adherence to traditional gender beliefs. The latter were more likely to have had sex and not gotten pregnant and also to have never had sexual intercourse. Some indicators of autonomous behavior among young women such as having discussed with partner about condom use before first intercourse, desired their first intercourse and decided together with partner on contraceptive use were also associated with a lower frequency of pregnancy.	Alessandra	S. Chacham	Malco	 Camargos
2006	57	Implications of Gender Interactions and Ideologies for Reproductive Behavior	Daughter Preference in Japan: A Reflection of Shift in Gender Role Attitudes (or Not)?	Unlike other East Asian nations where preference for sons over daughters still prevails, gender preference for children in Japan has progressively shifted from son preference to visible daughter preference over the past few decades. In this paper, I focus on the extent to which individuals’ child gender preference is shaped by their gender role attitudes and evaluate whether daughter preference is a reflection of convergence or persistent divergence in gender roles in Japan. I use data from the Single Persons subset of the 11th Japanese National Fertility Survey conducted by the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research in 1997. Findings suggest that the effect of gender role attitudes on one’s child gender preference differs for men and women.   Overall, while daughter preference is associated with nontraditional gender role attitudes for men, daughter preference is associated with traditional attitudes for women.	Kana	 Fuse
2006	57	Implications of Gender Interactions and Ideologies for Reproductive Behavior	Barriers to and Attitudes towards Promoting Husbands’ Involvement in Maternal Health in Katmandu, Nepal	In recent years, couple-friendly reproductive health services have garnered considerable attention. The sensitive nature of gender roles and relations in many cultures, however, makes the design and introduction of such services delicate. This qualitative study aims to (a) understand barriers to male involvement in maternal health, and (b) explore men’s, women’s, and providers’ attitudes towards the promotion of male involvement in maternal health. At a public maternity hospital in Katmandu, Nepal, 14 couples and 8 providers were interviewed and 17 couples participated in focus group discussions. Barriers to male involvement included low knowledge levels, social stigma, and shyness/embarrassment. Providers felt that couples-friendly services would enhance the quality of care and comprehension of health information given to pregnant women. Predominantly favorable attitudes of pregnant women, husbands, and providers towards encouraging greater male involvement in maternal health imply that offering an option of couples-friendly services would be both feasible and well accepted.	Britta	C. Mullany
2006	57	Implications of Gender Interactions and Ideologies for Reproductive Behavior	Marriage, Masculinity and HIV Risk in Southeastern Nigeria	This paper examines the social context of HIV infection in marriage in Nigeria. Based on an intensive ethnographic study in the southeastern region, it traces the relationship between modern marriage, patterns of gender inequality, extramarital sexual behavior, and popular responses of the HIV epidemic. Common representations of AIDS in Africa link risk to promiscuous sexual conduct and detrimental traditional practices, including men’s extramarital sexual relationships. Here, extramarital sexual behavior is examined anthropologically, showing how the social organization of extramarital sexuality is itself located at the intersection of economic inequality, aspirations for modern lifestyles, gender norms, and contradictory moralities. The findings argue against notions of African traditions, promiscuous women, and pervasive immorality as the causes of Nigeria’s and Africa’s AIDS epidemic, and instead show how particular practices of masculinity and anxieties about sexual morality contribute to risks produced primarily by poverty and inequality.	Daniel	 Smith
2006	58	Applied Demography as a Tool for Policy Design and Program Implementation	Building Strong Families: Using Research to Develop Programs	The Building Strong Families (BSF) program aims to foster the development of programs designed to enhance children's wellbeing by helping new unmarried parents build stronger relationships and achieve a healthy marriage if they so choose. The motivations and design of BSF programs draw heavily on findings about unmarried parents from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. This paper summarizes findings from that study about the characteristics and relationship patterns of unwed parents and discusses the implications for BSF programs. Three main implications of the Fragile Families findings for BSF program design are: (1) programs can build on the high hopes and affection in many unmarried parents' relationships; (2) programs need to recognize the economic needs of parents; and (3) the intervention must address issues of distrust and fidelity, along with the high relational bar unmarried parents set for marriage.	Barbara	 Devaney	Marcia	J. Carlson
2006	58	Applied Demography as a Tool for Policy Design and Program Implementation	The Use of Census Bureau Official Population Estimates and Projections in Policy Design and Program Implementation	The Population Division of the US Census Bureau prepares annual estimates of the population for the nation, states, counties, and functioning governmental units. These estimates are used for a variety of purposes including the allocation of federal funds, as denominators for statistical indicators, as population controls for various federal surveys including the Current Population Survey and the American Community Survey, and as tools in public and private policy and program planning. This paper will examine the major users of the population estimates including the federal programs that use population estimates in whole or in part to allocate program funds to subnational governmental units and to set thresholds for program eligibility. Recognizing that the use of estimates in policy decisions is not straightforward, the paper will identify the issues that arise when attempting to merge the constraints and limitations of demographically defensible population estimates with real program and policy needs.	Signe	I. Wetrogan	Lisa	M. Blumerman
2006	58	Applied Demography as a Tool for Policy Design and Program Implementation	Prioritizing Places: Geo-demographic Analysis Guides Acquisition and Development of Outdoor Recreation Land	Starting in 1999, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) initiated a study to identify places in the state that would be critical in meeting Wisconsin’s long-term conservation and recreation needs. The resulting 229 “Legacy Places” collectively are the special places that “make Wisconsin Wisconsin.” This paper is based on a research project between the Applied Population Lab and the DNR to prioritize the Legacy Places for acquisition and development over the next several years. Using geo-demographic analysis, we evaluate each Legacy Place according to five components: (1) number of potential visitors living within an hour’s drive; (2) population pressure; (3) cost of land; (4) conservation significance; and (5) recreation potential. We then use the scores on each of these components to rank Legacy Places according to priority for acquisition and development and evaluate the implications of this work for state and federal programs.	Richelle	 Winkler	Bill	 Buckingham	David	D. Long	Jeff	 Prey	John	 Pohlman
2006	58	Applied Demography as a Tool for Policy Design and Program Implementation	Pension Design and Longevity	This study compares alternative designs of an unfunded pension system. Convex combinations between a fixed contribution rate and a fixed benefit rate are considered. The objective is to maximize the expected ex-ante welfare under stochastic old age mortality. The aim is thus to find the optimal size and design of the unfunded pension system “behind the veil of ignorance.” The model is an overlapping generations model where the effects on factor prices, labor supply, and human capital are accounted for. An individual's decision to exit the labor force is endogenous, and depends on life expectancy, accumulated assets, and the pension design. The decision to enter the labor force is also endogenous and affected by expected working length and the pension design. Numerical methods are used to solve the model.	Jovan	 Zamac
2006	59	Family Patterns in Historical Perspective	African American Marital Disruption in the 20th Century: What Changed? What Did Not?	In this paper I analyze trends in and causes of evolving racial differences in divorce and separation during the 20th century. Using Census data on current marital status and past remarriage I produce estimates of race-specific trends in the prevalence of marital disruption. I find that Black/non-Black differences in marital disruption widened over the first half of the century, but, contrary to the findings of past work that relied on current marital status as an outcome, I find that the gap narrowed by roughly one-third over the three decades after 1950. I then examine what has caused the changes in the disruption gap. In doing so, I consider both the impact of changing inter-group differences in marital disruption risk factors and the fact that the effects of risk factors are historically contingent, so persisting differences in those factors may alter the disruption gap, even if they themselves do not change.	Andrew	 Clarkwest
2006	59	Family Patterns in Historical Perspective	Parents, Children, Gender, and Household Allocation: The View from History	Children of different genders had different earnings in the labor market and played different roles in old age support in the past. It is not known, however, if intrahousehold allocation took such differentials into account, where children on one gender would be favored over another. I use the 1888 Cost of Living Survey to estimate the earnings profiles of boys and girls, and to test for resource allocation differences by gender in nineteenth century industrial households. Despite different earnings profiles for boys and girls, neither American nor European households exhibited gender bias in the allocation of resources to children. Furthermore, I find that the resource allocation in the household was efficient. Using the efficiency and the lack of gender discrimination results, I estimate that European boys were twice as likely as European girls to leave the household, and American boys were 25% more prone to leave home than American girls.	Trevon	D Logan
2006	59	Family Patterns in Historical Perspective	Women and Children First? The Advancement of Women and Investments in Children in the Historical United States	Women’s empowerment is a central objective of development agendas and social policies around the world. It has intrinsic value as well as the potential to improve child health and well-being. The objective of this study is to estimate the consequences of several key historical policies to improve the status of women in the United States. Specifically, it analyzes changes in state laws governing divorce, alimony, and suffrage rights between 1870 and 1940 using novel data from historical legal archives, population censuses, and mortality statistics reports. Techniques that better allow causal inferences to be drawn are used, and their assumptions are examined in detail. The study will provide new evidence about the complex consequences of women’s empowerment for family dynamics and composition as well as the well-being of women, men, and children.	Grant	 Miller
2006	59	Family Patterns in Historical Perspective	Self-Ownership Rights, Household Formation and Family Decision-Making: Evidence from U.S. Historical Data	In the nineteenth century United States, female singlehood was a relatively rare phenomenon and female social status was determined by institutions regarding married women’s rights. Under the legal rules of coverture inherited from colonial times, a married woman had her legal and economic rights vested in her husband, who would control and dispose of her earnings from labor and/or assets. By the 1840's, however, states began passing legislation that revised many of these restrictions. Using variation on the timing of these revisions across states and data from IPUMS and on the Life Cycle of Union Army Veterans this paper examines the impact of changes in state-level legal institutions in the United States between 1850 and 1920 over three major aspects of the economics of the family: i) marriage markets and matching patterns; ii) intergenerational co-residence patterns, and iii) family decision-making.	Marcos	A. Rangel
2006	60	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Measuring Ethnicity in New Zealand: Developing Tools for Social Analysis	New Zealand is a microcosm in which to consider global mobility, indigeneity and intermarriage and their effects on culture and identity. Since the early days of New Zealand’s colonization there has been a significant level of ethnic intermarriage. One result is that descendents of intermarriage can affiliate with more than one ethnic group. Against a backdrop of historical debates about the measurement of race, and then ethnicity, the paper explores recent changes in the recording and reporting of ethnicity in New Zealand. There is particular emphasis on (1) how ethnicity is increasingly seen as a social construct; and (2) how individuals belonging to more than one ethnic group have been recorded and reported in research. The recording of more than one ethnic group presents challenges for ethnic analysis including measuring ethnic intermarriage. Finally, some social policy implications of the growing proportion of New Zealanders who claim multi-ethnic affiliations are explored.	Paul	 Callister	Robert	 Didham	Deborah	M Potter
2006	60	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Preferences, Race and Place: The Geography of a Monochrome Society	The divide between those who lament the coming multi-ethnicity of the United States and those who celebrate a nation of nations, continues to grow. Yet, demographic evidence and expressed preferences may provide very different long term outcomes than those suggested by either people who worry about a declining white majority or those who emphasize the gains from multi-ethnicity. There is now evidence that the residential locations of children of mixed-race households emphasize integration both in central cities and suburbs. These residential patterns can be interpreted as the first steps to a monochrome society. The data for levels of integration for Asians, Blacks, whites and Hispanics (who identify as white) show very high levels of integration. I argue that this is evidence of a changing pattern of residential integration and evidence of very different outcomes than those suggested by either the lamenters or the celebrators.	William	A.V. Clark
2006	60	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Inheriting Race: The Classification of U.S. Newborns in the ECLS-B	Do parents pass on race to their children in the way predicted by biological reasoning, where the child is the sum of the parents’ characteristics? Or do parents’ descriptions of their children demonstrate the fluidity and instability expected if race is a “social construct?” Using recently released data from the 2001 birth cohort of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, we find that while the majority of U.S. newborns are described as a biological notion of race would predict, a nontrivial proportion are not. These children are more likely to match their father’s race than their mother’s and they are less likely to be described as white. Foreign-born parents and their children are also less likely to have matching descriptions than native-born parents and their children. These findings have implications for the measurement of race and ethnicity and for understanding intergenerational processes of racial and ethnic formation.	Marcel	 Paret	Aliya	 Saperstein
2006	60	Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Bridging the Gap between the Old and New Race Categories: Comparing Population Estimates Prepared Using Two Different Sets of Bridging Factors	This paper summarizes U.S. Census Bureau/NCHS joint research to “bridge” between the old and new race categories. Two sets of bridged population estimates, each with a different set of bridging factors, are compared.    NCHS initiated this research to meet their need for post-2000 population estimates consistent with the old race standards. These data are denominators for their vital rates because the births and deaths are still collected under the old race standards.    The original bridging factors were estimated using National Health Interview Survey data which provides both “mark one or more races” and “mark one race” information. This paper focuses on updating these factors using Census Quality Survey data.    The final outcome of this research is post-2000 population estimates that can be used by private and public data users to measure changes by race that occurred before and after the new race standards were implemented.	Amy	S. Smith	Deborah	D Ingram
2006	61	Poverty and Health: Implications for Mortality and Disability	Immunizations, Poverty and Child Survival in the Kasena-Nankana District of Northern Ghana	Many African children continue to die each year from vaccine-preventable diseases despite well promoted evidence-based programs that aim to expand the coverage of childhood vaccination programs. Recent international attention to Millennium Development Goals often promote the view that low cost and effective immunization modalities may differentially impact on survival among the poor. This paper tests this assumption in a rural traditional district of northern Ghana where poverty is both pervasive and variable. Generalized Cox survival models are estimated that assess the main and interaction effects of poverty and immunization on childhood survival in a cohort of under-five children observed for five years. Results are consistent with findings in many other settings showing that immunization status has a major impact irrespective of poverty status. Interaction effects in this analysis demonstrate, however that this survival benefit is greater among the very poor than the less poor.	Bawah	A Ayaga	James	F. Phillips	Peter	 Wontuo	George	 Wak
2006	61	Poverty and Health: Implications for Mortality and Disability	Macro-Economic Shocks and Infant Survival: A Global Perspective	If income is protective of health, then deviations from anticipated national income may have important ramifications for population health, including child survival. We utilize Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data from 59 low- and middle-income countries to investigate the co-variation of trend-deviations in per capita GDP and infant mortality. Through the use of time-series and non-parametric regression techniques we identify the effect of macro-economic contractions on IMR and we find that there is a strong, significant, and statistically robust relationship between fluctuations in GDP per capita and IMR. These findings persist even after controlling for changes in the annual composition of birth mothers. We further explore how the severity of the contractions mediate the impact on child survival and find that the most harmful impacts occur for very large and negative deviations from expected national income. We then investigate the substantial cross-country heterogeneity in this relationship to draw policy implications.	Sarah	 Baird	Jed	 Friedman	Norbert	 Schady
2006	61	Poverty and Health: Implications for Mortality and Disability	Are Idle Hands the Doctor’s Workshop? Effects of Unemployment Shocks on Physical and Mental Health in Puerto Rico	Changes in access to employment may exacerbate or improve the population’s health status as a result of the interplay of complex channels. However, it has been difficult to identify the causal impacts of these economic processes on physical and mental health outcomes. During the 1990s, Puerto Rico experienced changes in access to employment due to the phased-in derogation of U.S. federal tax incentives for manufacturing firms in the island. We take advantage of the exogeneity of the phase-out of tax incentives and its variation across municipalities to assess its effects on the mental and physical health status of the population. In addition, we examine whether these impacts are mediated by the provision of health care services, either public or market-based. Preliminary results suggest that the incidence of depression increased from 21.6 percent to 22.5 percent, an increase of approximately 0.9 percentage points (4.5 percent) in the high de-industrialization municipalities.	Gustavo	J. Bobonis	Harold	J. Toro
2006	61	Poverty and Health: Implications for Mortality and Disability	Obstetric Fistula in Malawi: Prevalence and Correlates	Fistula is a severe medical condition usually arising from the experience of obstructed childbirth. It consigns the affected woman to a lifetime of physical, social and economic disability if the injury is not repaired. It is most common among those who have the least – the poor, the undernourished, and the underserved.    Despite the critical importance of the problem of fistula, no national prevalence data have been collected in any country in the developing world, until recently. This paper documents the first effort to collect national prevalence data on fistula, determines whether the data reasonably reflect the prevalence of fistula in Malawi, and discerns risk factors associated with the experience of fistula, using bivariate and multivariate methods.    Data from the 2004-05 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS) were used for this analysis. 12,229 women were eligible for interview, and 11,698 were successfully interviewed, yielding a response rate of 95.7 percent.	Kiersten	 Johnson
2006	61	Poverty and Health: Implications for Mortality and Disability	Impact of Military and Political Unrest on Child Mortality in the Central African Republic	The Central African Republic went through recurrent military mutinies between 1996 and 2003. The latest crisis that broke out in October 2002 and culminated with the March 2003 coup d'etat affected four of the country’s most populated districts. A dramatic increase in maternal and child mortality was observed during this period. Impact of political unrest on maternal and child mortality is either direct, through destruction of or poor-accessibility to health facilities, or indirect, through a spread of poverty. Using 2003-census data, this paper assesses both impacts on child mortality. The political unrest is measured by categorizing the 17 districts nationwide into those where combats took place (directly affected), those that hosted displaced populations (indirectly affected) and those not affected at all. Poverty is captured by an index that combines different characteristics of the household. Poisson regression is used and variables known to have an impact on child mortality are controlled for.	Macoumba	 Thiam	B.	Oleko  Tambashe	Adam	 Ahmat	Raymond	 Goula
2006	62	Union Dissolution	Do Greater Interdependencies between Spouses Lead to Greater Marital Stability?	This study investigates the types of interdependencies marriage creates between spouses, including measures that go beyond those related to income and children. I use data from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) and find that majorities of both men and women report depending on their marriage for their standard living, overall happiness, sex life, and being a parent. Women report higher levels of dependency in the areas of standard of living, career opportunities, and sex life, while men report higher levels of dependency on their marriage for being a parent. I find that women’s evaluations of the benefits (or disadvantages) of their marriage are related to marital stability, while only men’s evaluations of how their marriage affects their ability to be a parent and happiness are related to marital stability. Men are more likely to consider the effect that a separation would have on their spouse.	Tara	L. Becker
2006	62	Union Dissolution	Socioeconomic Determinants of Divorce and Separation in South Korea: Revisit to Independence Hypothesis	In the past decade, the “independency” hypothesis, which postulates that wives’ income increases the probability of divorce, has been widely refuted in the US literature. The hypothesis is based on the new home economics theory assuming that role specialization between husbands and wives in the market and household work, respectively, maximizes the benefit of marriage. In South Korea, divorce rates have sharply increased from the late 1990s reaching the crude divorce rate of 3.5 in 2003, closely following 4.1 of the United States. Evidence suggests that wives’ stable employment increases the chance of divorce or separation in South Korea. Using data from the first six waves of the Korean Labor and Income Panel Survey, conducted yearly from 1998 through 2003, this study will examine the detailed circumstances of how women’s employment or income affects the chance of divorce and discuss the implications.	Yean-Ju	 Lee
2006	62	Union Dissolution	Age at Marriage and Marital Instability: Revisiting the Becker-Landes-Michael Hypothesis	An early age at first marriage is known to be associated with a high risk of divorce. Yet it has been suggested that beyond a certain point, the relationship between age at marriage and marital instability may become positive, if women settle for matches that are far from the optimal as the biological clock begins to tick. Analyses based on the 1995 and 2002-2003 National Surveys of Family Growth show that women who marry in their late twenties/early thirties are indeed more likely to settle for poorer matches. The 1995 data reveal that the stabilizing effect associated with the greater maturity that comes with age is more powerful, and marital instability decreases steadily as age at marriage rises. This is not the case in the more recent period, where a U-shaped pattern is found: marriages contracted during the thirties are more unstable than those contracted in the late twenties.	Evelyn	 Lehrer
2006	62	Union Dissolution	Sexually-Integrated Workplaces and Divorce: Another Form of On-the-Job Search	As women have entered the work force and occupational sex-segregation has declined, workers experience increased contact with the opposite sex on the job. Because this contact lowers the cost of the search for alternative mates, the sex-mix a worker encounters on the job should affect the probability of divorce. This paper uses 1990 Census data to calculate the fraction of workers that are female by industry, occupation and industry-occupation cell. These results are then used to predict divorce among ever-married respondents in the 1990 Census and the NLSY79. Both fixed-effects and instrumental variables strategies are employed to address endogenous occupation and industry choice. The results indicate that those who work with a larger fraction of workers of the opposite sex are more likely to be divorced.	Terra	 McKinnish
2006	63	Key Demographic Changes among the U.S. Latino Population	Educational Homogamy of Mexicans in Mexico and in the USA: What Difference Does Gender, Generation, Ethnicity, and Educational Attainment Make in Marriage Patterns?	The ebb-and-flow of immigration of Mexicans to the United States is leading to a binational marriage market. We combine microdata samples from the 1970 to 2000 censuses of the United States and Mexico to compare educational homogamy in Mexico with patterns for Mexican-born, Mexican-origin, and non-Hispanic White couples resident in the United States. We examine the extent to which Mexican patterns of educational assortative mating in the United States differ from those of Mexico and gravitate toward those of non-Hispanic Whites. Gender, generation, ethnicity, and time must be taken into account to derive complete, parsimonious loglinear models of mating patterns. Alternative models, such as gender symmetry/asymmetry, homogamy, and segmented assimilation are considered as well. We conclude that Mexicans marrying in the United States depart markedly from both the strongly homogamous patterns in Mexico as well as the striking gender asymmetry. The most remarkable patterns are for inter-ethnic and inter-generational unions.	Albert	 Esteve	Robert	 McCaa
2006	63	Key Demographic Changes among the U.S. Latino Population	Contexts for Bilingualism among U.S.-Born Latinos, 1990 and 2000	This paper focuses on bilingualism among Latino adults who were born in the US or are members of the ‘1.5 generation’. We ask: Under what contextual circumstances does bilingualism thrive among US-born and 1.5 generation Hispanics? While we acknowledge that Spanish retention across generations is in part a factor of individual- and household-level circumstances, our interest is in broader contexts because these reflect contemporary developments that could influence change in both the real and perceived value of bilingualism. Our analysis encompasses US metropolitan areas in 1990 and 2000, emphasizing dynamics of socio-cultural, demographic, economic, and political change. We explore the contextual circumstances under which bilingualism could become a stable and compatible aspect of being American – part of an additive process of immigrant adaptation that incorporates, rather than replaces, characteristics of the sending country. Data sources include the US Census and PUMS, the National Association of Latino Elected Officials, and Latino business organizations.	Tomas	R Jimenez	April	 Linton
2006	63	Key Demographic Changes among the U.S. Latino Population	New Hispanic Migrant Destinations: A Tale of Two Industries	Census 2000 data indicate high rates of Latino population growth in new urban and rural areas that previously had relatively little ethnic diversity and/or recent experience with foreign-born populations. The geographic extensiveness and rapidity of such growth raises questions about forces attracting migrants to new destinations and links between economic structural change and Hispanic population growth. Our conceptual framework applies dual-labor market theory to the construction and meat processing industries that are concentrated in urban and rural areas, respectively. Our analysis links Hispanic population growth to changing U.S. labor demand by examining industry transformations that attract Hispanic migrants to new destination areas. We contrast these forces across rural and metropolitan areas between 1980-1990 and 1990-2000 by modeling county-level change in Hispanic representation as a function of industrial composition. Finally, we assess the changing socioeconomic characteristics of the labor force in new areas of destination and derive labor market implications.	Emilio	A. Parrado	William	A. Kandel
2006	63	Key Demographic Changes among the U.S. Latino Population	Educational Attainment in New and Established Latino Metropolitan Destinations	Over the last twenty years, Latino migration streams have shifted from a few cities with concentrated Latino populations to include many new destinations across the country. This paper examines the educational attainment of Latinos in these established and emerging Latino immigrant gateways. Statistical analysis of 32,361 Latino respondents in 16 established metropolitan areas and 15 new destinations were compared using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample. Interestingly, educational attainment was found to be significantly higher in new Latino destinations than in established Latino metropolitan areas, although much of these differences are mediated by demographic factors. OLS and logistic regression results suggest that English proficiency, ethnicity, and citizenship status account for a substantial portion of the differences in educational attainment between destination types.	Katherine	C. Stamps	Stephanie	A. Bohon
2006	64	Determinants of Educational Attainment	Timing Is Everything? A Proposed Multi-State Model of Post-Secondary Transitions across Two Cohorts of U.S. Students	Despite the benefits associated with post-secondary education and baccalaureate attainment, policy makers and researchers have paid relatively little attention to stratification in post-secondary education. In this vein, we hope to contribute to the literature on post-secondary educational trajectories by addressing methodological and substantive weaknesses in the extant literature. Using data for two cohorts of U.S. students and a multi-state event history model, we propose an analysis of the temporal dimensions of post-secondary educational trajectories and how these trajectories may vary by social background and demographic characteristics, high school and post-secondary academic achievement, and cohort. We also propose to assess how educational trajectories differ in the context of competing responsibilities some students may face such as parenthood, employment, and marriage.	Megan	 Andrew	Cecilia	 Ceja
2006	64	Determinants of Educational Attainment	The Impact of Nutrition and School Quality on Primary School Enrollment in the Philippines	Poor nutrition and health are thought to have negative consequences for children's school performance, in turn compromising lifetime income, productivity, and health. The objectives of this research are to examine whether: (1) better nutrition during pre-school age is positively associated with enrollment in grade 1; and (2) whether any positive effect of nutrition on school entry is greater in communities where there are better quality teachers and primary schools. We use three rounds of longitudinal data collected in three regions of the Philippines, and focus on the cohort of school age children at the latest round. We employ prices and geographic dummy variables at pre-school age as instruments for child health since its effect on schooling may reflect behavioral choices, and explore the robustness of the effect of health (and its interaction with school quality) to different specifications.	Jere	 Behrman	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Socorro	 Gultiano	Elizabeth	 King
2006	64	Determinants of Educational Attainment	The Relationship between Fertility and Children’s Education in Brazil: A Natural Experiment Using Twin Data	The purpose of this work is to assess the role of fertility or number of children in determining the investments in the children’s human capital in Brazil. The decline in fertility and the increase in children's and adolescents’ education observed during the last decades in Brazil suggest a potential trade-off between these two variables. The main contribution of this paper is to employ a natural experiment using twins’ data as a proxy for exogenous fertility. From it, it is possible to notice estimates of the exogenous fertility impact on the education of children. The results indicate primarily the existence of a trade-off between (exogenous) fertility and the education of children in Brazil. Secondly, it was found that this negative relation has lost strength or magnitude during the last fifteen years. Moreover, it is also seen that such trade-off is greater in situations deemed to be “unfavorable”.	Ana	P. Verona
2006	64	Determinants of Educational Attainment	Early Marriage and Pregnancy as Factors in School Dropout: An Analysis of DHS data from Sub-Saharan Africa	With the rapid expansion of girls’ schooling in sub-Saharan Africa and the greater likelihood of attending school after puberty, the effect of reproductive behavior on school participation among adolescent girls is a cause for concern. Using DHS data from 21 countries, this paper will investigate the association between school dropout and the timing of marriage and childbearing among young women aged 15-24. We will attempt to estimate how much of school dropout before completion of the full cycle of primary or secondary school can legitimately be attributed to early marriage and so-called “school girl pregnancy.” We will also investigate whether the prevalence of pregnancy-induced school dropout has increased over time in 5 countries that included a question on age at school leaving. Finally, we will explore the extent to which the increased share of adolescent fertility or adolescent marriage associated with school leaving is explained by rising enrollment rates.	Cynthia	B. Lloyd	Barbara	S Mensch
2006	64	Determinants of Educational Attainment	Islam and Gender Inequality in Education	The events of September 11 have reinforced in the public imagery the association of Islam and limited access to female education. Whereas previous studies have noted the larger gender gap in education in some Islamic countries, the reasons are not well understood. This research attempts to advance knowledge in this area by investigating the makeup of gender inequality in education. Using DHS data from 36 countries and life table analysis, I estimate the gender gap in secondary school completion and then divide this gap into three main sources: “cultural,” “demographic,” and “economic” factors. Next, I examine if cultural rather than demographic and economic factors are responsible for the gender gap in Moslem countries more than would be the case in other countries with comparable gender inequality. The analytical approach adds breadth, depth, and richness to efforts to provide efficient policies to address the global educational gender gap.	Fatou	 Jah
2006	65	Population and the Nutritional Transition	Urbanization and the Nutrition Transition in Cebu, Philippines	My goal is to use a scale measure of urbanicity based on demographic and modernization characteristics to describe urbanization and its effects on obesity risk in a large, Philippine, metropolitan area. Data are from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey, which has been following study participants since their birth in 1983. In 2002, under and normal weight (BMI≤25) young adults were evenly distributed across tertiles of the urbanicity scale, while overweight (BMI>25) study participants were much less likely to live in the most rural tertile of urbanicity (chi square p=0.001). This distribution was much more pronounced in young adult males. Furthermore, logistic regression revealed a positive, linear relationship between the continuous urbanicity scale (range 7-60) and obesity risk in young adult males, even after controlling for current education and SES [OR 1.02, p=0.017; OR 1.84 for a 30 point change in urbanicity]. This relationship was not seen in females.	Darren	L. Dahly
2006	65	Population and the Nutritional Transition	Inquiry into the Simultaneous Existence of Malnutrition and Overweight in India	India is facing a double burden of overnutrition and undernutrition; hence, the combination of a high proportion of malnourished people and an increasing proportion of obesity needs further exploration. This paper focuses on the Body Mass Index of Indian women using National Family Health Survey to investigate the simultaneous existence of malnutrition, and overweight and obesity. Logistic regression analysis determines the probability of having underweight and overweight, respectively. The results show that malnutrition is particularly serious for rural, illiterate, low-caste women with low standard of living. Obesity is becoming a substantial problem for urban, well-educated, and high standard of living women. Quantile regression uncovers the varying impact of socioeconomic factors across different BMI quantile groups. The regional differences in specific BMI quantiles obtained through quantile regression is pivotal in terms of policy recommendation.	Aravinda	 Guntupalli
2006	65	Population and the Nutritional Transition	The Transformation of Hunger: The Demand for Calories Past and Present	According to conventional income measures, nineteenth century American and British industrial workers were two to four times as wealthy as poor people in developing countries today. Surprisingly, however, today’s poor are less hungry than yesterday’s wealthy industrial workers. I estimate the demand for calories of American and British industrial workers using the 1888 Cost of Living Survey and find that the estimated caloric elasticities for both American and British households are greater than caloric elasticity estimates for households in present day developing countries. The results are robust to measurement error, unreported food consumption, and indirect estimation bias. This finding implies substantial nutritional improvements among the poor in the twentieth century. Using the Engel curve implied by the historical caloric elasticities, I derive new income estimates for developing countries which yield income estimates that are six to ten times greater than those derived using purchasing power parity or GDP deflators.	Trevon	D Logan
2006	65	Population and the Nutritional Transition	Diet, Body Mass Index, Physical Activity and the Education Connection among Adults in China	Evidence of increasing obesity and poor diet among low socioeconomic status groups in developing countries is found in the literature. However, the connection between education and obesity and diet patterns is not well understood. Our analysis is rooted in a first order dynamic health production model using body mass index as gauge for health outcome and the balance between macronutrient consumption and physical activity as measures of production input. We use data for adults in the 1991, 1993, 1997 and 2000 China Health and Nutrition Survey as an application, focusing on comparison of parameters for education across equations for BMI, nutrient inputs and physical activities, between men and women, urban and rural areas. The reduced form analysis reveals important associations between socioeconomic factors and health output and input, as well as changes of such associations over time.	Zhehui	 Luo
2006	66	Contraception	Rising Popularity of Injectable Contraceptives in Sub-Saharan Africa	Injectable contraceptives are fast becoming the method of choice among married women in sub-Saharan Africa. In several countries in the region, the proportion of women using injectable methods has surpassed the proportion of women using the pill. This is true even in some countries where the pill had been the most popular modern method in the 1980s and 1990s. This paper begins with a review of the history and experience with injectable contraceptives. It presents an overview of the DHS data on its pattern of use in sub-Saharan Africa. It then focuses on a select group of countries, including Malawi and Tanzania, to investigate recent increases in prevalence of injectable contraceptives, identify factors that drive the increase, and discuss the demographic and health consequences of this trend as well as implications for contraceptive security and sustainability in the region. The paper concludes by making specific recommendations for programs and policies.	Jacob	A. Adetunji
2006	66	Contraception	Myths, Misconceptions, Missed Opportunity: How Mistaken Beliefs and Lack of Knowledge Limit Family Planning Use in a Rural Indian Village	Though family planning services are provided at minimal cost to Indian women, most opt for sterilization when desired family size is reached. Little is known about the reasons women are reluctant to use other temporary methods despite positive attitudes towards contraception. This study attempts to addresses the question in a small coastal village in western India. Married women of reproductive age and older were interviewed in six focus groups (n=60) and individually (n=14) using a qualitative question guide regarding family planning methods, use, and side effects. Misinformation regarding contraceptive mechanisms and side effects are the primary cause of family planning service underutilization. Economic migration of village men also limits perceived need for temporary methods. Trained village women who are knowledgeable can effectively disseminate family planning information. Targeted educational efforts for villagers and structured counseling at or before service delivery are recommended to give women the knowledge to make informed decisions.	Mary	Ann  Kirkconnell-Hall
2006	66	Contraception	Natural Resource Responsibility and Seasonal Patterns in Contraceptive Behavior: Evidence from Nepal	This paper presents the use of discrete-time multilevel hazard models to explore the effects of natural resource responsibility and season on contraceptive adoption and discontinuation between 1997 and 2003 in the Western Chitwan Valley of Nepal. Data from the Chitwan Valley Family Study, containing a sample of 1,761 women of reproductive age, are used for this analysis. Women in this study are found to be less likely to adopt any method and more likely to discontinue non-permanent methods in the monsoon months than in the winter. There is little evidence to suggest that this seasonal pattern in contraceptive behavior is significantly stronger among women with greater natural resource responsibilities, although more sensitive measures of seasonal responsibility would be desirable for better assessing this relationship. This study contributes to the literature by looking beyond seasonality in births to examine the effects of season and natural resource responsibility on contraceptive behavior.	Elizabeth	G. Sutherland
2006	66	Contraception	Condom Use among Temporary Migrants in Beijing	This article discusses knowledge, attitude, and practice of condom use among young male migrants who work in Beijing. Data came from a stratified quota sampling survey and focus group discussions conducted in Beijing in 2004; a group of local residents with similar characteristics was also surveyed as a reference group. The study results show that most male migrants and all local male residents surveyed and interviewed knew about condoms. However, migrants from rural areas had less and incomplete information regarding condoms. The knowledge about condom as well as the use of condom is closely related to age, marital status, exposure to media, education, and monthly income among migrants. “Peers education” seems to be an important channel for promotion and newspapers, magazines, and flyers may also play a major role in promotion of condom use in China.	Yun	 Zhou	Zhenzhen	 Zheng
2006	67	Disability and Work	The Effect of Disability Insurance on Spousal Labor Supply	Current estimates of the work disincentive effects of the Social Security disability insurance (DI) program are much lower than past cohorts. These lower estimates occur despite increases in the generosity of the DI program and decrease in the stringency of the qualification rules for DI. One reason for the apparent decrease in the work disincentive effect may be the ability of husbands (or wives) to insure their spouses in the event of an adverse health shock. Using a new dataset that matches households who apply for DI to administrative data on DI application and award information, we find that the employment rate of husbands of DI applicants is higher in the case where their wives do not receive benefits compared to the case where they do. Similar results are also found for the wives of DI applicants.	Susan	 Chen
2006	67	Disability and Work	Disability and Employment for Single Mothers, 1989-2004	This paper investigates trends in employment for single mothers with and without disabilities from 1989 to 2004, using annual data for single mothers ages 25-54 from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS). Results show, first, a growing employment rate gap between those with and without disabilities, net of common control variables. Second, this trend is unlikely to result largely from greater access to disability benefits. Third, single mothers, especially those with disabilities, have become more likely to live in extended households; implications of this trend depend on the form of household extension. Finally, disability has significant interactive effects for Black single mothers, those with college degrees, and those with greater other household income. This is consistent with the suggestion that single mothers with disabilities are especially likely to remain out of the labor force if they cannot get jobs adequate to cover the costs their labor force entry would incur.	Philip	N. Cohen
2006	67	Disability and Work	Aching to Retire? The Increase in the Normal Retirement Age and Its Impact on the Disability Rolls	In 1983 the federal government passed legislation that gradually increased the age at which individuals can receive full social security retirement benefits from 65 to 67 and reduced the generosity of benefits available at the early retirement age of 62.  No corresponding changes were made to social security disability insurance (DI) benefits.  Once fully phased in, these changes will substantially increase individuals' financial incentives to apply for DI benefits.  In this paper we use administrative data from the Social Security Administration to estimate the effect of this change on DI enrollment. Our findings indicate that the policy has contributed to the recent growth in the disability rolls with the effect concentrated among 63 and 64 year old men.  Once the policy is fully phased in our estimates suggest that DI enrollment for this group of near-elderly men will increase by 1.6 percentage points (13 percent).	Mark	G. Duggan	Perry	 Singleton	Jae	 Song
2006	67	Disability and Work	Mothers of Children Receiving Supplemental Security Income: Sharpening the Focus on Barriers to Employment	The substantial investments of both parental time and money required for raising a child with severe disabilities exert competing pressures on maternal labor supply. This is especially true for economically disadvantaged, single mothers. With employment and self-sufficiency as key policy goals of welfare reform, there is a press to better understand how entitlement programs, along with other factors, influence the cost-benefit calculus of mothers’ employment decisions when raising an exceptional child.     Our aim is to understand how children’s health conditions influence maternal labor supply among poor minority women. We use two waves of a survey of children with special health care needs administered to over 900 minority mothers in the District of Columbia who have a child receiving SSI for one or more disabilities. Children’s health status is systematically assessed across multiple dimensions. We estimate multinomial logit models of labor market activity with an instrumental variable for baseline TANF receipt.	Donna	R. Morrison	Jean	M. Mitchell	Darrell	 Gaskin
2006	68	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Getting and Keeping a Home: A Lifetable Analysis of Black/White Homeownership Transitions in the US, 1969-2003	While a number of demographic and socioeconomic factors have been linked to homeownership, research demonstrates that racial differences in ownership rates persist even after accounting for life-cycle, resources, preferences and regional composition. This project examines the black/white homeownership gap by assessing the household transitions in and out of homeownership from 1969-2003. By utilizing the residence histories of a national sample of households, I am able to study age differences in the timing of home purchases and differential rates of ownership loss. Using multi-state life tables I study the black/white differences in the occurrence and timing of housing transitions such as becoming an owner, buying subsequent homes and returning to renter status. An emphasis is placed on how these transitions have changed over time between 1969-2003 and how they vary across cohorts.	Vanesa	 Estrada
2006	68	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Do Race, Gender, and Age Differences Affect Manager-Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm	Using data from a large retail employer, we examine how demographic differences between manager and subordinate affect the subordinate’s rate of quits, dismissals, and promotions. Demographic differences can produce statistically significant effects, especially differences in race and ethnicity. RACE: Blacks and Hispanics with racially or ethnically dissimilar managers are much more likely to be fired, and less likely to be promoted. By contrast, white employees with non-white managers are less likely to be dismissed than whites with white managers, and more likely to be promoted. Racial differences also cause a moderate increase in Hispanic and white quits, but not in black quits. AGE: Employees who are significantly younger than their managers are more likely to be dismissed, but employees who are significantly older than their managers are less likely to be dismissed. GENDER: Having a different-sex manager affects only quit rates, which are slightly higher.	Laura	M. Giuliano	David	I.  Levine	Jonathan	 Leonard
2006	68	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Segregation and Scale: The Use and Interpretation of Spatial Segregation Profiles for Investigating the Causes, Patterns, and Consequences of Residential Segregation	In this paper, we address an aspect of segregation research which has been largely ignored in prior study—the issue of scale in understanding segregation causes, patterns, and consequences. Because the causes and consequences of segregation may depend on its scale (local segregation will affect pedestrian contact patterns; macro scale segregation may affect the spatial distribution of institutional resources), the study of segregation requires scale-sensitive measures. The paper includes three sections: First, a brief discussion of the theoretical importance of considering scale in investigating segregation; second, a description of a new approach to computing 'segregation profiles' that indicate the level of segregation at different spatial scales; and third, a discussion of how these profiles are to be interpreted. In this third section, we illustrate the discussion with a set of maps and figures to ground the interpretation of the profiles.	Sean	F. Reardon	Stephen	 Matthews	David	 O'Sullivan	Glenn	 Firebaugh	Chad	R. Farrell
2006	68	Race and Ethnic Inequality	Who Pays the Penalties? Earnings Effect of Ethnic Labor Market Concentration in Multi-Racial Metropolitan Contexts	With the huge influx of immigrants to the United States, it is a well-observed phenomenon that a large number of ethnic minorities concentrate in a particular set of labor market sectors. Although considerable literature suggests that metropolitan contexts have significant effect on the job earnings of different racial and ethnic groups, there is a missing link between the metropolitan context and the earnings effect of ethnic niche employment. Using data from the 2000 Census data, this study deploys a multilevel research approach to compare job earnings of white, black, Hispanic and Asian workers in their respective niche and non-niche sectors, and to examine how the metropolitan urban labor market contexts influence these earnings. The findings show that engaging in ethnic niches is the main source of earnings inequalities among different ethnic groups and contextual conditions have great impacts on job earnings between ethnic niches and non-niches, and between different groups.	Qingfang	 Wang
2006	69	Issues Related to Study Design, Data Collection and Analysis in Developing Countries	Sexual Behavior and STI/HIV Status among Adolescents in Rural Malawi: An Evaluation of the Effect of Interview Mode on Reporting	Our understanding of the dynamics of HIV transmission in developing countries is compromised by unreliable data on sexual behavior. This paper examines whether audio computer assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) produces more accurate data on sexual behavior than face-to-face interviews.. Approximately 500 unmarried females aged 15-21 in rural Malawi were randomized to either a face-to-face or ACASI interview for the sexual behavior questions. Biomarkers collected for STIs and HIV enable us to investigate the association between STI/HIV status and sexual behavior by interview mode. If respondents are averse to revealing risky sexual behavior in face-to-face interviewers, the association between STI status and reported behaviors should be lower than that observed with ACASI, other things being equal. In addition, we will assess the consistency of responses between the main interview and a subsequent interview conducted by nurses prior to the collection of biomarkers.	Barbara	S Mensch	Paul	C Hewett	Richard	 Gregory
2006	69	Issues Related to Study Design, Data Collection and Analysis in Developing Countries	Evaluating HIV Estimates from National Population-Based Surveys for Bias due to Non-Response	Recently, HIV seroprevalence data have been collected in several national population-based surveys, such as Demographic and Health Surveys and AIDS Indicators Surveys. Such surveys enable direct estimation of population HIV prevalence. A major challenge for surveys is bias due non-response, both from refusal and absence. We evaluate survey estimates from eight sub-Saharan African countries for non-response bias. For each country, we predict HIV prevalence among non-responding adults based on multivariate statistical models of HIV for those who were interviewed and tested, using a common set of predictor variables. Predictions are made separately for adult males and females who were absent or refused testing. Results from Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, and Tanzania (Lesotho, Malawi, and Uganda to be added) indicate that although non-tested males and females tend to have higher predicted HIV prevalence than those tested, overall effects of non-response on the observed national HIV prevalence estimates tend to be small.	Vinod	 Mishra	Ties	 Boerma	Ann	 Way	Bernard	 Barrere	Fred	 Arnold	Anne	R. Cross	Rathavuth	 Hong	Kiersten	 Johnson	Shane	 Khan
2006	69	Issues Related to Study Design, Data Collection and Analysis in Developing Countries	The Effect of Non-Response on Population-Based HIV Prevalence Estimates: The Case of Rural Malawi	I explore if non-response to HIV testing exerts a downward bias in HIV prevalence rates obtained from population-based surveys. I use biomarker data that was collected between March and August 2004 in three rural districts of Malawi (Balaka, Mchinji, and Rumphi) by the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP). I employ a sensitivity analysis and a probit regression model with sample selection to determine the extent to which selective response to HIV testing biases the MDICP estimates of HIV prevalence. The results from sensitivity analysis show that non-response to HIV testing seems to exert a downward bias in HIV prevalence rate for one district, Rumphi, but not for Balaka and Mchinji districts. However, the selection model shows that overall, selective response to HIV testing does not significantly bias the MDICP HIV prevalence estimates. The case of Rumphi could therefore be genuine or an artifact of the assumptions made.	Francis	 Obare
2006	69	Issues Related to Study Design, Data Collection and Analysis in Developing Countries	Refusal to Be Tested for HIV and the Likelihood of Infection: A Potential, but Unlikely Source of Bias in Community-Based Studies of HIV Prevalence	Population-based studies involving HIV serostatus testing are regularly used to evaluate HIV prevalence estimates derived from ANC sentinel surveillance sites or to provide alternative estimates altogether. Bias in community-based estimates is, however, also plausible because of shortcomings in the sampling frame and non-response due to population mobility and/or refusal. In this paper, we investigate the association between refusal and HIV infection in a large governmental hospital in Addis Ababa, and via regression models that account for sample selection, we quantify the ensuing bias in HIV prevalence estimates. We find that refusal is indeed correlated with the likelihood of infection, but the resulting bias in HIV prevalence estimates –in our study population as well as in community-based studies– is likely to be negligible. The latter will depend in great part on the study protocol and informed consent procedures. We also find that consent for testing increased since the introduction of antiretroviral treatment.	Georges	 Reniers	Tekebash	 Araya	Yemane	 Berhane	Eduard	J. Sanders	Gail	 Davey
2006	70	History of the Life Course and Family Transitions	Black-White Interracial Marriage Trends, 1850-2000	This article traces the trend in black/white interracial marriage from 1850-2000, using microlevel Census samples. The results show that the frequency of interracial marriage has been highly responsive to the dynamic nature of broader race relations. The growth of the Jim Crow racial state in the South and segregation in the North led to a drastic decline in the frequency of interracial marriage from 1880 to 1930. The frequency of interracial marriage increased in the waning days of this system between 1930 and 1940, but only began to increase at a steady and rapid rate in the post-Civil Rights era. When disaggregated by region, the results suggest a process of latent racism in the non-South, and one of unequal gender suppression in the South. Results by nativity and education are also discussed.	Aaron	 Gullickson
2006	70	History of the Life Course and Family Transitions	Normative Groups: Religion and Language as Structural Determinants of the Choice between Marriage and Common-Law Union in Quebec and Ontario, 1937-2001	Important changes in the behavior related to family and sexual life observed in Quebec during the second half of the 20th century are a consequence of an important transformation of the foundation of the normative system shared by the members of its main socio-religious group, French-speaking Catholics. Using biographical data from the 2001 Survey on the History of the family, I compare the evolution of the behavior of Quebec French-speaking Catholics and Ontario English-speaking Protestants in the rate of union formation and the choice between marriage and common-law union as the form of first union. The general result is that the evolution of the differences between the two groups is compatible with the hypothesis.	Benoît	 Laplante
2006	70	History of the Life Course and Family Transitions	This Land is My Land: Establishing the Historical Link between Housing and Family Status within the Middle Class Life Course in the USA, 1900-2000	I argue that territoriality, as a set of strategies for demarcating and controlling land, plays a key role within the middle class life course. In particular, housing strategies provide a distinct set of advantages to middle class families, but collectively, they also serve to establish orderly progression along the middle class life course. Historically, family formation within the middle class life course became dependent upon access to proper housing. I examine the association between family status and housing situation from 1900-2000 using the IPUMS census records. Data (becoming available at different times), includes ownership, costs, detachment of structure, rooms per person, and rooms per child. I attempt to separate out associations between housing and family status for the middle class from those for other groups. Preliminary findings indicate strong associations. Changes in access to housing over time strongly predict changes in nuptiality and fertility, with intriguing implications for future research.	Nathanael	 Lauster
2006	70	History of the Life Course and Family Transitions	Young Adulthood as a Factor in Social Change	This essay compares family change during two periods of social and historical upheaval in the U.S.: the industrial revolution and the post-1960 period. Despite the manifest social and demographic changes that the industrial revolution brought, some aspects of family life remained unchanged. Almost all new families formed in the U.S. before and during the industrial revolution were same-race heterosexual marriages. In the post-1960 period, however, family diversity became the new rule; interracial marriages and extramarital cohabitation have both risen sharply. I suggest that a key to understanding the new family diversity (and the lack of diversity in the past) is the changing nature of young adulthood.	Michael	J. Rosenfeld
2006	71	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Family Structure, Parent-Child Relationships, and Self-Rated Health in Adolescence and Young Adulthood	Using data from Waves I and III of Add Health, we examine the association between aspects of the parent-child relationship and self-rated health in adolescence (Wave I) and young adulthood (Wave III) for respondents living in two biological/adoptive, stepfather, and single mother families at Wave I. Overall, our findings indicate that self-rated health is reduced for respondents who lived in stepfather or single mother families during adolescence, although the effect is reduced in young adulthood. Family structure effects at both waves are explained by mother-child relationship measures and indicators of health characteristics and behaviors. Within-family structure models show that Wave I parent-child relationship measures are stronger predictors of self-rated health at Wave I than at Wave III. The influence of mother-child relationship measures on self-rated health is largely explained by indicators of the father-child relationship and health characteristics and behaviors.	Holly	 Heard	Bridget	K. Gorman	Carolyn	A. Kapinus
2006	71	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Gender Differences in the Experience of Depression in the Family Context	Depression is a common illness that interferes with social functioning.  We developed a gender-sensitive model of depression in the family context based on self-in-relation theory and gender role theory.  We tested the model using psychological, emotional, and relational data collected from parents and their adolescent children from nearly 200 families across the United States in the Sloan 500 Families Study.  Our results confirm the presence of gender differences in the emotional experience of depression; women experienced greater inward negativity while men experienced greater outward negativity.  We observed stronger associations between spousal depression and marital satisfaction in wives than in husbands and we found that while depression was associated with negative feelings about parenting in both mothers and fathers, only depressed fathers spent less time talking with or engaged in activities with their adolescent children, consistent with the stronger constraints on maternal behavior predicted by our model. 	Lianne	M. Kurina	Barbara	 Schneider	Linda	 Waite
2006	71	Family and Health Over the Life Course	The NSLY79 Cohort Turns Forty: Predictors of Continuity and Change	Life course approaches emphasize both continuity and change over time. As the late baby boom respondents of the NLSY79 turn forty, over twenty years of data permit a more comprehensive look at how cognitive and psychosocial resources present in late adolescence and early adulthood, as well as characteristics of families of origin, combine with family experiences in adulthood to shape emotional well-being in maturity. I focus on the subset of approximately 5,500 NLSY respondents who had turned forty by 2002 and completed the 40-and-older module in 1998, 2000, or 2002. I examine linkages among early cognitive skills, mastery, and self-esteem reported in 1979 and 1980, subsequent sense of mastery and depressive symptoms assessed in 1992, and depressive symptoms around 2000, as well as work and family patterns by the outcome year. I also evaluate how these linkages vary by race-ethnicity and gender.	Elizabeth	 Menaghan
2006	71	Family and Health Over the Life Course	Health Transitions among Older Adults in Mexico: A Couples Approach	The paper examines the socioeconomic, demographic and life style determinants of two-year health transitions among adults aged 50 or older in Mexico. We use data from the National Mexican Health and Aging Study waves 2001 and 2003. The outcome variable in this paper is the two-year change in self-reported health status. We focus on unobserved heterogeneity, that is, the role of latent, unobserved factors such as attitudes or preferences that affect health. We use spouse data to essentially reduce or eliminate the influence of unmeasured covariates that are common to both spouses on the health of each. Comparisons of the results from these models with those from models based on individuals provide indications about the biases introduced by unobserved heterogeneity in models of determinants of health.	Rebeca	 Wong	Alberto	 Palloni
2006	72	Relationships & Sexual Behavior in Youth	What It Takes to Get the Pretty Girl or Cute Guy	Marriage and childbirth are preceded by the matching of men and women in the relationship market. This matching process is far less studied than its sequelae of cohabitation, marriage, fertility, and divorce. This investigation examines this demographically important area by analyzing one important aspect of voluntary matching: physical attractiveness. We estimate the probability of matching with a physically attractive partner, as a function of one's own characteristics such as physical attractiveness, body weight, education, and income using data from wave 3 of the Add Health Couples Sample. Results of this model provide the answer to our research question: what does it take to get the pretty girl or cute guy? We find that obesity is a significant disadvantage to matching with a physically attractive partner. Moreover, there are relatively few ways to compensate for obesity. The positive news is that good grooming or an attractive personality offset most (but not all) of this penalty.	Julie	H Carmalt	John	 Cawley	Kara	 Joyner	Jeffery	 Sobal
2006	72	Relationships & Sexual Behavior in Youth	What’s Love Got to Do with It? Sexual Behaviors of Opposite-Sex Couples during Emerging Adulthood	Developing sexual relationships and engaging in sexual activity are important components of emerging adulthood for many individuals and are connected to issues of health, love, and wellbeing. To describe the sexual activities of young adults with their current partners and to determine if these activities are predicted by love between partners, I analyzed data from 6,494 young adults who reported a current sexual relationship in Wave III of Add Health. The findings indicate that mutually high levels of loving between partners are associated with a wide range of sexual activities, including oral sex for males and females and anal sex for males. These results emphasize the positive role of sexuality in loving relationships and have important implications for STI and HIV prevention efforts.	Christine	E. Kaestle
2006	72	Relationships & Sexual Behavior in Youth	A Characterization of Young Adults’ Nonmarital Sexual Relationships: Findings from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health	Relational patterns and behaviors learned during adolescence and young adulthood are influential for reproductive health outcomes and set the stage for future family formation choices and behaviors. In order to better understand the extent to which the relational context influences behavior within relationships, it is imperative that researchers first delve into these relationships in a more descriptive manner than has been done in the past. Using the retrospective sexual relationship histories of young adults from the third wave of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this paper provides a detailed description of young adults’ nonmarital sexual relationships and the cumulative patterns of their sexual relationship histories. Findings suggest that the sexual unions that are formed during this time period are diverse in terms of relationship commitment and couple homogamy. Results also indicate that the features of these relationships differ depending on the age, gender, and race/ethnicity of the individual.	Yasamin	 Kusunoki	Dawn	 Upchurch
2006	72	Relationships & Sexual Behavior in Youth	Adolescent Dating Relationships and the Management of Sexual Risk	Adolescent sexual behavior typically occurs within a relationship context, but we know more about parent and peer effects than about how specific features of romantic relationships influence sexual decision-making. A basic premise of this research is that decisions about sexual risk-taking are relational as well as “health” decisions. We draw on data from the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study to explore the role of communication and emotional processes, asymmetries and levels of commitment that characterize adolescent romantic relationships. We evaluate how these relationship qualities influence the management of risk within the relationship, defined as communication about partner’s past risk behavior, condom use and sexual exclusivity. Results provide support for a relationship focus--scales measuring communication awkwardness and intimate self-disclosure are significantly related to the likelihood of relationship non-exclusivity. In addition, relationship asymmetries were linked to a decreased likelihood of condom use.	Wendy	D. Manning	Peggy	C. Giordano	Monica	A. Longmore	Christine	 Flanigan
2006	73	Comparative Trends in Adolescent Fertility	Adolescent Fertility in the Developing World: Trends and Comparisons between Countries and Major Areas	This paper presents an overview of the recent trends in adolescent fertility in the developing world. The data used come from the Demographic and Health Surveys for 40 countries. The results of the analysis show that, in general, adolescent fertility has slightly decreased in Africa and Asia whereas it has increased in Latin America and the Caribbean. As expected, early childbearing is more prominent among less educated, rural, and poor women and this holds true across countries and the major areas of the world. What is unexpected is that the increase in adolescent fertility in Latin America and the Caribbean occurred despite the fact that contraceptive use among the young women (aged 15-19 and 20-24) of this major area has also increased during the same period. The paper concludes with a discussion of the factors that may explain the differing trends in adolescent fertility in the developing world.	Hantamalala	 Rafalimanana	Vasantha	K. Kandiah
2006	73	Comparative Trends in Adolescent Fertility	Early Childbearing and Schooling in Urban South Africa	South Africa's total fertility rate is fewer than three births per woman and declining. At the same time we find that more than 35 percent of 20-year-old girls have given birth at least once. Limited data in developing countries, particularly the lack of information on timing of events, has not allowed for properly addressing how early life characteristics matter for early childbearing and schooling. We take advantage of a unique panel data to examine the dynamics defining early childbearing and the factors facilitating school enrollment after childbearing. The Cape Area Panel Study (CAPS) is a survey of 4,800 young people in Cape Town that also includes a calendar with extensive retrospective information. Unlike many countries, a birth does not necessarily mean South African girls permanently drop out of school. We find for example that 35% of girls who gave birth at age 15 are enrolled in school at age 16.	Leticia	J. Marteleto	David	 Lam	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2006	73	Comparative Trends in Adolescent Fertility	The Impact of Protestantism on Fertility Behaviors of Adolescents in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil	In recent history Brazil has experienced a dramatic shift in its religious composition with decreasing rates of Catholicism and increasing rates of Protestantism. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the potential impact of increasing Protestantism on adolescent fertility. Using micro-data from the 2000 Brazilian Census for the metropolitan region of Rio de Janeiro we find that Protestants have lower adolescent fertility rates when compared to Catholics. In addition, among adolescent females with a child born in the previous year, Protestants are much more likely to either be married or cohabiting at the time of the census. Protestant religious affiliation appears to provide a protective effect in terms of adolescent fertility behavior. This finding provides evidence that the changing religious composition of Brazil may have a profound impact on many aspects of society including, but not limited to, adolescent fertility.	Sarah	 McKinnon	Virginia	 Garrard-Burnett
2006	73	Comparative Trends in Adolescent Fertility	Adolescent Risk Taking: Comparing across a Decade?	In this research, we utilize an adolescent life cycle perspective to explore the extent to which teenage sexual and reproductive behaviors have common attitudinal and behavioral origins. This paper is an extension of our prior work where we examined high risk teens in 1994. In particular, we contrast results for two distinctly different cohorts of adolescents, one born to adolescent mothers, and one born to mothers who were at more mainstream childbearing ages. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), we employ partial correlational and logit techniques to compare the sexual behavior of teens surveyed in 1994 to teens surveyed in 2004. Results provide important comparative insights on changing sexual and reproductive behavior among an important national sample of American teenagers.	Frank	 Mott	Lori	 Kowaleski-Jones
2006	74	Race Differentials in Aging	Individual Perceptions of Mortality Decline	Demographers are well aware of the vast decreases in mortality among industrialized countries during the past century. Although there are differences of opinion, they generally expect mortality decline to continue into the future. But how do individuals perceive the process of mortality decline? Previous research has explored individual survivorship expectations in the cross section and among a cohort over time. In this paper, I examine the evolution of these perceptions across multiple cohorts over time in order to gauge how individuals perceive the process of mortality decline. I use data on subjective survivorship probabilities in the U.S. Health and Retirement Study, focusing on expectations measured in 1992, 1998, and 2004.  I also discuss trends in the variation of expectations across individuals and groups and relate it to the variation in mortality outcomes.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2006	74	Race Differentials in Aging	Mortality at Late Age for Major U.S. Race-Ethnic Groups	Ethnic differences in mortality at late age have attracted considerable discussion, most notably in terms of the Black/White crossover in age-specific death rates as well as the significantly lower death rates among the Hispanic population relative to others. The proposed paper presents an analysis of U.S. mortality data in race-ethnic detail, by sex and single-year age, from age 60 to 100+, relying on a time series of mortality rates from 1984 to 1999 for three major race-ethnic categories (Hispanic, Black Non-Hispanic, and Non-Black Non-Hispanic). The dynamics of mortality rates by sex and single-year age for these categories are examined to discern whether there has been convergence or divergence in the mortality schedules at ages 60 and older. The impact of alternative graduations, including those suggested by Thatcher and associates (1998) are investigated.	Ward	 Kingkade
2006	74	Race Differentials in Aging	Obesity and Racial Differences in Active Life Expectancy of Older Adults	Recent research indicates that obesity plays no role in life expectancy for older men or women, but significantly raises the likelihood of experiencing disability during remaining life for both. In this paper, the first three waves of the Asset and Health Dynamics Survey (AHEAD) are used to examine racial differences in the impact of obesity on active life expectancy (ALE) in 70+ adults. A multistate lifetable approach is used, with IMaCh software, to estimate transition probabilities and years spent in disability. Results indicate that obesity has a stronger effect on life expectancy in older African Americans than older Whites. Obesity has a stronger impact on disability in older White than African American males, and a stronger impact on older African American women only. The results of this study imply a complex relationship between obesity and the races at old age, which deserves further research. Implications of these findings are discussed.	Sandra	L. Reynolds
2006	74	Race Differentials in Aging	Race and Gender Differences in Overweight and Obesity over the Life Course	We use four waves of panel data from the Americans' Changing Lives (ACL) survey to examine whether race disparities in obesity and overweight status change over the adult life course and to determine whether this pattern differs for men and women. A secondary goal is to investigate the role of social stress in contributing to these patterns. We find substantial evidence of a race disparity in obesity, but only among women. African-American women are substantially more likely to be obese than White women at all stages of the life course. However, the complex life course trajectory of change in the probability of being obese or overweight differs significantly for African-American and White women. The race gap in obesity/overweight among women is greatest in mid-life and exposure to psychosocial stress appears to partly explain this association.	Kristi	 Williams	Adrianne	 Frech
2006	75	Children’s Impacts on Parents’ Lives	So Long as the Baby is Healthy: The Effect of Disability in Children on Mothers’ Subsequent Childbearing	This study explores the effects of children's disability on their mothers' subsequent fertility decisions. Caring for a child with a disability may influence mothers’ later decisions about childbearing. Raising a child with a disability can be taxing. Mothers of children with a disability may decide to forgo subsequent childbearing so as to dedicate their familial resources to meeting the needs of their child with a disability. However, childbearing is largely motivated by social-psychological forces. The desire for typical parent-child interactions may increase the desire for further children. Using quantitative and qualitative data, I explore these opposing hypotheses. Matched data from the 1993 National Health Interview Survey and 1995 National Survey of Family Growth serve as the basis for discrete-time analyses of subsequent childbearing, while in-depth interviews of parents of children with disabilities provide insight and nuance into the life circumstances in which childbearing decisions are made.	Maryhelen	 D'Ottavi
2006	75	Children’s Impacts on Parents’ Lives	Non-Marital Fertility, Child Health, and Marriage: Do Adverse Birth Outcomes Alter a Woman's Probability of Marriage?	The past few decades have witnessed increases in the rates of low birth weight deliveries and non-marital fertility in the United States. This study examines the influence of poor birth outcomes on the marital prospects of unwed mothers, about which little is known. We use the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey. This dataset oversamples very low-birthweight (VLBW) babies, validates mothers’ reports of child health with objective medical data, and permits use of additional early child health measures. We focus on primaparous unwed women who were followed up between 8-18 months post-delivery. Our recent work indicates that VLBW babies have a significant impact on marital dissolution. We extend this here by jointly modeling a discrete time hazard model for marriage and a probit model for VLBW to estimate the causal effects of VLBW on the probability of marriage, using as instruments mother’s birthweight and community level health infrastructure.	Andrzej	 Kulczycki	Shailender	 Swaminathan	Alexander	 Greg
2006	75	Children’s Impacts on Parents’ Lives	Longitudinal Trajectories of Youth Risk Behaviors and Family Processes: Who Influences Whom?	Addressing current debates concerning bidirectional influences between parents and children, this paper examines whether fathers’ and mothers’ parenting practices and family structure predict adolescents’ trajectories of substance use and sexual activity and similarly, whether adolescent risk behaviors predict trajectories of parenting and family processes. Employing 6 waves of data from a subsample of adolescents from the NLSY97 (N = 3780), hierarchical generalized non-linear models found that fathers’ parenting, family routines, and family structure predicted trajectories of adolescent risk behaviors. Moreover, adolescent risk behaviors, particularly substance use, predicted trajectories of decreasing parental involvement over time. Differences by child gender and family structure were also assessed. Results suggest that parent-adolescent relationships are indeed a two-way street. Although more involved and structured parenting, particularly from fathers, may help dissuade adolescents from initiating engagement in risky behaviors, parents also appear to abdicate their parental roles in the face of increased adolescent problem behaviors.	Rebekah	Levine  Coley	Elizabeth	 Votruba-Drzal	Holly	 Schindler
2006	75	Children’s Impacts on Parents’ Lives	Did Children Matter in Financial Support to Old Parents?	The objective is to explore the financial contribution to elderly parents from their own children and the effect of the number and sex of children on the family support of the elderly in rural China. The hypothesis is that the elderly in rural areas are highly dependent of the support from children. The data used for this paper are from two national aging surveys conducted in 1992 and 2000. We decomposed the total earnings of the elderly into three parts: self income, self plus social support, and self plus social support plus children’s support. Then we calculated the contribution from the children’s support, i.e. so called family support. We will also conduct multivariate analysis defining total income of the elderly as the response variable, the number and sex of their children as explanatory variable, and some demographic and socioeconomic characteristics as the control variables. The hypothesis has been verified.	Xiaochun	 Qiao	Kaiti	 Zhang
2006	76	Legacies of the Past: Early Childhood Conditions and Adult Outcomes	The Childhood Origins of Adult Health and Well-Being: Do Cohort and Gender Matter?	Are the family and childhood antecedents of adult health and well-being the same for individuals born in 1958 and in 1970 in Great Britain? Do these antecedents differ for men and women? Exploiting the overlaps in the content, and similarities in the timing of interviews, we use the National Child Development Study (NCDS), and the British Cohort Study (BCS) to derive a broad ranging set of summary measures of family and childhood antecedents. We examine their effect on adult health and well-being using several adult measures of mental and physical health and of life satisfaction, at age 33 for the NCDS and at age 30 for the BCS. Pooling the two cohorts in a common regression model including gender and time interactions, we characterize commonalities and differences between gender, and over time.	John	 Hobcraft	Fiona	 Mensah
2006	76	Legacies of the Past: Early Childhood Conditions and Adult Outcomes	Youth Energy Balance: Evaluating the Impact of Family and Economic Trajectories	In this paper, we explore how family economic and energy balance history may be linked to youth overweight and development. We use the 2004 release of Young Adult data from National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) to explore the relationships among maternal BMI, family income, family background variables and youth overweight and healthy behaviors. In our study, we exploit the longitudinal nature of the NLSY to create long-term family economic and family BMI profiles. Finally, we also track the impact of these profiles for key subgroups of youth (e.g., those youth still living at home and those who have left the parental home). Using multivariate techniques, we relate trajectories of familial BMI and economic well-being to healthy youth behaviors such as engaging in exercise and the consumption of fruits and vegetables. Results from this research afford valuable insights into complexity of family contributions to youth energy balance.	Barbara	 Brown	Jessie	 Fan	Cathleen	 Zick
2006	76	Legacies of the Past: Early Childhood Conditions and Adult Outcomes	Parental Overweight, Adolescent Overweight, and Adult Overweight	Concern about the adolescent obesity epidemic in the United States has increased rapidly over recent years. This concern largely rises from the health consequences of obesity and overweight; however, more research is needed to investigate the social and behavioral causes and consequences of overweight throughout the life course. We use the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) Waves I-III to explore the early life course trajectory of being overweight by examining the pathways through which individual and family characteristics influence adolescent and early adult weight. Given that many people who are overweight as young adults were also overweight as adolescents, we estimate the direct and indirect connections between adolescent and early adult overweight. We also estimate the influence of family background, e.g., parental overweight, and whether its influence on weight decreases while other environmental factors gain importance as individuals grow older.	Gary	 Sandefur	Jessica	 Jakubowski	Caroline	L. Faulkner	Molly	A. Martin
2006	76	Legacies of the Past: Early Childhood Conditions and Adult Outcomes	Obesity and Health among Mexicans Aged 50 Years and Older: The Role of Childhood Conditions	The health dynamics of the older population in Mexico are fused by an unusual interaction between chronic conditions and infectious disease (Palloni et al. 2002). Recent studies show that adverse childhood conditions have long-term consequences for the risk of obesity and related co-morbid chronic conditions in later life. In this paper, we use two waves (2001 and 2003) from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) to: one, validate measured leg length as a reliable proxy for adverse childhood circumstances in the context of a developing country; two, examine the relationship between various measures of childhood conditions, parental background, and own education and assets and the risk of obesity in later life; and, three, assess the impact of obesity on selected health measures of function.	Rania	 Tfaily
2006	77	Intergenerational Exchanges in Transitional Societies	Intergenerational Support in a Context of High Geographic Mobility: A Case Study on Vietnam	Using Vietnam as an example, the study presented here aims at investigating how the transition from a socialist- to a market-based economic system influences change in intergenerational support. The paper more specifically explores the consequences of increasing geographic mobility on intergenerational support as measured both by co-residence and by remittances in Vietnam. Drawing on data from nationally representative samples (the 3% micro-sample of the 1999 Population Census and the 1997-98 Vietnam Living Standard Surveys), the study finds that (1) co-residence between adult children and their elderly parents remains the norm in Vietnam; (2) the acceleration of migration induces increasing geographic distance between generations; (3) the few elderly who move are more likely to co-reside with children than others; and (4) remittances from adult children to their aging parents are increasingly regarded as an alternative form of filial support.	Magali	 Barbieri
2006	77	Intergenerational Exchanges in Transitional Societies	The Effects of Rural-Urban Migration on Intergenerational Financial Transfer in China: From a Gender Perspective	Rural-urban migration gives female migrants a dramatic shift from their traditional norms, and is very likely to change the traditional pattern of old-age support in the patrilineal rural society. Using data from a 2005 survey, Shenzhen Rural-Urban Migrants, the paper analyzes the relationship between gender of married migrants and their provision of financial support to their noncoresiding parents after migration. The results show that females are likely to give their parents-in-law more financial support, but both male and female migrants provide more financial support to their natal parents after migration. It indicates that the traditional pattern of old-age support is still dominant, but out-migration of rural females tends to shrink the gender difference. The article also discusses how these findings relate to current and future problems of old-age security and son preference in rural China during the process of rural-urban migration.	Xiaoyi	 Jin	Shuzhuo	 Li	Marcus	W. Feldman
2006	77	Intergenerational Exchanges in Transitional Societies	Agricultural Aid and Intergenerational Relations in a Context of Industrial Transition: The Case of Nang Rong, Thailand	This work investigates impacts on rural areas during a country’s transition from rural subsistence to urban industrial, using help with harvesting rice as an illustration of the profound changes that occur. The setting is Nang Rong, Thailand, a region that has been experiencing social, economic, and demographic transformation in the last three decades. Nang Rong out-migrants are young adults. Their parents are approaching ages where it becomes progressively more difficult to do agricultural labor. Hence, rice harvest help from migrants impacts intergenerational relations between adult children and their parents. I find that migrants are much more likely to help with the rice harvest if their origin household owns securely titled land, and if the migrant has lower human capital endowments. Results suggest that intergenerational relations between parents and children are becoming more instrumental, which is related to a loss of interdependency among family members.	Martin	 Piotrowski
2006	77	Intergenerational Exchanges in Transitional Societies	Counting Women's Labor: A Reanalysis of Children's Net Production in Mead Cain's Bangladeshi Village	Due to the inherent difficulties in valuing women’s and children’s labor in pre-industrial economies, their time inputs are frequently excluded from analyses of net production, understating female net production and overstating that of men. Here we combine data from Mead Cain’s seminal (1977) study of children’s economic contributions in a Bangladeshi village with unusual data on the productivity of males and females by age in a variety of agricultural and domestic tasks from a Maya village practicing extensive subsistence agriculture. Incorporating the value of female labor raises the estimated age at which boys produce as much daily as they consume from 9 to 12 years (crossover age) and raises the age at which their cumulative production equals their cumulative consumption (breakeven age) to between 30 and 50. Girls cross over 1.5 years earlier than boys and break even substantially earlier, in their mid-20s. We believe these methods could be usefully applied in other contexts.	Rachel	 Sullivan	Karen	L. Kramer
2006	78	New Directions in Small-Area Population Estimation and Forecasting	The Official U.S. Census Bureau Population Estimates by Demographic Characteristics: Requirements, Evaluation, and Future Directions	The Population Division of the U.S. Census Bureau recently instituted a project to recommend ways to improve the methods for the official sub-national population estimates with age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin detail. This project was necessary in order to take advantage of newly available data, to update aspects of the current methods developed under the constraints of outdated technology, and to correct some irregularities that have been identified in the estimates data. The intended products of this project are four-fold: (1) Requirements to evaluate the suitability of the methods and data for the sub-national population estimates; (2) Competing proposals for how to improve the methods; (3) Test code and provisional estimates based on the proposed changes; and (4) Evaluation of the proposed methods and provisional data. This paper will detail the conditions that made this project necessary and summarize the work on the project to date.	Matthew	 Christenson
2006	78	New Directions in Small-Area Population Estimation and Forecasting	An Alternative to the Census Bureau’s Distributive Housing Unit Method for Estimating Population Size for Sub-County Areas	The U.S. Census Bureau produces population estimates for sub-county areas using the distributive housing unit method. This method distributes county population estimates to sub-county areas based on estimates of housing units (HU), persons per household (PPH) and occupancy rates (OCCR). The Census Bureau holds PPH and OCCR from Census 2000 constant due to the absence of updates. When all sub-areas within a county are not changing to the same degree or direction the variability of error for the estimates increases substantially. We develop and test an alternative approach that uses sample survey data to update estimates of PPH. Census Block Groups are clustered on the basis of distributions of household characteristics that underlie PPH. Households in sample surveys are coded by Block Group Type yielding estimates of PPH that result in a reduction in the variability of error for the estimates as compared with the currently used distributive method.	Warren	A. Brown
2006	78	New Directions in Small-Area Population Estimation and Forecasting	Estimating County-Level Life Expectancy and Infant Mortality Rate In China	Using data collected in China’s 2000 census, we construct sex-specific life tables at county-level. One challenge to this effort is to provide reliable and robust estimates of infant mortality rate, which often suffer severe underreporting. In this paper, we construct life tables for each of China’s 2367 county-level units and compare three different methods of estimating infant mortality rate: conventional infant mortality estimates based on reported births and deaths, Brass logit model based on mortality rates of other age groups and a standard mortality schedule, and empirical Bayes estimates based on infant mortality rates reported in the neighboring counties. The results show a good correspondence among these three estimates, particularly between the empirical Bayes estimates and the Brass model estimates. The study not only confirms the overall quality of Chinese mortality data, but also demonstrates the power of empirical Bayes method as a powerful tool for small area population estimation.	Yong	 Cai
2006	78	New Directions in Small-Area Population Estimation and Forecasting	Census Block Population Estimates: Purpose and Practice	Washington’s Forecasting Division has developed a program for small area population estimates in response to increasing demand from state and local governments. This program combines local building data, the georeferencing capabilities of a GIS with the division’s established city and county estimates program to produce population estimates at the census block level. Block data are then aggregated into special area estimates, which fulfill statutory requirements, establish population based taxation rates, and help evaluate state and local programs and policies. Advancing simple housing unit methods, this program is continuously updated with local building data as it becomes available. Other data, namely postal delivery data, is used when building data is suspect or not available. This program uses a best data at the best time approach. This paper outlines system development and the considerations leading to specific decisions that make the system useful, timely, and comprehensive.	Michael	S Mohrman	Kyle	 Reese-Cassal	Theresa	J. Lowe
2006	78	New Directions in Small-Area Population Estimation and Forecasting	Areal Interpolation of Population Counts Using Pre-Classified Land Cover Data	The need to combine spatial data representing socio-demographic information across various and incompatible spatial units is a common problem for demographers. A particular concern is computing small area trends when aggregation zone boundaries change during the trend interval. To combine population counts across incompatible tract geographies corresponding to successive census enumerations, the authors propose dasymetric areal interpolation using a pre-classified urban land cover data layer. This solution is preferable to traditional re-aggregation techniques. A test of the interpolation technique using the National Land Cover Dataset (NLCD) shows significant error reduction over area weighted interpolation of the same data. The NLCD compares favorably with other common techniques when considered on the basis of accuracy, precision and ease of use.	Michael	 Reibel	Aditya	 Agrawal
2006	79	Life Course Perspectives on Migration	Mexico-U.S. Migration and Stages of the Family Life Cycle	We use retrospective life history data for married men and women collected in 93 Mexican communities by the Mexican Migration Project to examine how the likelihood of migration to the United States and return migration to Mexico changes as couples progress through the family life cycle. We define four migration states based on the migration status of the husband and wife: (1) husband and wife together in Mexico; (2) husband in the U.S. and wife in Mexico; (3) husband in Mexico and wife in the U.S.; and (4) husband and wife in the U.S. together. Corresponding to each state is a set of possible transitions into each of the other states, which represent distinct types of migration. Using these states and transitions, we estimate multinomial discrete-time hazards models to identify the relative influence of prior migration experience and socioeconomic status on the migration of husbands and wives as they progress through the family cycle.	David	P. Lindstrom	Silvia	E. Giorguli Saucedo
2006	79	Life Course Perspectives on Migration	The Effect of Labor Migration on Household and Family Structure in Nang Rong, Thailand	There has been much speculation, as well as some empirical research, regarding the consequences of outmigration on sending regions in less developed regions. Much of the research that does exist has focused on migration’s direct impact on economic development. Some research (e.g., Hugo’s work on Indonesia) has also examined the effects of migration on demographic structure and the family, but empirical analyses on this topic are sparse, due largely to limited data resources. We are interested in examining how these changes are affecting those ‘left behind’ in the sending regions. Given that demographic and household structures have socio-economic and normative implications, our results will provide the first step in a comprehensive analysis of the consequences of migration on aging, caregiving, and intergenerational relationships within families in rural sending regions.	Gretchen	 Livingston
2006	79	Life Course Perspectives on Migration	The Contribution of Migration to Children’s Family Context	Researchers concerned with child well-being increasingly emphasize the role of family structure. A large body of work suggests that the benefits to children raised in a stable household consisting of two biological parents are substantial. Much of this work contrasts children in two-parent households with children living with a single parent following nonmarital fertility, divorce, or death. In many developing societies, however, a common cause of family disruption occurs when one parent leaves the household to work elsewhere for an extended period of time. In this study I characterize children’s family experiences in a setting where labor migration is often a defining feature of family life.  	I develop multistate life tables for use with recent Mexican data to examine the roles that nonmarital fertility, union disruption and death play with respect children’s experience of parental presence in the household, and add the important element of migration to these estimates.	Jenna	 Nobles
2006	79	Life Course Perspectives on Migration	Mexican Migration to the United States and Extended Family Living Arrangements	Using 2000 census data from Mexico and the United States, we compare the life course patterns of extended family living among Mexican origin immigrants and non-immigrants on both sides of the U.S.-Mexico border. Additionally, we use the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to examine the stability of extended family living arrangements among Mexican-origin immigrants and natives in the United States. Compared with non-immigrants in the United States and Mexico, recent immigrants are more likely to reside in an extended family household, and among those co-residing, recent immigrants are more likely to live with kin from a similar point in the life course. Additionally, these households experience high levels of turnover in their composition. Overall, recently-arrived immigrants in the U.S. display unique lifecourse patterns and dynamics of coresidence, suggesting that migration itself interrupts normative lifecourse patterns of extended family household formation found in the US and Mexico.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Jennifer	E. Glick
2006	80	Macroeconomic Consequences of Migration	Social and Economic Determinants of Migration and Remittances	This study reviews the literature on the determinants of migration and remittances, and suggests modeling individuals’ decisions to migrate and their subsequent remittance behavior as interrelated events. Prior work assumes independence or complete dependence between individuals’ migration and remittance motivations. To relax these assumptions, the paper assesses the economic theories of migration and identifies their predictions about remittances. The literature on remittances is also reviewed to determine the economic and social factors that affect remittance decisions. The ultimate goal is to merge these two literatures, and establish a more general theory of migration and remittance behavior. To reach this goal, the paper develops hypotheses about the connections between individuals’ decisions to migrate and remit. Using a unique prospective, multi-level, longitudinal data set from 22 villages in Thailand, these hypotheses are subjected to empirical scrutiny. The findings support the empirical, methodological and theoretical value of this exercise.	Filiz	 Garip
2006	80	Macroeconomic Consequences of Migration	Regionalism in West Africa: Do Polar Countries Reap the Benefits? A Role for Migration	In the globalization era, increasing attention is paid to the ambiguous relationship between brain drain and economic growth, but few papers have analyzed the growth impact of skilled migration. The study filled the research gap by building the first data set on brain drain from seven countries of the western African Union (WAEMU) and highlighted the size of the brain loss toward Côte d’Ivoire and France. Burkina Faso shows a more severe brain drain to Cote d’Ivoire compare to other similar sahelian countries (such as Mali) whereas the reverse holds when considering the destination France. Subsequent growth convergence results show that the effect of brain gain holds only for countries with migration outside WAEMU toward an industrialized country (France) and failed when migration flows into Cote d’Ivoire, the Union polar economy. Therefore, migration can be used as a powerful force working toward income convergence between capital-rich and capital-poor countries.	Adama	 Konseiga
2006	80	Macroeconomic Consequences of Migration	Skilled Immigration and the Supply of Complex Problem Solvers in the Economy	In all advanced countries, the number of older workers is increasing while the number of younger workers is falling (or growing slowly). If labor shortages provide a stimulus to technological development and to higher productivity resulting from increases in capital per worker, this may not be a problem. However, this argument is contingent upon the assumption that older workers are substitutes for young workers. In jobs that require the most sophisticated technological skills, older workers are not substitutes for young workers. We identify a segment of the labor force that we describe as complex problem solvers (CPS). Both the psychological literature and the economic literature show that complex problem solving skills deteriorate rapidly after age 40 and, consistent with this, in Australia, 80% of CPS are aged less than 40. Using Australia data, we show that skilled migration is a highly effective way of increasing the supply of CPS workers.	Jeromey	 Temple
2006	80	Macroeconomic Consequences of Migration	Poverty Reduction and Decay in Sending: the Long-Term Macro-Economic Effects of Remittance Receipts in Mexico	Migrant remittances flow to one of every six households in Mexico, including many of the poor but also many of the middle class, according to an extensive survey of remittance receivers conducted by the Pew Hispanic Center this year. An analysis of the survey results and other data assesses the extent to which remittances are producing a reduction in poverty versus providing an economic cushion for families that are safely beyond poverty. An analysis of another survey which was conducted among Mexican migrants in the United States examines the phenomenon of “decay” in remittance sending—the drop off in remittance as migrants become settled and families reunite. The survey findings and other data allow an estimation of the conditions and chronology that produce declines in remittance sending. Both the extent of poverty reduction and the process of decay are major factors in assessing the long-term macro-economic impact of migration on Mexico.	Roberto	 Suro
2006	81	Desire, Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	“It Happened One Night”: The Sexual Context of Fertility Decision-Making	While demography has sophisticated theories about macro-level fertility patterns, very few theories exist about the micro-level experience of fertility. This paper attempts to develop models of individual fertility decision-making from which further theories of micro-level fertility experience can be created. I argue that in addition to focusing our theorizing and research on rational “child-focused” perspectives of fertility decision-making, we also need to incorporate less rational “sex-focused” perspectives. The sex-focused frameworks I offer assume that peoples’ desire for sex typically precedes their desire for childbearing, and these frameworks are thus better equipped to account for the extent of unintended pregnancy than standard rational-choice models. I outline three frameworks, and compare their relative advantages and disadvantages, both conceptually and in view of the rich array of empirical evidence. Although I have designed these frameworks with specific reference to the United States, they may be applicable to other developed societies as well.	Julie	 Fennell
2006	81	Desire, Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Managing Natural Reproduction	This paper analyzes how the concepts of natural fertility and natural childbirth incorporate human intention and intentional action. The paper first demonstrates that natural fertility treats nature as antithetical to intentional action, whereas natural childbirth requires maximally conscious decision-making to manage and maintain the naturalness of reproduction. The paper then argues that these different stances toward intentional action in the domain of reproduction arise out of a single, coherent view of nature and culture: the natural underlies and predates the cultural; it is what is left when social or technological innovations are stripped away. What differs between the representations of natural reproduction is the relationship between human intentional action and culture: for Coale, Henry, and their followers, intentional intervention in reproduction signaled the onset of culture; for Dick-Read, Kitzinger, and Bradley, by contrast, intentional management of the birth process could prevent technological intervention, recapturing nature in the midst of culture.	Jennifer	 Johnson-Hanks
2006	81	Desire, Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	How Women Calculate on the Survival of their Children in the Context of HIV/AIDS: Strategies, Child Hoarding and Fertility Behaviors	This paper describes research on the relationship between women’s mortality perceptions and their fertility desires in high mortality settings with soaring AIDS prevalence. The research focuses on how to estimate women’s mortality perceptions, links this with desired family size, and looks at the possibility that couples use insurance strategies involving high fertility to compensate for possible future child loss. The study setting is Maputo City, Mozambique, where a specially designed quantitative survey of 800 respondents and in-depth interviews were carried out in 2003. Results suggest that women perceive mortality rates to be higher than they are in reality and that women use insurance strategies to a considerable extent in response to perceived child survivorship. Finally, women’s intention to change their fertility behavior due to AIDS is linked not only to AIDS awareness but also to women’s empowerment and women’s perceptions of child’s survivorship into adulthood.	Ana	 Carvalho	Zoe	 Matthews
2006	81	Desire, Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Biographic Discontinuities and Family Formation: Case Studies from Western and Eastern Germany	Young adults' working lives are increasingly marked by discontinuities as changing work locations, time-limited contracts or unemployment. These discontinuities require some flexibility and may be perceived as temporal economic uncertainty. This may shape fertility intentions and behavior, interfering with the timing of family formation.  Our study investigates how young adults in eastern and western Germany perceive biographic discontinuities and how they affect their ideas and plans on family formation. The different demographic “regimes” of the previously divided Germanys offer an unprecedented possibility to compare how biographic discontinuities are framed in different cultural contexts. The empirical base is provided by qualitative interviews with men and women and their current partners, when available.	Laura	 Bernardi	Holger	 Von der Lippe	Sylvia	 Keim
2006	82	Social and Demographic Effects of Welfare Reform (TANF) Ten Years After Enactment of PRWORA	Trajectories of Birth, Welfare and Dropout: A Difference-in-Differences Approach to Evaluating Welfare Reform		Lingxin	 Hao
2006	82	Social and Demographic Effects of Welfare Reform (TANF) Ten Years After Enactment of PRWORA	The Effect of Welfare and Child Support Policies on Maternal Health	Previous research indicates that welfare reform policies – work requirements, sanctions, and child support enforcement – had negative consequences for mothers’ health insurance coverage and use of health care service, but there is little evidence that these policies had negative effects on health. This paper examines the effects of post-reform welfare and child support policies on maternal health and health behavior using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Using evidence from OLS, fixed effects, and instrumental variables models, we find that policies that increase the likelihood of welfare participation are associated with increases in mothers’ drinking, food insecurity and, possibly, depression, and that policies that increase the likelihood of child support receipt are associated with increases in drinking, depression, and poorer overall health. Together the results indicate that welfare and child support policies do affect maternal health, primarily by affecting mothers’ mental health.	Jean	T. Knab	Sara	 McLanahan
2006	82	Social and Demographic Effects of Welfare Reform (TANF) Ten Years After Enactment of PRWORA	Personal Responsibilities Before and After Reform: How Poor Mothers Manage Welfare, Jobs, and Family	Many of the arguments in support of welfare reform suggested that the policy would improve the quality of poor families’ lives. Child care arrangements would be eased through subsidized services and employment would provide mothers and children a sense of self-worth. In this in-depth qualitative study of women navigating welfare-receipt and low-wage work both before and after welfare reform, I find that while mothers post-reform indeed are better able to organize child care and enter the labor market, they experience many of the same challenges that women pre-reform faced. Turnover in jobs is high and many jobs fail to provide a sense of independence or satisfaction. Most women find some source of child care, but encounter the same problems with instability, trust, and quality that mothers pre-reform experienced. Women at both time periods rely heavily on their personal networks for work supports, which solves some challenges but induces others.	Judith	A. Levine
2006	82	Social and Demographic Effects of Welfare Reform (TANF) Ten Years After Enactment of PRWORA	Did Welfare Reform Affect Births among Low-Skilled Immigrants?		Kosali	I. Simon	Felicia	T. Yang
2006	83	Household Time Allocation	Absolute Earnings, Relative Earnings, and Women's Housework	Do husbands and wives divide housework on the basis of who makes more money? Much of the recent literature has focused on the effects of individuals’ earnings relative to their partners’ on their housework. By contrast, this paper analyzes the effects of women’s own earnings on the time they spend doing housework in the context of heterosexual couple households. Using the second wave of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), I find that the relationship between women’s relative earnings and housework time documented in previous research is driven entirely by women’s own absolute earnings. Their male partners’ earnings have no significant effect on women’s housework hours. Further, I show that the variation in women’s own earnings can explain the “gender display” pattern in the association between women’s relative earnings and their housework documented in some recent studies. These findings underscore the importance of income variation among women in explaining their housework behavior.	Sanjiv	 Gupta
2006	83	Household Time Allocation	Economic Resources, Marital Bargains, and Marital Quality	Under what conditions do spouses have more “voice” or bargaining power to get what they want from their marriages? In this analysis, we use longitudinal data from 3 waves of the NSFH to measure whether changes in resources between the first and second waves are related to changes in perceived fairness of the division of paid and unpaid work during the same time period, and whether changes in perceived fairness from time 1 to time 2 are related to changes in marital quality between the second and third waves. Because of the omnipresent effects of gender on individual identities, interactions, institutions, and societal norms, we examine variation by gender in the relationship among resources, changes in perceived fairness, and changes in marital quality. This research will shed light on how economic resources, perceptions of relationship quality, and relationship outcomes are interrelated.	Liana	C. Sayer	Lisa	 Nicholson
2006	83	Household Time Allocation	Gender Differences in Paid and Unpaid Work: How Much Do Wages Really Matter?	This paper uses data from the UK 2000 Time Use Survey on a sample of matched spouses to explore the relationship between wage rates and the gender division of labor. Economic theory suggests that gender differences in wage rates play a key role in explaining the observed specialization of men in market work and women in non-market domestic work, while sociological theories tend to stress the importance of social norms regarding gender stereotypes. We model the allocation of husbands’ and wives’ time to paid work and unpaid work simultaneously using a procedure that accounts for the existence of limit observations. Decompositions of the gender gaps in paid and unpaid work suggest that although wages do play a role in explaining the division of labor, a substantial ‘gender effect’ remains that would lead to a traditional division of labor even if men and women were to earn equal wage rates.	Elizabeth	 Washbrook
2006	83	Household Time Allocation	Does Household Work Matter Anymore? Comparisons of Household Production and the Distribution of Income in the United States in 1965-66 and 2003	In this paper, we examine how demographic and economic factors can help us understand trends in housework time and what they imply for trends in the distribution of income in the United States. Using time-diary data, we estimate how adults’ housework time influenced households’ real access to goods and services in both 1965-66 and 2003. Particular attention is given to assessing the impact of housework on economic inequality as measured by Lorenz Curves and Gini ratios. Based on these estimates, we decompose the changes over time that we observe into those attributable to (1) demographic shifts in marital status, ethnicity, and the presence or absence of children; and (2) economic shifts in the costs of market alternatives and the distribution of household money income. By using data from 1975 and 2003, we will be able to assess change over a period of time where the United States experienced considerable demographic change.	Cathleen	 Zick	W.	Keith  Bryant	Sivithee	 Srisukhumbowornchai
2006	84	Historical Demography	Continents and Classifications: European Instruction of American Medical Nomenclature	This paper presents an analysis of European influence on American Medical Nomenclature through examining early guidelines in the International Classification of Disease (ICD). For correctives addressing major cause of death reporting categories, or with particular historical interest for evolving medical histories, we provide a qualitative analysis of the ICD and a brief archival history of the prior use of terms addressed by each of these correctives in Northampton and Holyoke, Massachusetts. We conduct a quantitative interrupted time-series design analysis of trends in targeted nomenclature to evaluate the impact of ICD correctives on practical use of nosological nomenclature. We then examine the evidence for marked immediate changes in terminology, shifts in the direction of terminological growth, and more gradual innovation and diffusion models for targeted nomenclature. Finally, we provide preliminary models indicating the extent to which ICD correctives influenced major cause of death groupings relevant to theories of the epidemiological transition.	Douglas	L. Anderton	Susan	 Hautaniemi Leonard	Jeffrey	K Beemer	Alan	C. Swedlund
2006	84	Historical Demography	Socioeconomic and Kinship Factors in Infant and Child Mortality in Historical Slavonia	This paper extends prior work on the consequences of social, economic, and kinship factors for health in a pre-industrial extended household environment. We use family reconstitution data from seven contiguous Catholic parishes in south central Slavonia c. 1750-1900 to examine the relationship between these factors and infant/child mortality. We postulate that children have lower survival chances when labor for their care is diminished. Both the availability of male labor and the size and the structure of the household female labor pool are important. Where more men and women are available per child, survival should be higher. However, if women other than the mother of a child have competing interests, survival of that mother’s child will not benefit as much. These competing interests will increase as children age and the familial unit approaches the point of fission. We test these hypotheses using a piecewise-constant hazard model of infant and child death.	Aaron	 Gullickson	Eugene	A. Hammel
2006	84	Historical Demography	American Indian Mortality at the Turn of the Twentieth Century: Assessing the Impact of Federal Assimilation Policies	Under the urging of late nineteenth-century reformers, U.S. policy toward American Indians shifted from removal and relocation efforts to state-sponsored attempts to “civilize” Indians through allotment of tribal lands, citizenship, and forced education. There is little consensus, however, whether and to what extent federal assimilation efforts contributed to the stabilization and recovery of the American Indian population in the twentieth century. In this paper, we rely on new IPUMS samples of the 1900 and 1910 Indian population and census-based estimation methods to investigate the impact of federal assimilation policies on Indian mortality. We use children ever born and children surviving data to estimate childhood mortality and several questions unique to the Indian enumeration--including tribal affiliation, degree of “white blood,” type of dwelling, ability to speak English, and whether a citizen by allotment--to construct multivariate models of child mortality.	J.	David  Hacker	Michael	R. Haines
2006	84	Historical Demography	The Correlates of Infant and Childhood Mortality: A Theoretical Overview and New Evidence from the Analysis of Longitudinal Data from Bejsce Parish Register Reconstitution Study, 18th-20th Centuries, Poland	The paper reviews the theoretical background of infant mortality studies and adds new evidence from a longitudinal study of Bejsce parish registers. Applied multilevel hazard models of mortality over the first 60 months of life include a rich set of covariates, for instance: sex, birth rank, birth intervals, survival of previous child, presence of extended family (grandmother effect). The analysis also demonstrates the change in relative importance of analyzed factors during the process of mortality decline. Obtained mortality patterns overlap with those reported in other studies. Moreover, the results provide evidence for the crucial role of post-reproductive family members on survival during the first 60 months of life.	Krzysztof	 Tymicki
2006	85	Lowest-low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	The Impact of First Birth Trends on Fertility in Developed Countries: A Cohort Analysis	This investigation is part of a project analyzing childbearing trends and prospects in 35 advanced countries using the cohort method. The principal finding of the project: Childbearing was the lowest ever early in the 21st century and is not likely to increase in the foreseeable future. The present research aims to analyze in detail first births. For cohorts since the 1920s first birth fertility rates were stable; a general decline was under way among the 1960s birth cohorts; births were being postponed. In some countries (Finland, Austria, Slovakia), the rate was below 0.8 first births per woman. Among the cohorts born in the 1960s and 1970s first births declined among young women, apparently a continuation in birth postponement. Only rarely were all delayed births recuperated later in life. This also means an increase in childlessness. Among many repercussions: the pool of women to have higher order births is diminishing.	Tomas	 Frejka	Jean-Paul	 Sardon
2006	85	Lowest-low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Low and Lowest-Low Fertility in Europe: Causes, Implications and Policy Options	This paper analyzes the causes and implications of, and potential  policy responses to, low and lowest-low fertility in Europe. Our  portrait of contemporary European fertility patterns identifies a  systematic pattern of lowest-low fertility that is characterized by a  rapid delay of childbearing, a low progression probability after the  first child, a ``falling behind'' in cohort fertility at relatively  late ages (in Southern Europe). The emergence of lowest-low fertility  during the 1990s has also been accompanied by a disruption or even a  reversal of many well-known patterns that have been used to explain  cross-country differences in fertility patterns. The policy options in  response to lowest-low fertility, however, are limited. The existing  empirical evidence provides mixed conclusions as to the effects of  various policies on fertility behavior, and on balance, that the  evidence supports only a weak positive relation between reproductive  behavior and a variety of policies.	Hans-Peter	 Kohler	José	Antonio  Ortega
2006	85	Lowest-low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	The Low Fertility Trap Hypothesis	This paper concerns the future quantum of fertility in lowest low fertility countries. It starts from the observation of Peter MacDonald that there may be a bifurcation in national fertility trends around TFR of 1.5, with countries falling below this level having a lower chance to recover. This also coincides with the view of Rindfuss et al. concerning possible demographic regime changes. Here we discuss two arguments supporting this hypothesis: (1) that ideal family size is a function of the actual number of children experience thus causing a possible downward spiral in fertility; and (2) that following Easterlin’s relative income argument, the fertility of the young generation results from the combination of their aspirations for material consumption and their expected income, with the latter declining due to population aging. This also implies a downward spiral of fertility.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Maria	Rita  Testa	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2006	85	Lowest-low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Age at First Marriage, Time to First Marital Birth, and Pace of Subsequent Childbearing in Italy and Spain, with Comparisons to the USA	Lowest-low fertility in Mediterranean countries has been linked to strong family institutions that may paradoxically act as barriers to family formation. Using the USA as a standard for comparison, the present study investigates for Italy and Spain the relative importance for completed fertility of (1) low rates of childbearing among never-married women; (2) late entry to marriage; (3) long intervals between marriage and first birth; and (4) slow rates of parity progression after the first birth. Birth probabilities are estimated simultaneously by age, marital status and duration since either marriage or the previous births by combining population and survey data in each country.	Michael	 Rendall	Encarnación	 Aracil	Paola	 Di Giulio	Alessandra	 De Rose	Filomena	 Racioppi	Antonio	 Parisi
2006	86	Migration and Social Networks	Migration of the Health Belief Model (HBM): Effects of Psychosocial and Social Network Characteristics on Emigration Intentions in Five Countries in West Africa and the Mediterranean Region	The effects of psychosocial and social network factors on emigration intentions are examined. Following a review of migration and health theories, it is argued that adaptation of the Health Belief Model (HBM) conceptualization of behavioral intentions, linked to constructs of Social Network Theory, will contribute to a better understanding and prediction of emigration intentions. An analytical model is then developed and tested, using comparable data collected in migration surveys by a multi-country project on international migration from West Africa and Mediterranean region to Europe. Results show that, in addition to social network variables and person and household level control variables, the psychosocial constructs of perceived emigration-risk, perceived barriers and support to emigration, and self-efficacy show significant effects in predicted directions and add to the explanation of emigration intentions. It is recommended that future surveys on (international) migration include questions that adequately measure such psychosocial constructs.	George	 Groenewold	Bart	 de Bruijn	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2006	86	Migration and Social Networks	Immigrants to USA from India and Pakistan: National and Transnational Practices and Impacts	In the United States during the past two decades, the overall population of people from South Asian countries (predominantly from India and Pakistan) experienced a five-fold increase (from .361 to 1.785 million).     This paper examines how these new South Asian immigrants are incorporated into the United States at the same time that they remain active in their homelands. We use data from a one percent sample from the 2000 US Census. We also conducted a qualitative study of the ties between immigrant families living in Boston, Massachusetts and their non-migrant relatives in India and Pakistan.     Our work moves with discussions of the relationship between assimilation and transnational ties. In fact, many of the people in our study are highly educated professionals who have successfully inserted themselves into the US economy but at the same time maintain strong homeland ties. It illuminates the experiences of groups that can choose to live their lives across borders.	Mehtab	 Karim	Peggy	 Levitt
2006	86	Migration and Social Networks	Migration Networks and Migration Processes: The Case of China	The main goal of our paper is to examine the role of migration networks in the case of China. Specifically, we focus on following issues that have received relatively less attention in the migration literature. One is to examine how the use of migration networks differs by individuals with different characteristics. For example, we expect highly educated individuals do not use migration networks as much as people with limited education. We examine the use of migration networks for people with different characteristics both in the context of migration departure (initiation of migration) and destination choice. We use data from the 1995 China 1% Population Sample Survey. Our results show that female migrants and migrants without hukou are more likely to rely on well-developed migration networks, whereas younger migrants and those with higher level of education are less likely to depend on migration networks.	Zai	 Liang	Hideki	 Morooka
2006	86	Migration and Social Networks	Social Networks and Intraurban Residential Mobility Among Black Africans in Post-Apartheid Cape Town	Apartheid laws in South Africa have resulted in residential segregation by race and class, with migration and social networks emerging as necessary and self-perpetuating survival strategies for many poor households. Using a 1995 household survey of metropolitan Cape Town’s Black population, this study examines how human capital and social networks shape intraurban mobility in Cape Town. Results indicate that homeowners, households with a high percent of employed adults, and household heads involved in semi-skilled or skilled labor plan to move. On the other hand, households contemplating a move were not members of social organizations. Explanations are advanced, and implications and policy issues, particularly in relation to South Africa’s housing policy and social stratification, are discussed.	Sangeeta	 Parashar
2006	87	Cohabitation	Couple Beliefs about Father Involvement and the Union Transitions of Unmarried Parents	Expectations for how fathers should be involved in their children’s lives can impact the parents’ relationship. These expectations may be particularly meaningful for fragile unmarried families. Using the first two waves of the Fragile Families survey, this paper investigates the two partners’ beliefs about the importance of fathers’ caregiving, financial support, and disciplining their child. When partners believe that fathers’ caregiving is important, they are less likely to end their union. The couple is also less likely to marry if only the woman believes fathers’ caregiving is not very important. This suggests that when parents value fathers’ day-to-day, hands-on involvement, they have a stronger commitment to their relationship. In addition, it appears that women’s beliefs about father involvement have a stronger impact on the relationship than men’s beliefs. A comparison of married, cohabiting, and dating couples finds that expectations have an equivalent impact on all three union types.	Bryndl	 Hohmann-Marriott
2006	87	Cohabitation	Family Structure and Well-Being of Out-of-Wedlock Children: The Significance of the Biological Parents' Relationship	This study examines the role of the relationship between biological parents for child development using longitudinal data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. We extend prior research by considering children born to unmarried parents, in an investigation of the effect of the relationship between biological parents on infant health and behavioral problems. We find evidence that children born into families of cohabiting biological parents realize better outcomes, compared to those born to mothers less involved with the child's father. The hypothesis that children born to cohabiting parents benefit from marriage of their biological parents is rejected. Children born to cohabiting or visiting parents whose relationship ends within a year after childbirth are up to 9 percent more likely to have asthma compared to children of continuously cohabiting, continuously visiting, cohabiting-at-birth or visiting-at-birth and married-subsequently biological parents. The effects are robust to controls for economic and parental resources.	Shirley	H. Liu	Frank	 Heiland
2006	87	Cohabitation	Does Cohabitation Matter? The Effects of Nonmarital Cohabitation Disruption on Children's Behavior	This study investigates whether children’s behaviors associate with cohabiting-parent families and cohabitation breakdown, using 5 waves (1994 – 2003) of data from Canada’s National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth. The findings demonstrate that children living with cohabiting couples have worse behavioral outcomes than those living with married couples. This negative effect obtains through disparities in socioeconomic and parental resources. Unlike divorce, cohabitation breakdown has a non-significant influence on children’s behavioral outcomes, before and after considering differences in socioeconomic status, family functioning, and parental resources. The findings also indicate that divorce is worse than cohabitation breakdown for children’s emotional well-being.	Zheng	 Wu	Feng	 Hou	Christoph	M. Schimmele
2006	87	Cohabitation	For Better and for Worse: Cautionary Tails of Happiness in Marriage	The marriage decline since the late 1960s has been accompanied by a dramatic increase in cohabitation outside of marriage. Do these cohabitations that have replaced marriage, at least at younger ages or postmaritally, provide the same level of satisfaction as marriage? Previous studies found that the mean rating of happiness in the union is greater among married than cohabiting individuals. However, these studies focused exclusively on mean happiness. We explore two additional dimensions of  relationship quality, and find that the tendency to rate the union as happy does not differ between marriage and cohabitation, but the tendency to rate the level of happiness or unhappiness as extreme is higher in married than cohabiting people, by using adjacent category logit models developed by Sobel to analyze data from the National Survey of Families and Households. These results suggest that marriages are both more intensely happy and more  intensely unhappy.	Yan	 Yu	Aimée	R. Dechter	Michael	E. Sobel
2006	88	Socioeconomic Determinants of Obesity	An Examination of Socioeconomic Differences in Body Mass Index from 1986-2001 Using a Growth Curve Analysis Approach	Obesity prevalence has been increasing in the United States for over 50 years, with alarming increases since the early 1980’s. Research suggests that obesity is a serious threat to population health because of its many comorbidities, which include diabetes and heart disease. Obesity rates also appear to be socially patterned, an indication that obesity may be an explanatory factor in observed health disparities. Using longitudinal data from the Americans’ Changing Lives survey, I model growth trajectories in Body Mass Index (BMI), an indicator of obesity, to determine how obesity rates are socially patterned by race, sex and education. I find that black women have the highest initial BMI and growth rates. Interestingly, there is little difference between men of different racial groups in either initial BMI or growth rates. In addition, while initial BMI is found to vary by education level, there is no significant difference in the growth rates.	Jennifer	A Ailshire
2006	88	Socioeconomic Determinants of Obesity	The Connection between Maternal Employment and Childhood Obesity: Inspecting the Mechanism	We use time diaries and interview responses from the Child Development Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to study the connection between maternal employment and childhood obesity. Our empirical strategy involves estimating the effect of children’s activities and meal routines on children’s body mass index (BMI), estimating the effect of maternal employment on these activities and routines and then combining these two estimates. We find that the effect of activities on BMI and the effect of maternal employment on activities vary greatly by the mother’s educational status. In particular, among highly educated mother families, mother’s employment significantly increases time spent watching TV, which in turn, significantly increases a child’s BMI. However, for both groups higher levels of employment reduce the number of meals consumed per day by children, which increases their BMI.	Angela	R. Fertig	Gerhard	 Glomm	Rusty	 Tchernis
2006	88	Socioeconomic Determinants of Obesity	Obesity in the Transition to Adulthood: Predictions across Race-Ethnicity, Immigrant Generation, and Sex	Our paper fills a void in the research on obesity by using national longitudinal data from Add Health to study race, ethnic, and immigrant disparities in body mass index among young people aged 11-28, and to trace how disparities change as adolescents age into young adulthood. We use growth curve modeling to estimate the pattern of change in body mass index beginning in adolescence and extending through the transition to adulthood. Findings indicate significant differences in both the level and change in BMI across age by sex, race-ethnicity, and immigrant generation. In particular, females, second and third generations, and Hispanics and blacks experience more rapidly increasing BMI as adolescents age into young adulthood than males, first generation, and whites and Asians. Overall, disparities in both raw BMI and the percent overweight and obese tend to widen with age as adolescents leave home and begin independent lives as young adults.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Krista	 Perreira	Dohoon	 Lee
2006	88	Socioeconomic Determinants of Obesity	More for the Money? Differences in the Prevalence of Adult Obesity by Income Level - United States, 1999-2002	Between 1988-94 and 1999-2002, the prevalence of adult obesity in the U.S. increased from 22.9 to 30.4 percent. In 1988-94, the prevalence of obesity was significantly higher for low-income non-Hispanic white males and non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and Mexican American females than their high-income counterparts. Using National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999-2002 data for 6,997 adults aged 20 years and older, we tested differences in the prevalence of adult obesity by income level within sex and racial/ethnic groups with the t-statistic to determine if significant differences by income level still exist. In 1999-2002, only non-Hispanic white females had a significantly higher prevalence of obesity in the low-income versus the high-income group. Compared to 1988-94, the reduction in socioeconomic differentials in obesity prevalence is concerning because it results from increases in the prevalence of obesity among the high-income group. Public health interventions for obesity should target all income levels.	Allison	A. Hedley	Cynthia	 Ogden
2006	89	Special Measurement Issues	How Do We Know if a Program Made a Difference? A Helicopter Tour of the Econometrics of Non-Randomly Allocated Community-Level Programs	This paper offers a survey of popular econometric methods for addressing statistically community-level characteristics that might otherwise prevent us from obtaining valid estimates of the impact of human resource policies or initiatives (for instance, health or family planning initiatives). We begin by characterizing the problem and then provide a survey of the various econometric methods typically applied in response. Our survey focuses on various ‘classes’ of estimation strategy. In each case, we emphasize data requirements and assumptions, sources of identification and interpretation of results. We conclude with a brief coverage of a few techniques that have received significant attention in the recent literature (such as regression discontinuity design). Our goal is to offer empirical researchers from a variety of disciplines an accessible and intuitively appealing guide to the tools available from the econometrics tradition	Gustavo	 Angeles	Peter	M. Lance
2006	89	Special Measurement Issues	Overestimating HIV Infection: The Construction and Accuracy of Subjective Probabilities of HIV Infection in Rural Malawi	In the absence of testing, how accurate are rural Malawians in assessing their HIV status? In this paper, I use a unique dataset that includes respondents’ HIV status as well as their subjective likelihood of HIV infection. These data show that many men and women in rural Malawi overestimate their likelihood of current HIV infection. This difference between self-assessed and objective HIV status raises an important question: why are so many wrong? I begin by identifying characteristics of individuals associated with the belief that they are, or are not, already infected. I then compare subjective probability of infection with biomarker results, to find what proportion of the respondents accurately identifies their HIV status. Next, I distinguish between those who overestimate their risk and those who underestimate it, and ask what characteristics of individuals are associated with these errors. Finally, I discuss the implications of incorrect perceived HIV status.	Philip	A. Anglewicz
2006	89	Special Measurement Issues	The Demographic Profile of Twins: Temptation of Mimetism or Dissimilarity among Co-Twins ?	In our societies, twins are exposed to external representations of twinning, representations which they can choose to integrate and appropriate, or reject. This work aims to evaluate similarity or dissimilarity in demographic and social behaviors among twins by studying such characteristics as education, profession, fertility, and nuptiality. Using the French Longitudinal Study (EDP or Permanent Demographic Sample), we compare discrepancies between twin pairs to those observed among ordinary non-twin sibling pairs with similar characteristics. This allows us to estimate differences in behavioral patterns among twins and to identify special situations and risk factors, such as familial composition (two or more children) or type of twin pair (identical or fraternal).	Nadège	 Couvert
2006	89	Special Measurement Issues	A Comparison of U.S. Mother and Daughter Reports about Intergenerational Transfers	Using data from the 1997 National Longitudinal Surveys of Mature Women and Young Women, we examine agreements between mother and daughter reports about time and money transfers. Specifically, three research questions are addressed. First, how much agreement is there between mother and daughter reports of transfers from adult daughters to their older parents? Second, what factors predict disagreements between mother and daughter reports? Last, do researchers using reports from mothers and those using reports from daughters reach the same conclusions about the factors that predict intergenerational transfers? We find that compared to mother reports, daughters tend to “over-report” both money and time transferred. The disagreements between mother and daughter reports are significantly associated with the characteristics of the event, respondents’ motivation or ability to recall, and social desirability. Finally, we find different factors predicting transfers using mother or daughter reports, but the differences in effect sizes are small.	I-Fen	 Lin	Megan	 Hanning
2006	90	Demography of Poverty	The Spatial Distribution of Poverty in Chile:
Stasis and Change in the Neoliberal Era	For most of the 1990’s, Chile enjoyed rapid economic growth and export expansion that resulted in some declines in measured poverty. At the same time, worries about increasing income inequality and a late-1990’s recession have maintained poverty as an issue of concern. The purpose of this paper is to document the level and pattern of spatial inequality in Chile with a focus on poverty and its correlates, and how spatial inequality changed over the 1990’s. We use descriptive mapping as well as both spatial and aspatial measures of segregation in an analysis of nationally representative household survey data from Chile for the years 1990 and 2000.	Leif	 Jensen
2006	90	Demography of Poverty	Does Fertility Decrease the Welfare of Households?: An Analysis of Poverty Dynamics and Fertility in Indonesia	It is generally accepted that lower population growth is associated with positive economic development. Although there is a large body of literature supporting this hypothesis at the macro level, few studies have analyzed the causal effect of fertility on household welfare at the micro level. This paper presents an empirical analysis of the relationship between household welfare and fertility applying propensity score matching methods. Further, we test for the sensitivity of our results with respect to alternative measures of welfare at the household level. When consumption expenditure per person is used as a welfare measure, the analysis suggests that the effect of fertility on household welfare is sensitive to the choice of equivalence scales. The lower these values are the less likely will an additional child depress household welfare. When the food share of household expenditure is used as a welfare measure, fertility does not lower household welfare.	Jungho	 Kim	Henriette	 Engelhardt	Arnstein	 Aassve
2006	90	Demography of Poverty	Risk and Household Structure: Another Look at the Determinants of Fertility	This paper uses unique data on hurricanes in Guatemala to analyze how decisions on fertility and education respond to risks and shocks. Adults from areas with higher levels of risk have more education than those from areas with lower levels of risk, whether their parents owned land or not. Landed households show higher fertility with higher risk, while households without land have lower fertility. The higher fertility for landed households is not explained by higher mortality risk. Shocks affect both fertility and education negatively. If the shocks occur early in a woman's fertile period there is, however, a substantial compensatory effect later in life.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2006	90	Demography of Poverty	Demographic Externalities from Poverty Programs in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Latin America	In this paper, we use experimental data from cash transfer programs in three Latin America countries to assess the unintended impact of conditional cash transfers programs on childbearing. Our findings show that the program in Honduras, which may have inadvertently been designed to create large childbearing incentives, may have in fact raised fertility by somewhere between 2-4 percentage points – a non-negligible impact in a country where fertility is relatively high. In the two other countries where the programs did not include the same unintentional incentives, Mexico and Nicaragua, we found no net impact of the programs on fertility. Our analysis also explored the potential mechanisms through which fertility in Honduras may have risen and we find that marriage rates may have increased. Furthermore, there is some indication in the other two countries that contraceptive use rose but this might be simply to counteract the impact of reduced spousal separation.	Guy	 Stecklov	Paul	C Winters	Jessica	 Todd	Ferdinando	 Regalia
2006	91	On the Nature of Intergenerational Transfers	Biological Basics and Intergenerational Transfers	How do considerations of gender and reproductive biology figure into intergenerational transfer behavior? My research seeks to remedy a lack of attention to demographic effects in the standard economics literature on intergenerational transfers by examining the distinct constraints and interests of mothers, fathers, sons and daughters that emanate from biological considerations. It focuses on two prominent themes in reproductive biology: The first is paternity uncertainty. How might it affect incentives to provide for children? I examine differences in the transfer behavior between maternal grandmothers (whose biological relationship to grandchildren is always certain) versus paternal ones. The second theme is reproductive and economic prospects of male versus female offspring. I find that a maternal/paternal advantage in the provision of childcare persists even after controlling for covariates that would be implicated in such care. I also present preliminary findings concerning self-reports of paternal resemblance and subsequent paternal childcare, and sex-biased paternal investments.	Donald	 Cox
2006	91	On the Nature of Intergenerational Transfers	The Role of Grandparents in the Lives of Children	This study seeks to better understand the role of grandparents in the lives of adolescent grandchildren by addressing the following questions:    1)	What are the implications of grandparent involvement for children?   2)	What factors mediate and moderate the influence of grandparents on grandchildren?    We use data from the National Survey of Families and Households, which contains reports from three generations within a family—grandparents, parents and children, as well as extensive measures of grandparent involvement that include the provision of financial assistance, emotional closeness, frequency of contact, and co-residence with grandchildren. Results will shed light on an understudied, but potentially important, source of influence on children.	Rachel	 Dunifon	Ashish	 Bajracharya
2006	91	On the Nature of Intergenerational Transfers	The Evolution of Post-Reproductive Lifespan	We present initial tests of alternative explanations for the extension of the human lifespan, using data collected among Tsimane. The “grandmother hypothesis” proposes that older women increase offspring fertility and grandoffspring survivorship through provisioning. The  “embodied capital” theory proposes that a shift in productivity from younger to older ages selects for increased investments in survival and longevity. The “patriarch hypothesis” proposes that an extended lifespan provides direct reproductive benefits to men, who do not experience reproductive cessation. The “mother hypothesis” argues that direct care of offspring will come from mothers, and extended lifespan is due to long-term child dependence. First, we test predictions regarding the behavior of older people with respect to descendent kin. Second, we measure the effects of older individuals’ survival on children’s survival and morbidity. Third, we examine how absolute levels of resource production and investment in descendants change with the increasing age, and dependency, of grandparents.	Hillard	S. Kaplan	Michael	D. Gurven	Jeff	 Winking
2006	91	On the Nature of Intergenerational Transfers	Competition for Resources: A Reexamination of Sibship Sex Composition Models of Parental Investment in Japan	This research challenges the predictions of resource dilution models of educational investment through an analysis of survey data from the Japanese National Family Research 1998 Survey. Exchange-based models of educational investments arguing that boys drain resources away from their sisters are shown to be inadequate. Using mixed models to examine differences in parental educational investments within families, it is shown that while boys with college-educated brothers have lower levels of educational attainment than those without brothers, the same cannot be said for girls with college-educated brothers. These findings support the results of a qualitative analysis of interviews with 104 Japanese respondents indicating that the family culture of investment, defined by parental gender beliefs and valuation of education, shapes the investments that parents make in their sons and daughters.	Kristen	Schultz Lee
2006	92	Issues in the Measurement and Modeling of Migration Processes	Migrant Associations as Actors in Local Development? A National Event-History Analysis in Burkina Faso	Social and environmental consequences of migration are often studied through the lens of destination areas both because this is where (1) population pressure constrains local resources; and (2) social and economic integration problems arise. However, migration also affects sending areas. Depopulation is often cited as a major issue. And there is still a debate on the impact of individual remittances on departure places. Migration can also have an impact through collective organizations. But the role of migrant associations has received very little interest in the literature on the consequences of migration on sending areas. In this context, our paper aims at assessing if migrant associations can be actors in the development of their community of origin, and thus in social, economic and environmental changes. We will provide qualitative analyses and quantitative results using a national community survey carried out in Burkina Faso (West Africa) in 2002.	Cris	 Beauchemin	Bruno	D. Schoumaker
2006	92	Issues in the Measurement and Modeling of Migration Processes	Linking Social and Spatial Mobility in Immigrant Incorporation	This paper seeks to ascertain (1) the extent to which immigrant-native wage differentials are the product of the differing internal geography of immigrant and native-born groups in the U.S.; and (2) the extent to which immigrants’ wages are sensitive to the selectivity of internal migration. As such, it attempts to re-focus some of the discussion on immigrant economic incorporation with an understanding of how the geography of immigrants and natives in the U.S. matters both for immigrant incorporation, and discussions of these processes. I first weight wage regressions by relative shares of immigrant and native-born groups (by metropolitan area) to determine the extent to which geography plays a part in the wage gaps between immigrants and natives. Second, I assess the importance of internal migration in determining wage outcomes, incorporating a component examining the selectivity of inter-metropolitan migrants.	Jamie	 Goodwin-White
2006	92	Issues in the Measurement and Modeling of Migration Processes	Migration and Mental Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment	People migrate to improve their well-being, whether through an expansion of opportunities or a reduction in persecution. Yet a large literature suggests that migration can be a very stressful process, with potentially negative impacts on mental health reducing the net benefits of migration. This paper overcomes the selection problems affecting previous studies of the effect of migration on mental health by examining a migrant lottery program. New Zealand allows a quota of Tongans to immigrate each year with a lottery used to choose amongst the excess number of applicants. A unique survey conducted by the authors in these two countries allows experimental estimates of the mental health effects of migration to be obtained by comparing the mental health of migrants who were successful applicants in the lottery to the mental health of those who applied to migrate under the quota, but whose names were not drawn in the lottery.	Steven	 Stillman	John	 Gibson	David	 McKenzie
2006	93	Racial/Ethnic Formations and Immigration	West Indies and Caribbean Immigrants' Earnings in the United States: The Penalites Associated with  English Proficiency and Racial Self Identification	Research on future U.S. race relations suggest that racial discrimination, especially by employers in the job market, may be determined by skin tone and proficiency of the English language. The influence of these two factors may be especially detrimental to immigrants of color such as those from the West Indies and the Caribbean. The purpose of this research is to examine the impact that skin tone and language proficiency may have on the earnings of West Indies. The earnings of Russian immigrants serve as a comparison group. We use data from the 2000 U.S. Census 5% PUMS to compare the effects of skin tone and language proficiency on earnings. We find when West Indies and Russian immigrants are compared, skin color and language proficiency determine wage earnings. However, with the exception of language proficiency, there is no evidence that skin color is a factor that influences wage earnings for women.	David	 Embrick	Rogelio	 Saenz	Marie	Cristina  Morales
2006	93	Racial/Ethnic Formations and Immigration	A Boundary Approach to Understanding the Integration of Asian Americans	In this paper, marriage outcomes are analyzed to further understand the integration of Asian Americans, a new immigrant group, into American society. Instead of utilizing assimilation theories that focus on individual-level variables such as education and nativity, I develop and test a new boundary approach that emphasizes the importance of structured contexts at ethnic and racial boundary levels to understand intermarriage outcomes. Using the concept of panethnicity, this approach recognizes the layered character of ethnic boundaries and the salience of ethnic and racial boundaries for contemporary immigrant groups. Multinomial logistic regression models are used to analyze marriage data taken from the 2000 PUMS. The predictions suggest that group size, segregation, and heterogeneity should influence marriage outcomes, and that examining the effects of structural variables measured at the larger boundary of race and smaller boundary of ethnicity should provide a more complete understanding of the contexts that influence group members to enter into interracial, interethnic, and endogamous marriages.	Dina	G. Okamoto
2006	93	Racial/Ethnic Formations and Immigration	From Puerto Rican to Pan-Ethnic in New York City	Increasing diversity has stimulated interest in racial identification. Racial identification is complex for groups that exhibit considerable phenotypic variation, such as Puerto Ricans. However, the empirical literature on racial identification among Puerto Ricans suffers from numerous limitations. We overcome several limitations with a study that is grounded in the experience of Puerto Rican women in New York City. Our analysis focuses on two questions: How do Puerto Rican women identify themselves racially? What are the sources of their racial identities? The results indicate that most Puerto Rican women in New York City conflate race and ethnicity by designating their race as either “Puerto Rican” or “Hispanic.” Moreover, the decision to “become” pan-ethnic has complex roots. In particular, the effect of physical appearance on the adoption of a pan-ethnic identity is conditioned by socioeconomic and neighborhood characteristics	Sal	 Oropesa	Nancy	S. Landale	Meredith	 Greif
2006	93	Racial/Ethnic Formations and Immigration	Family Reunification and Citizenship for Chinese Immigrants, New York City	This study examines the timing of naturalization for Chinese immigrants settling in New York City. Immigration helped sustain New York City population levels in the 1990s. Chinese immigrants naturalize more quickly than other major groups, and they sponsor many family members under immediate relatives provisions. Extensive investigation of continuous-time hazard models over duration showed the best models were based on the log-logistic form of the underlying hazard function with statistical controls for unobserved heterogeneity. Immediate relatives of U.S. citizens were naturalizing more quickly than immigrants under employment or family preference categories. For most cohorts, immigrants reporting professional, managerial, technical sales, or administrative occupations showed propensity to naturalize more quickly than others. The gender effect was inconsistent, although women of recent cohorts were naturalizing more quickly, perhaps due to changing gender roles. For recent cohorts, occupational background, younger age, and having prior nonimmigrant experience seem more important than previously.	Karen	A. Woodrow-Lafield	Bunnak	 Poch
2006	94	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Race Segregation in Brazil: A GIS Approach	In Brazil, a major problem is related to population segregation by socioeconomic status in major cities. Some studies have been looking for this kind of segregation, using information on income and education level. However, these studies have been ignoring race characteristics of the Brazilian population that could determine in which neighborhoods people are living. The main point of this research is the analysis of how the Brazilian population is segregated by socioeconomic status and race in Recife, Belo Horizonte, and Porto Alegre. Results indicate that among those groups of census tracts that have a majority of whites, there is a high proportion of the population with at least a high school degree. On the other hand, among those groups of census tracts that have a majority black and brown population, most of the population has low educational achievements.	Ernesto	F. Amaral
2006	94	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Residential Integration but Social Segregation: Community Boundaries in a Multi-Cultural Society	Residential spatial integration is often held to be an indicator – and sometimes cause – of social assimilation. That contention forms the basis of much housing policy but has rarely been tested. Singapore, a multi-cultural city-state in tropical Southeast Asia provides an excellent laboratory for informing theory and policy concerning residential distribution and social interaction. Combining evidence from Census summary data and a unique survey of the social networks of adult (25-55) residents that places inter-ethnic social ties in the context of a range of functional and intimate relationships, this paper finds no support for a general linkage between special proximity and the formation of relationships. Singaporeans live in spatially interpenetrating but largely socially separate worlds. Beginning with the impact of ethnic category size, social homophily, and the crowding out effect of family dependence, the paper will attempt to understand why Singaporean adult social networks are not more integrated.	Stephen	 Appold	Vincent	 Chua
2006	94	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Asian American versus Asian Canadian: Ethnic Segregation and Implications for a Panethnic Boundary	The panethnic identifier “Asian American” has been readily accepted in the US vernacular. However, a similar “Asian Canadian” identity has not emerged as a distinctive panethnic identity nor has it (yet) taken on the same significance for Asian groups in Canada. This might be explained by cross-national differences in the structural conditions that give rise to the shifting of ethnic boundaries. To examine whether the degree of pan-Asian residential experience can be one explanation for this difference in pan-Asian identities in the US and Canada, this study will compare Asian ethnic residential segregation in Los Angeles and Toronto using the 2000 US census and 2001 Canadian census. Eight Asian groups are included in the analysis as well as other racial and ethnic groups for comparison. These results will have implications for our understanding of immigrant adaptation and the shifting of ethnic boundaries, and, in particular, Asian panethnicity in different contexts.	Ann	H. Kim	Eric	 Fong
2006	94	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Apartheid in South Africa and the United States?: A Tale of Two Countries	In American Apartheid (Massey and Denton, 1993), the authors assert that residential segregation of blacks in the United States is comparable to South African apartheid. In this paper, we present a critical analysis of Massey and Denton’s (1993) hypothesis. We compare the historical context of segregation in the United States and South Africa. Next, we compare the impact of racial residential segregation of blacks from whites in the US and in South Africa. We question the comparison of residential segregation of blacks in the US with that of blacks in South Africa. We provide a more historically nuanced comparison of segregation in the two nations.	Fareeda	 McClinton	Tukufu	 Zuberi
2006	95	Family and Social Change in Sub-Saharan Africa	Risk, Network Quality, and Family Structure: Child Fostering Decisions in Burkina Faso	Researchers often assume household structure is exogenous, but child fostering, the institution in which parents send their biological children to live with another family, is widespread in sub-Saharan Africa and provides evidence against this assumption. Using data I collected in Burkina Faso, I analyze a household's decision to adjust its size and composition through fostering. A household fosters children as a risk-coping mechanism in response to exogenous income shocks, if it has a good social network, and to satisfy labor demands within the household. Increases of one standard deviation in a household's agricultural shock, percentage of good network members, or number of older girls increase the probability of sending a child above the current fostering level by 29.1, 30.0, and 34.5 percent, respectively. Testing whether factors influencing the sending decision have an opposite impact on the receiving decision leads to a rejection of the symmetric, theoretical model for child fostering.	Richard	 Akresh
2006	95	Family and Social Change in Sub-Saharan Africa	Crossing the Marriage Threshold in a High HIV Setting	Using evidence from the 2004 Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change survey, this paper investigates the relationship between the complex process of marriage and the AIDS epidemic in rural Malawi. We explore how sexual behaviors, partnership types, and HIV concerns evolve as young adults approach marriage, and how this process differs for women and men. The data show sexual activity rises steadily as youth approach their desired age to wed, followed by a sharp increase at marriage. HIV risk perceptions increase for women after marrying, but remain flat for men. We also show that worry about contracting HIV figures prominently in decisions about when and who to marry. Young adults consider an HIV-negative spouse important, and correspondingly seek spousal partners whom they identify as “low risk”. Having a nuanced understanding of how the process of marriage shapes and is shaped by HIV risks is critical for developing better HIV protection policies.	Michelle	 Poulin
2006	95	Family and Social Change in Sub-Saharan Africa	Family-Building Processes and Fertility Transition in Ethiopia: An Analysis Using Parity Progression Ratios	It is known that the pace of fertility decline is the key factor in shaping the demographic structure of the developing world. However, the link between family-building process and the pace of fertility decline has not gained much attention.    This study uses a conceptual framework of the family-building process, a series of stages through which women move, from marriage to first birth, from first to second birth, and so on. We employ period parity progression ratios to examine fertility trends.    Ethiopia is a very interesting case because the total fertility in Addis Ababa is below replacement level and demographic decomposition of recent fertility decline has indicated that a major component of the decline is delayed marriage among recent cohorts of women. We use data from the 2000 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) which includes 15,367 women aged 15-49, permitting separate analysis by place of residence, education, and birth order.	Gebre-Egziabher	 Kiros	Vasantha	K. Kandiah
2006	95	Family and Social Change in Sub-Saharan Africa	Changing Living Arrangements of the Young after First Marriage in Urban Mali	Changes in family formation have been documented in terms of the postponement of age at marriage and a quasi-constant age at first birth in several African countries. However, the conditions in which young people reach greater autonomy (or not) have been less studied. What are the living arrangements of the young married men and women after marriage and at the time of first birth? The paper will focus on urban areas in Mali where poverty is largely associated to the growing pace of urbanization.  The paper will use qualitative data from a study I conducted in Mali in 2004 and quantitative data from a large scale retrospective survey held in 2000.  While results of the qualitative interviews give materials for new assumptions on the conditions of living of spouses after first marriage, results of event history analysis provide a better understanding of the association of living standards with family formation.	Solene	 Lardoux
2006	96	The Role of Community in Children's Well-Being	Racial Residential Segregation and Birthweight: The Role of Specific Dimensions of Segregation	Five distinct dimensions of residential segregation have been identified empirically; however, there is little evidence to guide the measurement of segregation in studies of health. We developed a conceptual model and tested associations between segregation and birthweight in a sample of 494,248 singleton births to African-American or Black women living in 225 large U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas. In multilevel regression models of birthweight on the five segregation dimensions, isolation and clustering were significantly associated with birthweight in opposite directions. As hypothesized, higher isolation was associated with lower birthweight and higher clustering was associated with higher birthweight. While isolation appears to be deleterious to birthweight, aspects of racial contiguity appear to be mitigating, or indeed beneficial. These findings underscore the multidimensional aspects of segregation and the need for theoretically-driven measurement decisions that include the possibility of several segregation dimensions in a single analytic model.	Janice	F. Bell	Frederick	J. Zimmerman	Gunnar	R. Almgren	Jonathan	D Mayer	Colleen	E. Hueber
2006	96	The Role of Community in Children's Well-Being	Children's Community Context, Time Use and Well-Being	This project uses data from the PSID/CDS to explore two questions: (1) Do characteristics of neighborhoods influence children’s health and academic related time use?; and (2) Do neighborhood-based differences in time use influence children’s health and academic success, making time use a mediator in the neighborhood/well-being relationship? Researchers have shown that neighborhoods influence children’s health and academic achievement, independent of other important contexts. In addition, studies using time diaries demonstrate that children’s time use varies by family and socioeconomic environment. These two strains of research are separate, however, and raise several questions about non-family determinants of children’s health and school-related time use, and about how and why neighborhoods matter for children’s quality of life. In the end, our goal is to begin to unravel the space in between the neighborhood structure/child well-being relationship by integrating two separate literatures and considering time use as a mechanism through which neighborhoods influence children’s health and academic performance.	Margot	I. Jackson	Amy	 Hsin
2006	96	The Role of Community in Children's Well-Being	Sociodemographic Deprivation Domains and Preterm Birth	Area-level deprivation is consistently associated with poor health outcomes. Using US census data (2000) and principal components analysis, a priori defined socio-demographic indices of poverty, housing, residential stability, occupation, employment and education were created for use in race-stratified multilevel logistic regression models of preterm birth in Wake County, NC. In age and education adjusted models, living in tracts with high poverty, poor housing and high unemployment was associated with increased PTB odds for non-Hispanic (NH) black women, but preterm birth odds for white NH women appeared unaffected by these tract characteristics. Living in tracts with more professional / managerial occupations appeared protective against preterm birth for both white and black women. Residential stability was unassociated with preterm birth in these analyses. Different deprivation domains are associated with PTB odds for NH white and black women. This finding is relevant for disparity reduction, PTB programming and policy development in this country.	Lynne	 Messer	Lisa	 Vinikoor	Jay	S. Kaufman	Barbara	A. Laraia
2006	96	The Role of Community in Children's Well-Being	The Effects of Housing and Neighborhood Crowding on Children's Well-Being	The degree to which children grow up in crowded housing and neighborhood conditions is a neglected but potentially important component of social inequality and its effect on their well-being. This paper uses a large sample of children from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey to explore the effects of housing and neighborhood crowding on a variety of child outcomes, including academic achievement, behavioral problems, and health. Using multilevel and latent variable models, we examine the gross effects of crowding as well as net effects controlling for other family and neighborhood social and demographic factors. We seek to determine whether there are significant net effects of crowding and whether differential exposure to crowding accounts for some the effects of family poverty and immigration status on child outcomes. This study can enhance our understanding of how crowding at several levels of children’s living environment may affect their well-being.	Claudia	 Solari	Robert	D. Mare
2006	98	Public Policy and Child Well-Being	The Economic Determinants and Cognitive Effects of Childhood Malnutrition in the United States	The U.S. is currently facing a two-pronged battle against child malnutrition -- the prevalence of overweight children has increased dramatically over the past two decades and the percentage of children who are underweight remains unacceptably high. Both forms of malnutrition create well-known public health problems. But, less is known about how childhood over- or underweight affect cognitive functioning, behavior or self-esteem. In this research, we use data from the NLSY to investigate the causes of childhood malnutrition using quantile regression methods. We then use these findings and instrumental variables methods to separately estimate the effects of child malnutrition on self-esteem, cognitive functioning and behavior problems. We use county and state level data on availability of fast food outlets and fast food prices, and school district level data on soda consumption and physical education requirements as instruments to identify the effect of malnutrition on these child outcomes.	Susan	L. Averett	David	 Stifel
2006	98	Public Policy and Child Well-Being	Food Stamps and Food Insecurity: Does Reporting Error Influence this Relationship for Households with Children?	Food stamps take a central role in the efforts to eradicate food insecurity and hunger among children in the United States. Given this role, it may be surprising – at least on the surface – that children in households receiving food stamps are far more likely to be food insecure than children in eligible households not receiving food stamps. These higher rates (which remain after controlling for relevant covariates) have been ascribed to many factors including the possible misreporting of food insecurity. We investigate, using nonparametric methods, how conclusions about relationships between food stamps and food insecurity vary depending on a researcher’s maintained assumptions about the nature and degree of food insecurity reporting errors. Our work contrasts with the previous literature on food insecurity which has implicitly made the strong assumption that food insecurity is reported without error. We use data from the Core Food Security Module of the 2003 Current Population Survey.	Craig	G. Gundersen	Brent	 Kreider
2006	98	Public Policy and Child Well-Being	Participation in Food Assistance, Maternal Employment, and Child Obesity	Using a comprehensive data set from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), this study examines the effects of Food Stamp Program (FSP) and maternal employment on the risk of obesity among children who live in single-mother families. Incorporating the endogenous decisions on participation in FSP and maternal employment, this study will evaluate the effects of demographic and economic factors on the probability of taking up public food assistance programs, as well as the impacts of FSP participation and maternal employment on the risk of obesity among impoverished children. The study provides important new insights into the determinants of both public food assistance program participation and maternal work decisions and into the way in which both choices interact in influencing child weight outcomes.	Haiyong	 Liu
2006	98	Public Policy and Child Well-Being	Why Wait?: Delayed Participation in WIC Among Pregnant Women	Research that identifies the factors that influence when, as well as if, a pregnant woman begins receiving WIC can aid in the design of effective targeting and outreach efforts. This research uses a recently released data set, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), to examine the timing of prenatal WIC participation. We find that almost three-fourths of eligible pregnant women participated in WIC in 2001, which represents about 40 percent of all pregnant women who gave birth that year. Although the majority of eligible pregnant participants begin participating during their first trimester, there is a substantial percentage who begin later. Hispanic women, teen mothers, and women experiencing a first birth enroll in WIC later in their pregnancies. Early WIC participation also depends on the mother’s early knowledge of her pregnancy.	Laura	 Tiehen	Alison	 Jacknowitz
2006	99	Immigrant Incorporation in the U.S.	New Spatial Assimilation Patterns among Immigrant Groups		John	R. Logan
2006	99	Immigrant Incorporation in the U.S.	Immigrant Intermarriage and Incorporation		Gillian	 Stevens
2006	99	Immigrant Incorporation in the U.S.	The Battle over Assimilation		Richard	D. Alba
2006	99	Immigrant Incorporation in the U.S.	The Welfare Helping Hand: Bane or Boost for Immigrant Settlement?	Public assistance is often argued to impede immigrant assimilation because some think government support discourages work and fosters dependency.  Sociological research and theory, by contrast, suggest assimilation is most likely to occur in the context of supportive environments.   To evaluate these two perspectives, we examine multiple panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to estimate levels and trajectories of immigrant welfare receipt during the pre-reform period (1990-1996) and how these vary across states with relatively less and more generous welfare benefits.  The results suggest that in generous welfare policy contexts, immigrant welfare recipiency declines and immigrant employment following welfare spells increases with longer time in the United States.  Conversely, in states with low welfare benefits, welfare recipiency increases and employment declines with increasing time in the country.  The results generally support the idea that more favorable contexts of reception generate greater assimilation.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Frank	D. Bean
2006	100	Causal Effects of Schooling	Cross-Cohort Changes in the Returns to Schooling and Early Work Experiences: Consequences on the Gender Wage Differential	In this paper, we estimate the effect of schooling and of various types of work experiences, acquired by young men and young women in the U.S. during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, on their subsequent wage attainment. We present and estimate an econometric framework to consistently estimate these returns. This framework accounts for both selection bias in the wage data and the potential endogeneity of young men and women’s decisions on the timing and accumulation of schooling and early work experiences. We use these estimates to subsequently assess separately the roles of cross-cohort changes in these returns, changes in the observed skill distribution, and in the distribution of unobservables of men and women, in the convergence of the gender wage gap.	Marigee	 Bacolod	Douglas	 McKee
2006	100	Causal Effects of Schooling	Estimating the Human Capital and Screening Effects of Schooling on Productivity in U.S. Manufacturing Industries, 1979-1996	A classic issue in labor market studies is whether the correlation between an individual’s education and her socioeconomic rewards reflects increased productivity (i.e., human capital), labor market screening or credentialism. While previous research has usually avoided the challenge of empirically testing these three competing explanations, we provide some relevant findings using productivity data for U.S. manufacturing industries from 1976 to 1996. Our results indicate that, contrary to the credentialist hypothesis, mean years of schooling has a strong and robust net effect on industrial productivity. In contrast to the screening explanation, a measure of relative educational among the workers in an industry has no positive net effect on industrial productivity. Our findings most strongly support the human capital interpretation in that years of schooling has a large net effect on industrial productivity even after controlling for relative educational attainment.	Arthur	 Sakamoto	Changhwan	 Kim
2006	100	Causal Effects of Schooling	Choice of Major and Continued Class Disadvantage in Higher Education	Although much postsecondary education research has been dedicated to differences across socioeconomic class and the transition to college, few scholars have considered the relationship between choice of major and social background once students have matriculated. This oversight may be a key reason why less advantaged students are more prone to dropout and tend experience different occupational returns to their education than middle and upper class students. I hypothesize that students from low socioeconomic families tend to select into fields of study that differ from those selected by other students, and that this process is a function of academic achievement and occupational goals. The results suggest that these two factors do influence the attractiveness of majors across socioeconomic backgrounds in ways that disadvantage students from lower class families.	Julie	 Siebens
2006	100	Causal Effects of Schooling	Schooling, Wages, and the Role of Unobserved Ability in the Philippines	This paper analyzes the role of schooling and cognitive ability in determining wages for young Filipino adults. It uses a semiparametric model where schooling, achievement test scores and wages are postulated to be driven by a common unobserved ability. Rich data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey allow us to model grade repeats and school reentry after dropping out of school, phenomena common in developing countries. The results reveal that children with lower innate ability are much more likely to drop out of school at all levels of education. While a standard Mincer equation yields a 4.5 percentage point return to an additional year of schooling, my model estimates this return to be only 2.7 percentage points. An omitted ability bias appears substantial. While completing additional years of schooling can compensate for lower innate ability, such substitution would be costly.	Yaraslau	 Zayats
2006	101	Religion, Ethnicity and Reproductive Health	Reproduction in Upheaval: Ethnicity, Fertility, and Societal Transformations in Kazakhstan	We examine the complexities of the demographic response to societal crises by analyzing how members of different ethnocultural groups in Kazakhstan adapted their reproductive behavior to the radical and multidimensional transformations produced by the reforms in the Soviet Union and its eventual collapse, Kazakhstan’s independence in 1991, its transition from a centrally-planned to a market economy, and its post-independence ethnic politics. Using DHS data and discrete-time logit models we analyze trends in the probabilities of first and second births and of first abortion among ever-married women from the early 1970s through the late 1990s. We detect both overall and ethnic-specific patterns in the outcomes that can be linked to the changes in the country’s social, economic, and political environment in the 1990s. We interpret our results in light of the theories of demographic transition, the minority-status group hypothesis, and the existing cross-cultural evidence on demographic responses to rapid and dramatic changes.	Victor	 Agadjanian	PremChand	 Dommaraju
2006	101	Religion, Ethnicity and Reproductive Health	Religious Affiliation, Ethnicity, and AIDS-Related Discrimination in Sub-Saharan Africa	Considerable stigma and discrimination is attached to HIV/AIDS in various parts of sub-Saharan Africa, in spite of high prevalence rates. Some of the blame for perpetuating such discrimination continues to fall upon organized religion, which occupies a central part in many Africans’ lives and tends to advocate sexual conservatism. However, little evidence exists to support the suggestion that religious ideologies breed discrimination and stigma about HIV/AIDS. Drawing upon Demographic and Health Survey data from seven sub-Saharan countries with acute health crises, we evaluate the effect of religious affiliation on different forms of AIDS discrimination, paying close attention to possible confounding effects of tribe or ethnicity. In most analyses, religious affiliation is unrelated to discrimination after accounting for ethnicity – a key predictor of discrimination. Where affiliation remains significant, Muslims and people who practice other non-Christian religious traditions tend to report more discriminatory habits.	Mark	 Regnerus	Viviana	 Salinas
2006	101	Religion, Ethnicity and Reproductive Health	Religiosity and Marital Fertility: Israeli Arab Muslims, 1955-72	This paper examines the relationship between religiosity and marital fertility in a Muslim society around the onset of the transition. Our questions are, first, whether the effect of religiosity remains significant after controlling for socioeconomic characteristics and variables associated with women's status; and, second, to what extent the decline in religious commitment 'explains' the transition. We use the 1973-74 Israeli Fertility Survey to investigate the effect of religiosity on marital fertility among Israeli Arab Muslims.	Jona	 Schellekens	Zvi	 Eisenbach
2006	101	Religion, Ethnicity and Reproductive Health	Religion and Fertility: The United States in International Comparison	Early in the 21st century fertility was higher in the United States than in European countries. Has U.S. religiosity contributed in a meaningful way to this fertility differential? American adults consider religion much more important than do citizens of other industrialized countries. The relationship between religion and fertility will be analyzed utilizing data of the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. The paper will put this analysis into a historical and international perspective. A preliminary analysis demonstrates that 57.8 percent of female respondents consider religion as a very important part of their life; 31.6 are “born again Christians”. There is a strong positive association of intentions to have another child with religious affiliation; and a strong positive association of having two or more births with religious affiliation. Religiousness shows a strong positive association with fertility in all four main ethnic groups.	Charles	 Westoff	Tomas	 Frejka
2006	102	New Ways of Looking at Fertility Measurement Challenges	How Many Children Does It Take to Replace Their Parents? Variation in Replacement Fertility as an Indicator of Child Survival and Gender Status	Replacement fertility is a key demographic concept often misconstrued as a constant 2.1 children per woman. Actually it varies by population and over time, from as low as 2.06 children per woman to well over 3. High replacement fertility mostly reflects low survival of female infants (i.e., future childbearers) to their own reproductive age. High sex ratios at birth can also raise replacement fertility values somewhat. Replacement fertility is generally perceived as relevant only to population stationarity or decline. Its variation can, however, illuminate child and adolescent survival and some aspects of female status when its components are disaggregated. Those who study and work on population can clarify for policymakers the importance of tracking and publicizing variation and change in replacement fertility rates. This concept can then evolve from a hypothetical target on which total fertility rates should converge to an indicator of young people's health and female well-being.	Robert	 Engelman	Elizabeth	 Leahy
2006	102	New Ways of Looking at Fertility Measurement Challenges	Religion and Fertility in the United States: A Geographical Analysis	Only a few demographic studies look at the spatial patterns and correlates of fertility in the United States; and, despite its importance, the research on spatial variability excludes analyses of religion and fertility. In pursuit of a geographic analysis of religion and fertility, this paper examines the association between county-level fertility rates (1998-2002) and religious adherence, controlling for mediating demographic and economic variables. GIS techniques are used to map fertility rates across the U.S., and Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR) results of fertility and religion yield mappable regression parameters. This paper finds that religion is, in fact, significantly related to county-level fertility rates. Of particular interest are maps of local parameters that illustrate where Catholic adherence has positive, negative, or insignificant local effects on fertility rate.	Lisa	 Jordan
2006	102	New Ways of Looking at Fertility Measurement Challenges	Multivariate Analysis of Parity-Progression-Based Measures of the Total Fertility Rate and Its Components Using Individual-Level Data	This paper develops multivariate methods for analyzing (1) effects of socioeconomic variables on the total fertility rate; and (2) effects of socioeconomic variables on the trend in the total fertility rate. For the multivariate methods to be applicable, the total fertility rate must be calculated from parity progression ratios (PPRs). We also consider the total marital fertility rate, the individual PPRs themselves, and mean and median failure times (which in this case are mean and median age at first marriage and mean and median birth intervals). The methods are applicable to either period data or cohort data. The methods are illustrated by application to data from the 1993, 1998, and 2003 DHS surveys in the Philippines.	Robert	D. Retherford	Naohiro	 Ogawa	Rikiya	 Matsukura
2006	102	New Ways of Looking at Fertility Measurement Challenges	Fertility among Immigrant Women in France: New Data, a New Approach	The comparison between fertility of immigrants and “natives” is often based on the total fertility rate (TFR). But migration marks an important change in family and fertility behavior. Though immigrants’ fertility before migration is low, migration is often linked with union formation, and fertility rates just after immigration are very high. The TFR does not take this discontinuity into account, and thus overestimates lifetime fertility of immigrants. Using a one-percent survey, part of the French 1999 Census, we first present fertility of men and women by age and duration since migration. We then propose a new method of estimating total fertility, taking fertility both before and after migration into account. Using this method, the estimated excess fertility of immigrants compared with women born in France is 0.46 children per women during the 1990s (2.16 vs. 1.70), while the usual TFR leads to an apparent difference of 0.85.	Laurent	 Toulemon
2006	103	Population and Environment: Water and Land Resources	The Biophysical Determinants of Global Poverty	Though much is known about socioeconomic correlates of poverty, much less is known about poverty’s biophysical determinants. Discrete evidence indicates that poverty is highly connected to poor-quality soils, drought-prone climates, high-altitude residence, and lack of access to markets, urban areas, and ports or coastal areas. Nevertheless, efforts to make universal statements about biophysical and geographic determinants of poverty has been limited largely to case-studies or explanations of unexplained residual effects. This study aims to fill that gap by examining the biophysical determinants of one aspect of poverty -- infant mortality -- via large-scale data integration to render biophysical parameters in units compatible with those from which the infant mortality data were collected. A multi-level, spatial regression model that accommodates inherently complex sampling frames is the basic method of analysis.	Deborah	 Balk	Glenn	D. Deane	Marc	 Levy
2006	103	Population and Environment: Water and Land Resources	Population and Water in American Metropolises: Mexico, New York and São Paulo	The paper compares the three largest metropolitan areas of the Americas (Mexico, New York and São Paulo), in terms of population size, growth history, density and age structure, and in terms of access to water, conflicts over the use of water, and distance from which water is transported, in order to: identify the demographic components of water availability as a limit to growth; call attention to the primacy of population mobility and distribution as central issues; assess the prospects of achieving balance between population size and access to water; and consider the case for ecological-economic zoning as a tool for sustainability.	Roberto	Luiz do Carmo	Haydea	 Izazola	Daniel	Joseph  Hogan
2006	103	Population and Environment: Water and Land Resources	Social Change, Community Context, Land Use, and First Birth Timing in an Agricultural Setting	The dramatic changes in earth’s landscape have prompted increased interest in the links between population and land use and land cover. Previous research emphasized the notion of population pressure (population pressure increases demands on natural resources causing land use change), overlooking the potentially important effect of changes in land use on humans. Using multiple data sets from the Chitwan Valley Family Study in Nepal, we test competing hypotheses about the impact of land use on first birth timing. We argue that while agricultural land should encourage early childbearing, land area devoted to public infrastructure should discourage it. The results show that individuals from neighborhoods with larger proportions of land under agriculture experienced first birth at rates higher than those from neighborhoods with smaller proportions. On the other hand, individuals from neighborhoods with larger proportions of land under public infrastructure experienced first birth at rates lower than those from neighborhoods with smaller proportions.	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	Lynette	 Hoelter
2006	103	Population and Environment: Water and Land Resources	Child Malnutrition and the Environment: How Women’s Work in Collecting Environmental Goods Affects Children’s Health in Malawi	Half of Malawi children are stunted. Malawi also has a high infant mortality rate. Malnutrition contributes to this problem and to lower children’s education. Several studies have analyzed determinants of malnutrition in Africa. However few have analyzed the link between the environment and malnutrition. This paper contributes to this scanty literature using data from 1997-98 Malawi national survey. Determinants of stunting are estimated using a probit model that includes water and fuel wood collection hours among explanatory variables. Longer water collection hours are associated with increased probability of child stunting while women’s self-employment is associated with lower probability of stunting. A multinomial logit model of women’s choice of main activity is also estimated. Women in degraded areas are less likely to be self-employed. These results imply that environmental degradation contributes to child’s lower nutrition by increasing women’s time spent on environmental goods collection and by lowering women’s participation in income-generating activities.	Flora	J. Nankhuni	Jill	L. Findeis
2006	104	Immigrant Health	Workplace, Human Capital and Ethnic Determinants of Health and Sickness Absence in Sweden – 1981-1991	This study identifies factors influencing the differences in health and utilization of sickness benefits between immigrants and natives in Sweden. The main conclusion is that the differences in consumption of sickness benefits between foreign born and Swedes, as well as between various immigrant groups are large and persist after accounting for standard human capital factors, workplace conditions and recorded medical diagnoses. In fact the difference explained simply by country at birth is larger than differences due to other human capital factors such as education and sex, workplace factors, or observable health factors. It is also larger than income position and urban/rural differences. It is, however, not simply a matter of health selection attributed to arriving as a labor immigrant or asylum seeker but has a more complex pattern. This study utilizes a unique register-based panel containing economic, health and demographic information on a sample of 550,000 Swedes and immigrants from 16 countries.	Tommy	 Bengtsson	Kirk	A. Scott
2006	104	Immigrant Health	Self-Assessed Health and Mortality in Migrant Communities in Belgium	The aim of this study is to describe the contrasting patterns of mortality and morbidity among migrant communities and to assess the degree to which socioeconomic status accounts for ethnic differentials in health outcomes. The Belgian 2001 census measured self-assessed health by the standard WHO question. The comprehensive character of the census and the link to the population register produce high-quality data that allow control for selection effects and provide follow-up mortality on an individual level. Belgium has a large migrant community, composed of a broad range of nationalities. Previous research, based on the 1991 census and follow-up of mortality and migration in the population register, demonstrated a clear mortality advantage for the adult population of Mediterranean and Islamic origin compared to the Belgian population. This is especially striking regarding their lower socio-economic status. Self assessed health however does not follow the same pattern across nationalities.	Patrick	 Deboosere	Sylvie	 Gadeyne
2006	104	Immigrant Health	Immigration and Health: New Results from the New Immigrant Survey Cohort of 2003	This paper explores immigrant health, focusing on two main questions -- concerning health selectivity among immigrants to the United States and health changes after immigration -- and using a new data source, the 2003 cohort of the New Immigrant Survey. We develop a model which distinguishes three sources of health changes -- visa stress, migration stress, and U.S. exposure -- and which implies that the appropriate time for measuring health selectivity is at the time of the migration decision, before the onset of the three kinds of stress. Besides estimating the models of health selection and health change, we also empirically examine visa depression and BMI. We find, for example, that BMI is higher among new immigrants who are already in the United States at admission to LPR, and that female thinness is an asset not only in the international marriage market but also in the early years of a marriage.	Guillermina	 Jasso	Mark	R.  Rosenzweig	James	P. Smith
2006	104	Immigrant Health	Immigrant Perceptions of Discrimination in US Health Care	Previous research about US health care disparities has been organized around race/ethnicity, with little information about whether immigrants are more likely to experience discrimination in the health care system than the US-born. Because immigrants are clustered in certain racial and ethnic groups, failure to account for immigration status could distort the measurement of race/ethnicity effects. Using a large, population-based sample of California residents, we find that immigrants are more likely to report discrimination in health care than US-born persons of the same race/ethnicity, even after controlling for socioeconomic, language and health care access factors. For Asians and Latinos, increased perceptions of discrimination are specific to the foreign-born. US-born Asians actually report less discrimination than US-born Whites. US-born Latinos report similar levels to US-born Whites, after adjusting for socioeconomic status, language and access. For Blacks, immigration status has little additional effect on perceptions of discrimination in health care.	Diane	S. Lauderdale	Ming	 Wen	Namratha	 Kandula
2006	105	Community Effects on Health Behaviors and Outcomes	Women’s Position in the Household and Community and the Care of Sick Children in Rural Bangladesh	This study examines the associations between women’s position in the household and community (here it is village) and the care of children having acute illnesses in rural Bangladesh using data of the 1996 Health and Socioeconomic Survey conducted in Matlab, Bangladesh. Women’s positions in the household are indicated by their education, domestic autonomy, social capital and household socioeconomic status, and their village-level positions are indicated by percentage of ever-married women who have high autonomy, high social capital and some education. The results show that sick children are more likely to be treated by healthcare providers over home-care if their mothers have some education and high social capital in the village, controlling for illness and child’s characteristics. Better household socioeconomic status is associated with increased use of trained providers (doctors or paramedics) over others. High village-level women’s education and short distance to trained providers are associated with increased use of trained providers.	Nurul	 Alam	Ian	M. Timaeus
2006	105	Community Effects on Health Behaviors and Outcomes	Marriage Patterns, Kinship Structure and the Utilization of Maternal Health Care Services in India	Regional variation in utilization of maternal health services in India is well recognized. We examine the role of marriage and kinship patterns in shaping intrahousehold resource allocation and thereby influencing women’s access to prenatal, delivery and postnatal care. We expect this effect to operate in two ways: (1) Marriage patterns characterized by village endogamy and consanguinity increase parental connections with their daughters, resulting in increased valuation of women in the community as a whole; and (2) Village endogamy and consanguinity increase individual women’s contact with their parents and social support networks and thus add to the resources women are able to draw upon to obtain maternity care. Lack of appropriate data has hampered an examination of these relationships. Using our recently collected University of Maryland-NCAER Human Development Survey 2004-2005, we attempt to disentangle the contextual and individual effects of marriage and kinship patterns on women’s access to maternity care.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Lijuan	 Wu
2006	105	Community Effects on Health Behaviors and Outcomes	Social Affiliation and the Demand for Health Services: Caste and Child Health in South India	This paper assesses the role of community affiliation, measured by caste, in shaping investments in child health. The special setting that we have chosen for the analysis--tea estates in South India--allows us to control nonparametrically for differences in income, access to health services, and patterns of morbidity across low caste and high caste households. Using data from a survey of 4000 female tea workers the authors conducted in 2003, we find that low caste households spend the same amount as the high castes on treatment for children's routine illnesses, but more on treatment for their children's serious, non-routine illnesses, reversing the pattern we would expect to find elsewhere in India. Moreover, health expenditures do not vary by gender within either caste group, in contrast with the male-child preference documented throughout the country. A simple (caste) network-based model of household resource allocation is proposed to explain these striking results.	Nancy	 Luke	Kaivan	 Munshi
2006	105	Community Effects on Health Behaviors and Outcomes	The Impact of Neighborhood Structure on Health Inequalities in Accra, Ghana	The literature on health inequalities in Africa and other developing regions of the world has overwhelmingly focused on urban-rural differentials, thus ignoring the tremendous variability (inequality) that almost certainly exists within cities of developing nations. We hypothesize that intra-urban variability is impacted by individual risk factors and by the structure of the neighborhood in which an individual lives. That structure includes the demographic composition of the neighborhood and the environmental context within which people live. We use data from the Women’s Health Survey of Accra in 2003 to provide individual-level data, data from the Ghana census of population and housing in 2000 to provide neighborhood demographic composition and contextual data, and data from a high-resolution satellite image acquired in 2002 to add another component of contextual data, and then test a two-level model to decompose the impact of neighborhood structure on health inequalities in Accra.	John	R. Weeks	Allan	G. Hill	Douglas	A. Stow	Arthur	 Getis
2006	106	Using Biomarkers to Validate Alternative Measures of Health in Developing Countries	Differences between Self-Reported Diabetes and Clinical Test Results: The Usefulness of Bio-markers in Research in Developing Countries	Degenerative diseases are the main causes of morbidity and mortality not only in industrialized countries, but also in some developing countries. Unlike infectious diseases, degenerative diseases have longer durations between onset and diagnosis. This means that a certain proportion of sick people do not know what their actual health status is. The collection of biomarkers in population research that also gathers self-reported information allows studying these discrepancies. CRELES, a new survey focused on the Costa Rican elderly, is one of these cases. Using a multinomial regression, I find that the number of symptoms and living in rural areas differentiates those who know about their disease from those who do not. Additionally, socio-economic status, place of residence, gender, and early childhood conditions predict diabetes status, regardless of whether the subject knows or does not know about it. Results are useful for improving screening policies and primary health care services.	Gilbert	 Brenes
2006	106	Using Biomarkers to Validate Alternative Measures of Health in Developing Countries	Measuring the Burden of Malaria in West Africa: Are Levels of Childhood Anemia a Good Proxy?	Malaria is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in young children in sub-Saharan Africa. The impact of malaria on child mortality levels, however, has been difficult to quantify with empirical data. In malaria-endemic areas, anemia is a more common complication of malaria in children than death. This study explores the relationship between anemia in young children and malaria prevalence, in order to determine whether measurements of childhood anemia provide a good proxy for tracking changes in malaria morbidity. A logistic regression analysis is employed to estimate the effects of malaria prevalence on children’s anemia levels while controlling for child nutrition and other factors believed to relate to anemia. Individual-level information on children in five sub-Saharan African countries includes geographically-linked data from two sources: the Mapping Malaria Risk in Africa (MARA) project, which models the distribution of malaria prevalence, and child health and socio-demographic information from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).	K.	Fern  Greenwell	Melissa	 Neuman
2006	106	Using Biomarkers to Validate Alternative Measures of Health in Developing Countries	Using STI Biomarkers to Validate the Reporting of Sexual Behavior within an Experimental Evaluation of Interviewing Methods	The AIDS pandemic has increased the need for comprehensive data on risk behaviors in developing countries. However, if reporting is unreliable, the ability to evaluate interventions and monitor programs is compromised. To address the sensitive nature of questions in studies of sexual behavior and STI risk, researchers have turned to computerized interviewing techniques. The collection of STI biomarkers in conjunction with an experimental evaluation of face-to-face versus audio-computer assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) provides an opportunity to externally validate the reporting of risk behaviors. Data will be used from a study assessing STI screening and diagnostic techniques among women aged 18-40 in São Paulo, Brazil. Reduced form bivariate probit models that control for exogenous demographic indicators will capture the residual association between STIs and reported risk behavior by interview method. If higher associations are found with ACASI, strong evidence that computerized interviewing provides more accurate data on risk behaviors will be obtained.	Paul	C Hewett	Manoel	 Ribeiro	Sheri	A Lippman	Heidi	 Jones	Janneke	 van de Wijgert
2006	106	Using Biomarkers to Validate Alternative Measures of Health in Developing Countries	Magnitude and Factors Affecting Anemia in West Bengal (India): A Multi Method Approach	In NFHS (2000), anemia level was tested for ever-married women. It is found that in the state of West Bengal, 63 percent of women have some degree of anemia. A follow-up study was carried out in the same villages selected in the NFHS to examine the factors affecting anemia and to suggest a method that is economical in estimating level of anemia. Blood is tested by two methods, Helliges and Cyna-Math (Gold Standard), by trained pathologists. Medical doctors trained investigators in a symptomatic approach for identifying anemic women by looking at eye color, palm color, nail color, and color of tongue. Prevalence of anemia by all symptoms is lower than by the Cyna-Math method level. Also, the Helliges method over-estimates the level of anemia when compared to Cyna-Math. Food habits, namely consumption of green leafy vegetables, protein and lemon (vitamin C) are negatively associated, whereas menstrual problems are positively associated with level of anemia.	Sayeed	 Unisa
2006	107	Child Support	Father Involvement and Parental Relationship Quality among New Parents: A Reciprocal Relationship?	Past research indicates that poor parental relationships serve as a substantial barrier to father involvement, particularly among unmarried and nonresidential fathers. However, transactional models suggest a bidirectional perspective, in which parental relationship quality and father involvement with children influence each other. Focusing on a subset of unmarried parent families (n = 1868) from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, this study uses structural equation modeling to assess the longitudinal, transactional relationships between parental relationship quality and father involvement with children. Results indicate that father involvement and relationship quality are highly correlated and that there is a continuity of both relationship quality and father involvement over time. Furthermore, parental relationship quality predicts an increase in father involvement 18 months later. Policy implications surrounding marriage and father involvement are discussed.	Daphne	C Hernandez	Rebekah	Levine  Coley	Selva	 Lewin-Bizan
2006	107	Child Support	Child Support and Father-Child Contact: Leveraging Panel Data to Establish a Causal Path	Three waves of panel data are used to examine the relationship between child support payments and fathers’ contact with their nonmarital children. Cross-lagged effects models are incorporated to identify the direction of causality between these two behaviors. Controlling for the lagged term and a rich set of individual characteristics eliminates the relationship between paying formal support and whether fathers see their children, although a strong reciprocal relationship remains between paying any support (formal or informal) and contact. For the subgroup of fathers who consistently see their children, paying any support leads to more frequent contact, but the reciprocal relationship does not exist.	Lenna	 Nepomnyaschy
2006	107	Child Support	The Effects of Distributing More Child Support to Current and Former Welfare Recipients	This paper presents estimates of the potential effect on families and the government of two possible changes in child support policy that have been proposed as part of TANF reauthorization. The first policy change would encourage states to increase the generosity of the child support pass-through and disregard rules used in their TANF program. The second policy change would enable former TANF recipients to receive more of the past-due child support collected on their behalf through the Federal Tax Refund Offset program. We find that, if implemented, these policy changes would increase family income and self-sufficiency and reduce poverty, although government costs would increase.	Laura	 Wheaton	Elaine	 Sorensen
2006	107	Child Support	Impact of Welfare Reform on the Child Support Receipt of Divorced Custodial Parents	This paper uses data from the 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, and 2001 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation to examine whether there are differential child support payment trends among divorced custodial mothers and fathers in the pre- and post-welfare reform period. Welfare reform brought about changes in child support enforcement that increased collection efforts, primarily for never-married single mothers. This paper examines if increased collection efforts also influenced payment of child support to divorced custodial parents. I find that the probability of child support receipt by custodial parents who divorced prior to welfare reform is 10 percentage points lower than that of those who divorced after. No differences were found in the amount of support received for all custodial parents; however, conditional on receipt of any support, those who divorced prior to welfare reform received $68 more per month than those who divorced after.	Kathleen	M. Ziol-Guest
2006	108	Intergenerational Wealth Transmission	Associations between Health and Later Life Wealth and Intergenerational Transfers of Wealth	Inter-vivos transfers are an important element in the transmission of wealth. Ruel and Hauser (2005) found that intergenerational transfers played a large role in the accumulation of wealth from mid life to retirement age. One factor that could have a negative impact on wealth accumulation and intergenerational transfers are short or long term health or disability problems, which may cause individuals to spend down their wealth as they consume health care. This is a concern in the United States as we face an aging population that will produce greater incidences of chronic disease. We ask, how do short term health problems at mid life (age 53-55) affect later life (age 64-65) wealth accumulation and inter-vivos transfers to adult children?  Data for this paper come from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS). The WLS is a long-term study of a one-third random sample (N=10,317) of men and women who graduated from Wisconsin high schools in 1957.	Megan	 Andrew	Erin	 Ruel
2006	108	Intergenerational Wealth Transmission	Are Changing Family Structures Redirecting the Flow of Mother's and Father's Financial Transfers to Their Adult Children?	As divorce and remarriage have become prominent features of American families, extensive research has focused on the effect of these family changes on children's and teens' emotional and financial wellbeing and on parental investment in education. Although resources from parents continue to be important to adult children—helping pay for houses, weddings, higher education, or simply helping to make ends meet—little research has examined how divorce and remarriage influence such transfers. Using data from the 1992 Health and Retirement Survey, we examine how financial transfers from older adults to their adult children vary by the parents' sex and marital and re-marital status. Consistent with prior research, we find that parents who remain married give more to their children than single divorced parents or remarried parents. However, we also discover that remarriage reduces men's contributions to their prior biological children more than it does women's contributions.	Shelley	 Clark	Catherine	T. Kenney
2006	108	Intergenerational Wealth Transmission	The Changing Impact of Fathers on Women's Occupational Choices	Over the past century, women have experienced a dramatic growth in labor force participation. We hypothesize that the increase in the overall probability of a daughter working has led to an increase in job-specific human capital investment from fathers to daughters. We use the occupation of the woman's father-in-law as a counterfactual to what would have occurred if no job-specific human capital was transmitted. Because of assortative mating, fathers and fathers-in-law will look alike, however fathers-in-law will make no job-specific human capital investments. Our paper tracks the relative odds ratio of a married, white woman being in the same occupation as her father relative to her father-in-law and find that one quarter of the increased odds of a woman going into the occupation of her father can be explained by an increase in intergenerational job-specific human capital investment.	Judith	 Hellerstein	Melinda	 Sandler
2006	108	Intergenerational Wealth Transmission	Intergenerational Support in Contemporary Urban China	In this paper, we empirically test, in the Chinese context, three hypotheses based on three standard explanations for intergenerational support: the power model, the exchange model, and the altruism model. Our study is based on data from a survey (Study of Family Life in Urban China) that we conducted in 1999 in three Chinese cities (Shanghai, Wuhan, and Xi’an). We show that cultural beliefs about supporting the elderly, measured both for the elderly generation and for their adult children, explain a significant proportion of the variation in intergenerational support.	Yu	 Xie	Haiyan	 Zhu
2006	109	Socioeconomic Status and Health in Dynamic Perspective	Who Is Hurt by Procyclical Mortality?	There is renewed interest in understanding how periodic fluctuations in mortality, and by extension in health, are related to fluctuations in economic conditions. The traditional perspective, that economic recessions are bad for health and mortality just as they are bad in economic terms, is increasingly challenged by new findings that suggest the reverse, at least in developed countries. Several recent studies have found that mortality rises above its trend during periods of rapid economic activity, not stagnation. The epidemiology behind these patterns still suggests that socioeconomically vulnerable populations may well be those at risk during periods of procyclical mortality. Traffic accidents, stress-induced cardiovascular disease, and smoking and alcohol related illness may be disproportionately borne by lower classes, and they appear to increase during good times. In this study, I examine mortality by cause and socioeconomic status during the recessions and expansions of the 1980s using the National Longitudinal Study.	Ryan	D. Edwards
2006	109	Socioeconomic Status and Health in Dynamic Perspective	Accounting for the Change in the Gradient: Health Inequality among Infants	More-educated women have healthier infants. This study investigates changes in the relationship between maternal education and infant health using Vital Statistics data from 1983 to 2000. I find that the disparity in both APGAR scores and infant deaths has been narrowing over the past two decades. A simple decomposition reveals that increasing access to medical care is the dominant factor explaining the closing gap. The gap was also narrowed by the increasing share of births to less-educated women that were accounted for by Hispanics rather than African-Americans. However, several behavioral factors had an important impact on the education-related gap in infant health. The gap decreased because less-educated women smoked less, but this improvement was partially offset by an increase in the number of less-educated women gaining more than 60 pounds during their pregnancies. The gap also decreased because increasing numbers of college-educated women had multiple births.	Wanchuan	 Lin
2006	109	Socioeconomic Status and Health in Dynamic Perspective	Which Causes of Death Contribute to the Widening Gap in Socioeconomic Inequalities in Austrian Adult Mortality?	Previous research for Austria has shown that socioeconomic inequalities in mortality exist and that they have increased over time. We studied which causes of death are responsible for this development. The data for our analysis are linked census and death records from Austria for the years 1981/82 and 1991/92. They have been analyzed for mortality differentials by education and cause of death using relative measurements (logistic regression), absolute measurements (age-standardized crude death rates) and decomposition methods. We discovered that the effect of education is not homogeneous across various causes of death. While some causes, such as respiratory diseases, show a decrease in inequality over time, an increasing social gradient has been found for circulatory diseases which account for about 50% of all deaths. Our analysis shows that differential development in ischaemic heart disease has been the main contributor to the widening gap in socioeconomic inequalities in Austrian adult mortality.	Roland	 Rau	Gabriele	 Doblhammer
2006	109	Socioeconomic Status and Health in Dynamic Perspective	Disentangling the Life Course Process of Disability in Later Life: The Role of Socioeconomic Status	Over the past few decades, disability has become one of the most salient and researched outcomes for older adults in the United States. It is predominantly conceptualized as a life course process and is increasingly measured over time using transitions or trajectories. In this paper, I extend this research by using methods previously unutilized in aging research to measure disability as both a transition and trajectory, therefore better capturing it as a life course process. Previous theory and research on SES and health suggests that education and financial resources work differently on disability over time. I revisit these arguments, finding that the independent effects of education are mainly protective for onset, whereas financial resources also impact level of disability given onset. I discuss these findings in terms of past and future research, focusing on what may be gained by conceptualizing and measuring disability in later life as a life course process.	Miles	G. Taylor
2006	110	Using Policy Variation to Identify Demographic Change	Is There Any Added Worker Effect from the Reduction in Standard Working Hours? The Aubry's Law in France as a Natural Experiment	Added Worker Effect (AWE) implies increased labor force participation of married women when their husbands become unemployed or face working hour restriction without any compensation. This incidence of AWE has been documented mostly in terms of unemployment spells faced by the husbands. This is the first attempt which empirically investigates the existence of AWE using mandatory reduction in standard working hours in France as a natural experiment. The results show that the exogenous reduction in standard work hours for husbands does not lead to any unemployment-to-employment transition among wives but that it increases the number of hours worked by wives who are already in the market and are not affected by the law themselves. It is also found that AWE in terms of hours worked is more prominent in low income families and for families with more members, as family size is positively correlated with the degree of credit constraint.	Meherun	 Ahmed
2006	110	Using Policy Variation to Identify Demographic Change	Female Income, Women's Status, and Spousal Violence: Effects of the Mexican Progresa Program	Although a growing literature examines the relationship between women’s economic status and spousal violence, compelling empirical evidence remains scarce. This paper uses a regression discontinuity approach to identify and estimate the effect of the Progresa program – a conditional cash transfer scheme partly intended to improve women’s status within the household – on spousal violence. In contrast to existing studies, the research design allows us to identify the causal effect of women’s socio-economic status on spousal violence. In addition, we use multiple measures of spousal violence—physical, sexual, emotional, economic—and examine both prevalence and intensity. The evidence suggests that women in beneficiary households are as likely to be victims of spousal violence. However, the distinction between the different types of abuse is meaningful; although women in beneficiary households are as likely to be victims of physical, sexual, and economic violence, they are more likely to be victims of emotional violence.	Gustavo	J. Bobonis	Roberto	 Castro	Melissa	 Gonzalez-Brenes
2006	110	Using Policy Variation to Identify Demographic Change	Explaining Birth Order Effects Using Variation in Compulsory Schooling Law	We use cross-state and temporal variation in compulsory schooling laws to explain differences across siblings in the age at school entry of children of different birth orders. The analysis takes advantage of changes in the age parents are first allowed to enroll children in public schools. Because our data, the Children of the NLSY79, cover a long time period (1986 through 2002) we observe a large number of children within families who were allowed to enter school at different ages. These differences in the age of first permitted entry means that parents face greater incentives to enter a youngest child into school at an earlier age than they did an older sibling. We use these different incentives to first control for whether parents in fact do enter children into school at different ages and then to investigate how much of sibling differences are explained by differences in age at entry.	Dean	R. Lillard	Jennifer	 Gerner
2006	110	Using Policy Variation to Identify Demographic Change	Do the Elderly Respond to Taxes on Earnings? Evidence from the Social Security Retirement Earnings Test		David	 Loughran	Steven	 Haider
2006	111	Getting Results: Case Studies in Applied Demography	KIDS COUNT: Using Demographic Indicators to Increase Public Awareness of Child Well-Being	The annual KIDS COUNT Data Book provides statistical information related to the well-being of children nationally and state-by-state. Since most of the data in the Data Book are demographic in nature it can be seen as an exercise in applied demography. The major goal of the KIDS COUNT report is to increase public awareness of children’s issues. Information from the release of the 2005 KIDS COUNT Data Book shows that it stimulated 885 newspaper articles which reached 56.9 million potential readers, 559 television spots reaching 19.8 million viewers, and 125 radio spots reaching 138 million listeners. A survey of state legislators shows that 75% are familiar with KIDS COUNT, and 55% say they have used KIDS COUNT products and the majority of state legislators say KIDS COUNT data are timely, credible and useful for policy-makers. Data will also be provided on KIDS COUNT’s impact on public awareness and on public policy.	Bill	 O'Hare
2006	111	Getting Results: Case Studies in Applied Demography	Positional Errors in Small-Area Demographic Analysis: Estimating Population for an Oregon School District	Using a recent study to develop enrollment forecasts for the Medford School District (Oregon) as an example, this paper discusses common yet frequently overlooked sources of error in small area demographic analysis: positional errors. It identifies their sources and types and focuses on boundary mismatch errors arising from different spatial representations of the same study area. These errors are especially challenging when conflicting data are provided by trusted sources, such as GIS departments with the school district, city, or county. Using spatially referenced tax assessors’ inventories, fine-resolution GIS imagery, and expert judgment, we corrected positional errors in the data and created true boundaries for the study area. Next, we developed population estimates for the school district and its attendance areas from true and conflicting boundary configurations. The paper compares gains in spatial accuracy with improvements in estimates' accuracy and discusses the results in light of efforts required to achieve them.	Irina	V. Sharkova	Kenneth	 Radin
2006	111	Getting Results: Case Studies in Applied Demography	The Demography of Large-Scale Human Rights Atrocities: Integrating Demographic and Statistical Analysis into Post-Conflict Historical Clarification in Timor-Leste	During 1975, Timor-Leste transitioned from being a colony of Portugal to being occupied by Indonesia. The occupation was characterized by large-scale political violence, including selective and indiscriminate killings, forced migration, famine-related deaths, tortures and acts of ill-treatment. The authors, formerly advisers to the Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, estimated the pattern and magnitude of excess mortality and forced migration during the Indonesian occupation of Timor-Leste between 1975 and 1999. These estimates were based on a combination of qualitative testimony data, a census of public graveyards and a Retrospective Mortality Survey. The data corroborate the eyewitness accounts and qualitative historical analysis of the period. This paper briefly presents the statistical and demographic findings from survey estimates and capture-recapture methods. A detailed discussion is presented which shows how the demographic analysis contributed to the Commission's mandate, how the analysis was combined with historical, legal and anthropological findings, and which specific policy questions it informed.	Romesh	 Silva	Patrick	 Ball
2006	111	Getting Results: Case Studies in Applied Demography	Demographic Trends and Enrollment Decline in Wisconsin's Public Schools	Between 1998 and 2003, 63% of Wisconsin's public school districts experienced declining enrollment. Declining enrollment has profound implications for schools: funding is tied to enrollment numbers and declining enrollment often means that administrators must consider school closures, cutting resources, and reducing staff.    This paper examines the demographic and socio-economic trends behind enrollment decline, including the impact of the Baby Boom generation and trends in births, migration, and racial/ethnic population change. We conduct statewide and regional analyses to examine how demographic trends and enrollments vary across different parts of the state; and we employ factor analysis to categorize school districts by socioeconomic characteristics and examine enrollment trends for these types of districts. Finally, we use cohort component methods to project enrollment for various subsets of school districts. Throughout, we address questions such as: Will decline continue and to what extent? Where will decline occur? What conditions might mediate enrollment decline?	Richelle	 Winkler	Sara	 Lazenby
2006	112	Child Well-Being, Health and Mortality	The Consequences of Overseas Employment of Parents on the Educational Success of Filipino Children	Using data from the Philippines, we examine the consequence of overseas employment of parents on the educational success of children 10-21 years old. We analyze data from a survey conducted in four primary overseas contract worker (OCW) sending areas. Respondents in this study were children for whom one or both parents had been overseas for at least three consecutive years. Children for whom neither parent was overseas were likewise interviewed. Children who had one or both parents abroad, but whose parents had left more recently were not included in the study. Our research questions are as follows: Are there differences in the educational success of children who grow up in households in which one or both parents are OCWs? Are school-related parenting practices different in these types of households? What coping strategies do different families adopt? This study seeks to contribute to our understanding of the consequences of overseas employment of parents on the well-being of children.	Marie	Joy B. Arguillas	Lindy	 Williams
2006	112	Child Well-Being, Health and Mortality	Birth Spacing and Neonatal Mortality in India: Dynamics, Frailty and Fecundity	A dynamic panel data model of neonatal mortality and birth spacing is analyzed, accounting for causal effects of birth spacing on subsequent mortality and of mortality on the length of the next birth interval, while controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in mortality (frailty) and birth spacing (fecundity). The model is estimated using micro data on about 29000 children of 6700 Indian mothers, for whom a complete retrospective record of fertility and child mortality is available. Information on sterilization is used to identify an equation for completion of family formation that is needed to account for right-censoring in the data. We find clear evidence of frailty, fecundity, and causal effects of birth spacing on mortality and vice versa, but find that birth interval effects can explain only a limited share of the correlation between neonatal mortality of successive children in a family.	Sonia	 Bhalotra	Arthur	H. Van Soest
2006	112	Child Well-Being, Health and Mortality	Impact of Piped Water Supply on Infant Mortality Rate in Brazil	We examine the causal impact of piped water supply on the under one infant-mortality-rate (IMR) using a novel census dataset that divides Brazil into 3659 minimally comparable areas in 1991 and 2000. The first difference models, controlling for time invariant unobservables, indicate that the 14 unit improvement in percentage household with piped water supply between 1991 and 2000 reduced the under-1-IMR by 0.56 deaths per 1000 live-births, amounting to 3.5% of the mean decline in IMR between 1991 and 2000. The quartile regressions, with IMR for children aged 1-5, who are more resilient to water-borne diseases than children under 1, to control unobserved health inputs, indicate that the impact of piped water is more pronounced in areas with higher under-1-IMR. In 1991, a percentage point increase in piped water coverage reduced under-1-IMR at the 90th percentile by 0.25 deaths per 1000 live-births, but showed no reductions at the 10th percentile.	Shanti	 Gamper-Rabindran	Christopher	 Timmins
2006	112	Child Well-Being, Health and Mortality	Has the One-Child Policy Improved Adolescents’ Education Access and Progress in Reform-Era China?	One of the purposes of China’s one-child policy is to improve child wellbeing. However, past studies overwhelmingly focus on policy effects on fertility, and thus, whether the policy has achieved this goal remains unclear. This paper exploits the relationship between the one-child policy and educational access and progress among adolescent children in the 1990s, using CHNS data (1993-2000). Drawing on local variations in policy strength and sibship composition, I find a consistent, strong advantage of single children in school enrollment and grade completion relative to those with an older brother or 2+ siblings among children beyond compulsory education, regardless of residence and child gender. The quality of children decreases with quantity, particularly with the presence of an older brother. The results provide evidence to support the idea that restricting family size and promoting sibling equality will necessarily help increase adolescents’ educational wellbeing in developing settings.	Juhua	 Yang
2006	113	Religion, Religiosity and Family Behavior	Religious Factors in High School Completion	The far-reaching consequences of failing to complete secondary schooling are well-known. The central questions addressed in this study are: Does religion make a difference in the likelihood of successfully completing the transition to high-school graduation? If so, how large are the influences? Based on a human capital framework, the paper develops hypotheses about the effects of two dimensions of religion during childhood -- affiliation and participation -- and tests them with data on non-Hispanic white, African-American, and Hispanic respondents from the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth. The results are generally consistent with the hypotheses, revealing sizeable differentials in high-school graduation rates by affiliation and participation. The results also uncover pronounced differences by race/ ethnicity.	Evelyn	 Lehrer
2006	113	Religion, Religiosity and Family Behavior	World Views and Altruistic Economic Behavior	We investigate whether and how world views affect altruistic economic behavior of individuals within and across families. The standard economic model assumes that all agents share the same world view of Naturalism, in which it is believed that there exists no after-life or no spiritual being who may reward altruistic behavior. In reality, people have different world views, and some people believe that heaven and hell exist, for example. It is also likely that some people are attaching positive probabilities to different world views, because they are not perfectly sure which world view is true. Different world views can affect altruistic economic behavior. We use data from the PSID on intra- and inter-family transfers of time, goods, and money to investigate predictions of how different world views affect altruistic behavior.	Masao	 Ogaki
2006	113	Religion, Religiosity and Family Behavior	Religion, Work-Family Gender Ideology, and Fertility	Given evidence suggesting (1) that religiosity and work-family gender ideology are related to childbearing; and (2) variance in religious institutions’ promotion of gendered patterns of family organization, this paper explores whether work-family gender ideology is a mechanism through which religious affiliation and/or practice influences childbearing. Using NLSY79 data, we evaluate how childhood religious affiliation, adult religious service attendance, and attitudes towards gendered family roles relate to the hazard of first premarital and marital births. We find that work-family gender ideologies somewhat mediate the elevated risk of a premarital birth for those raised Evangelical Protestant but not the negative relationship between religious service attendance and the risk of a premarital birth. Work-family gender ideology is negatively related to timing of first marital birth and does not mediate observed religion-fertility relationships. Our findings further elucidate relationships between religion and family formation and how attitudes toward gendered family organization might factor in the process.	Lisa	D. Pearce	Shannon	N. Davis
2006	113	Religion, Religiosity and Family Behavior	Understanding the Faith Factor: Religion, Norms, Decent Behavior, and Relationship Quality among Urban Parents	Our previous research indicates that religious participation is correlated with higher levels of supportive relationship behaviors and with relationship satisfaction among both married and unmarried parents. But little is known about how the association between religious participation and relationship quality may be mediated by family norms and decent behavior. Using data from three waves of the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, we will investigate the role that marriage norms and prosocial behavior play in mediating the relationship between religious participation and relationship behaviors and quality for both married and unmarried urban parents. In addition, because the literature suggests that men’s relationship behaviors are influenced by the institutional contexts of their relationships more than are women’s behaviors, we will determine if the effect of religion, marriage norms, and prosocial behavior on relationships varies by gender.	W.	Bradford  Wilcox	Nicholas	H. Wolfinger
2006	114	Comparative Perspectives on Migration	The Immigrant-Native Gap in Labor Market Earnings and Total Net Income across European Countries	The paper uses the 1994-2000 waves of the European Community Household Panel to analyze both work earnings and net income of immigrants as compared to natives across 15 European Union countries. Immigrant individual work earnings are 40% lower than those of natives at the time of arrival in the pooled sample. Differences vary across countries, with migrants in Germany and Portugal faring the best relative to natives and those in Sweden, Denmark, Luxembourg or Spain the worst, particularly for non-EU born migrants. By continent, Asian men followed by Latin-American and Eastern European men receive the lowest earnings. Latin-American and Eastern European women are at the bottom of the distribution. Differences between immigrants and natives are notably lower in terms of total net income. The immigrant-native gap is relatively smaller in Nordic countries but still sizable in Southern Europe. This denotes important differences in the workings of the welfare state across countries.	Alicia	 Adsera	Barry	R. Chiswick
2006	114	Comparative Perspectives on Migration	The Economic Performance of Immigrants: A Longitudinal Analysis of Earnings Mobility in Denmark and Germany	The aim of this paper is to assess the factors that influence the earnings mobility of immigrants and natives in Denmark and Germany. If immigrants' earnings are lower than natives' at the time of arrival to the host country and we consider upward earnings mobility as a sign of catching up (and assimilation?), then immigrants should be more mobile than comparable natives. Both the structure of the labor market and the educational system are expected to considerably influence immigrants' economic performance and mobility in the two countries studied.	Stefanie	 Brodmann
2006	114	Comparative Perspectives on Migration	Remittances of Paraguayan Migrants to Argentina: Prevalence, Amount, and Utilization	This paper contributes to discussions on the role of migration in development by analyzing the remittances of Paraguayan migrants to Argentina. Despite its historical significance, there is little information about the economic consequences of the flow and its contribution to development. Drawing on original data collected in four sending communities and their counterparts in Argentina, the specific objectives are: a) to understand the decision to remit by describing and modeling their determinants; b) to assess the amount remitted, transfer mechanisms, and aggregate contribution to sending economies; and c) to investigate how remittances are used. Results support perspectives that view remittances as a central contribution to the well-being of migrant families. However, while housing is a main destination for a large portion of remittances, other forms of investment, such as business formation, are almost non-existent. We highlight the importance of communities’ economic context for understanding the connection between migration and development.	Marcela	 Cerrutti
2006	114	Comparative Perspectives on Migration	Intersecting Inequalities and Immigrant Joblessness in Britain, Germany, and Sweden	This paper considers destination effects on immigrant joblessness in Britain, Germany, and Sweden. Findings show that immigrant/native-born joblessness differentials are larger in Sweden than in Britain and Germany, net of human capital, socio-demographic characteristics, and sending country. Institutional explanations include cross-national differences in occupational structures, access to welfare, and anti-discrimination law. A second important finding is that Swedish institutions boost women’s employment so much that immigrant women in Sweden have lower absolute levels of joblessness than immigrant women elsewhere. This suggests that gendered institutional configurations in destination countries are an important aspect of immigrant economic incorporation. Furthermore, the finding provides evidence that institutions which foster women’s work have independent effects on newcomers’ employment, and are not merely an indicator of pre-existing proclivities toward work.	Christel	 Kesler
2006	115	Demography of Frontier Areas	Sending or Receiving Stations?: The Dual Influence of Railroads in Early 20th-Century Great Plains Settlement	This study tests two theses on how railroads shaped settlement patterns in the twentieth century U.S. Great Plains using railroad, population census, and environmental data. Drawing from theories of transportation and development, I supplement standard regression procedures with spatially-oriented techniques to empirically test long-held claims about the relationship of railroads. The Great Plains is a region where settlement is commonly attributed to the railroad. I examine the period after the railroad heyday and before the widespread adoption of the automobile. Study results show a complex relationship between county population growth and the presence of railroads. Counter to the nineteenth-century pattern, the influence of railroads is negative and conditioned by county development; in the first decade, railroads are receiving stations for counties with greater population density and sending agents for less settled places. Spatial effects explain the conditional relationship in later decades. Implications for scholarship concerning transportation and spatial observations are discussed.	Katherine	J. C. White
2006	115	Demography of Frontier Areas	Social Change and the Relationships between Education and Employment	The relationships between education and employment have long been of interest to demographers. During the transition from a completely agricultural economy to one that has some non-farm opportunities, however, the relationships between education and employment may dramatically change. We examine how two components of education—schooling enrollment and attainment—affect the transition to employment for men and women in the Chitwan Valley of Nepal. Using discrete-time event history models, we find that enrollment tends to delay employment, while school attainment accelerates employment. We also test how these effects may have changed across successive cohorts. Over time, the effects of enrollment have become stronger, while the effects of attainment appear to have weakened. These shifts in the nature of education may be related to increasing conflict between student and employee roles, as well as changes in the types and availability of employment in Chitwan.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Sarah	 Gore-Hoefke
2006	115	Demography of Frontier Areas	Demographic, Socioeconomic, and Biophysical Factors Affecting Land Use and Land Cover Change in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon: Factors, Models, and Spatial Explicit Simulations	Investigations of land cover/land use (LCLU) change and forest management are limited by a lack of understanding of how socio-economic and demographic factors combine with geographical and biophysical factors in affecting LCLU patterns and change trajectories. The objectives of this paper are (a) to quantify deforestation and secondary forest succession in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon, (b) to determine the significance and magnitude of the effects of socio-economic, demographic, geographic and biophysical factors on deforestation and secondary forest succession at the farm level, and (c) use spatially-explicit models (i.e., Cellular Automata) and significant demographic, socioeconomic and demographic variables to create future LCLU scenarios interpreted within a policy-relevant context. Socioeconomic and demographic survey data are used to describe the household characteristics of spontaneous colonists who have in-migrated into this frontier environment and remote sensing is used to acquire information on the spatial pattern of LCLU change.	Carlos	F. Mena	Stephen	J. Walsh
2006	115	Demography of Frontier Areas	A Demographic Dynamics System for Municipalities in the Brazilian Amazon	Population growth and migration represent an important underlying cause of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. Models designed to simulate deforestation should therefore incorporate a demographic dynamics system to help project the rates of deforestation across the basin. We present a demographic model that projects population at municipality level by computing migratory movement among Amazonian municipalities, both in and out of the region, as well as their crude birth and mortality rates. The annual projections from 1995 to 2035 are based mainly on mortality, fertility, and migration data from the 1991 and 2000 IBGE censuses. The migratory movement was determined by establishing an origin-destination matrix for all the Amazonian municipalities and Brazilian states from 1995 to 2000. Validation was performed by comparing the model output with 2000 IBGE data. The model is designed to handle various scenarios of regional migration in face of existing projects to expand infrastructure across the Amazon.	Ricardo	A. Garcia	Britaldo	 Soares-Filho
2006	117	Policy and the Family	First-Year Maternal Employment, Parenting, and Child Outcomes in Single-Mother Families: Evidence from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study	We examine the effects of early maternal employment on parenting and child outcomes for families likely to have been affected by recent welfare reforms: single-mother families, racial/ethnic minority families, and families who received welfare in the past. Our sample is drawn from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCW), a birth cohort of children of predominantly low-income single-mothers, more than a third of whom were on welfare at the child’s birth. We use extensive parenting and child outcome measures available in FFCW to examine the effects of maternal employment in the first year of a child’s life on a range of parenting and child outcomes at age 3, both for the full sample of single-mother families and for the sub-sample that was receiving welfare prior to the focal child’s birth. We also investigate whether the effects of early maternal employment vary across racial/ethnic sub-groups and for boys and girls.	Lawrence	M. Berger	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn	Christina	 Paxson	Jane	 Waldfogel
2006	117	Policy and the Family	Were the Assumptions behind Welfare Reform Right?: Comparing Recipients’ Attitudes and Experience Pre- and Post-PRWORA	Only a minority of the welfare reform literature addresses how the policy is actually experienced by the low-income families who must follow its dictates. We know little about how parents’ social interactions (and how their level of trust in their interaction partners) shape their perceptions of and experiences with employment. This paper, based on in-depth qualitative interviews with two cohorts of welfare recipients – one in 1994-95 and one in 2004-05 – explores how low-income mothers’ interactions in the welfare office, the workplace, and their own personal networks impact employment outcomes. The paper finds that women pre-reform wanted to work but often did not because of a lack of trust in work incentives offered by welfare offices, in employers, and in child care providers and other network members. Post-reform, mothers face the same issues, but are often forced to overlook them with potential costs to themselves and their children.	Judith	A. Levine
2006	117	Policy and the Family	The Effect of Specific Welfare Policies on Poverty	This paper uses monthly individual-level SIPP data and state-level policy data from 1988 through 2002 to measure the effect of specific welfare and related policies on the deep poverty and poverty status of ever-single mothers and children of ever-single mothers. The 19 specific policies included in the model are based on a conceptual framework that lays out a typology of policies hypothesized to affect poverty. We find evidence of both short-run effects of policies and medium-run behavioral effects of policies. More lenient eligibility requirements for welfare receipt generally reduce poverty, as hypothesized. More generous financial incentives to work generally reduce poverty, as hypothesized. Welfare time limits are hypothesized to have ambiguous effects on poverty, and we find few statistically significant effects of our six time limit policies, either jointly or individually.	Signe-Mary	 McKernan	Caroline	 Ratcliffe
2006	117	Policy and the Family	Welfare Reform and Young Child Health and Behavior	We investigate the effects of welfare and work on young child well-being. We use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a survey of primarily unmarried, low-income mothers, to examine the health and emotional behavior of the 3-year-old children of four groups of mothers: welfare only, welfare and work, work only, and no welfare or work. Using OLS models, we control for several antecedent characteristics that may be correlated with both welfare receipt, work, and child well-being, however, the risk remains that we have not accounted for some unmeasured characteristic that is driving the observed associations. To this end, we use instrumental variable models to limit our selection effects. We find that children’s health and behavior is poorest among mothers who do not work, but only receive welfare, and that the children of working mothers have the best outcomes. However, this association does not appear to be causal.	Cynthia	A. Osborne
2006	118	International Perspectives on Inequality	Child Poverty and Changes in Child Poverty in Rich Countries since 1990	This paper documents levels and changes in child poverty rates in 13 OECD countries using data from the Luxembourg Income Study project, focusing upon an analysis of the reasons for changes over the 1990s. The objective is to uncover the relative role of income transfers from the state in determining the magnitude and direction of change in child poverty rates, holding other demographic and labor market factors constant. As such, the paper offers a cross-country overview of child poverty, changes in child poverty, and the impact of public policy in North America and Europe.	Miles	 Corak	Wen-Hao	 Chen
2006	118	International Perspectives on Inequality	Factors Affecting International Differences in Childhood Poverty Rates	Attempts to explain the unenviable U.S. leadership in childhood poverty have pointed to the lesser extent of labor market regulation, allowing for greater wage dispersion than in some other countries, and to the similarly meager extent of government redistribution through taxes and transfers. A little-explored factor that could contribute to the observed cross-national differences, however, relates to living arrangements. In this paper, we explicitly focus upon the distribution of children across a variety of types of households, and upon the poverty gradients between these types, to assess whether these factors might play a significant role in explaining the comparatively high childhood poverty rates in the U.S. We also examine whether income redistribution through taxes benefits some types of households more than others.	Patrick	 Heuveline	Matthew	 Weinshenker
2006	118	International Perspectives on Inequality	Does HIV/AIDS Disproportionately Affect the Poor? Cross-Country Evidence	This paper analyzes patterns in average levels and inequalities in HIV/AIDS prevalence using household survey data from six countries in sub-Saharan Africa: Kenya, Tanzania, Ghana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Malawi. These surveys have been chosen because they collected biomarkers for HIV that can be linked to information on a series of household assets, which allows us to construct an index of economic status and thus to examine HIV/AIDS prevalence across income quintiles. The estimation of economic status is done concurrently for all countries in the analysis, leading to an index that is on the same scale for all countries. This enables us to provide a detailed analysis of similarities and differences in socioeconomic gradients of HIV/AIDS prevalence both within and between countries and regions. This is an important step in considering how wealth or income may interact with other factors, from geography to policy, to affect HIV/AIDS outcomes.	Simona	 Bignami	Emmanuela	E. Gakidou	Ari	 Van Assche	Cecilia	 Vidal
2006	118	International Perspectives on Inequality	Disparities in Working Time: A Cross-National Analysis of the Distribution of Work Hours	We investigate intra-country distributions of work hours, in cross-national perspective. Using data from the Luxembourg Income Study and from labor force surveys, we compare working time distributions, as of the year 2000, across a group of twelve industrialized countries -- Austria, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States.     Clearly, work hours constitute a resource as they result in income for workers and their families. They also constitute a burden -- especially if the work is onerous -- and time spent in employment always has opportunity costs; long work hours crowd out caregiving, leisure, and/or personal care. In this paper, we assess disparities in working time, recognizing the importance of both over-work and under-work. We assess patterns of variation, within and across countries -- especially with respect to gender, parenting status, and age, as well as educational attainment and household income.	Janet	 Gornick	Traci	 Schlesinger
2006	119	Alternative Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Racial and Ethnic Differences in Parent-Child Relationships: Does Mixed-Race Matter?	We investigate the association of race and ethnicity, and racial mixture, with parent-child relationships. Using data from Wave I of Add Health, we examine 8,327 adolescents in two-biological parent families who also had a parent interviewed. We examine racial mixture at the couple level (whether the parental couple is mixed-race) and at the individual level (whether the father, mother, or adolescent are multiracial). A contribution is the diversity of our parent-child relationship measures. We examine closeness, activities, communication, and educational aspirations from both mother and father, and parent-level indicators of parental control and social closure. We pose three research questions: First, are there differences in the level of parental involvement between racially mixed households and racially homogenous households?  Second, do these differences persist over all types of racial mixture?  Finally, do the patterns of parental involvement imply differences in the degree of mother’s involvement relative to fathers?	Holly	 Heard	Jenifer	 Bratter
2006	119	Alternative Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Ethnosizing Immigrants	The paper provides a new measure of the ethnic identity of immigrants and explores its evolution in the host country. The ethnosizer, a measure of the intensity of a person's ethnic identity, is constructed from information on the following elements: language, culture, societal interaction, history of migration, and ethnic self-identification. A two-dimensional concept of the ethnosizer classifies immigrants into four states: integration, assimilation, separation and marginalization. We find that ethnic identity persists more strongly for females, Muslims, those with schooling in the home country, and older age at time of entry. Young migrants are assimilated or integrated the most. While Muslims do not integrate, Catholics and other Christians assimilate the best. Immigrants with college or higher education in the home country integrate very well, but do not assimilate. Having some schooling is worse than no education for integration or assimilation. The ethnicity of individuals, measured by country of origin, remains relevant.	Amelie	 Constant	Liliya	 Gataullina	Klaus	F.  Zimmermann
2006	119	Alternative Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	A New Method for Estimating Racial/Ethnic Disparities where Administrative Records Lack Self-Reported Race/Ethnicity	With increasing ethnic diversity, equity is a continuing focus of policy formulation and political debate. We consider the need by health plans to monitor racial/ethnic disparities in health care quality among their enrollees. Few plans acquire racial/ethnic data from their entire membership. Where classification variables are missing, individuals’ surnames and neighborhood contextual measures can provide useful surrogate data elements for comparing population subgroups. Building on the strengths of surname analysis and neighborhood contextual analysis, we present and evaluate a hybrid method which is broadly applicable where researchers must rely on administrative records lacking racial/ethnic detail. This Bayesian Algorithm integrates both sources of information and substantially outperforms other approaches. It performs well when race/ethnic classification is the only goal or when estimated race/ethnicity is to be a predictor in regression or other models. Thus its potential applications are not limited to estimation of disparities or to health applications.	Marc	 Elliott	Allen	 Fremont	Nicole	 Lurie	Peter	A. Morrison	Philip	 Pantoja	Allan	 Abrahamse
2006	119	Alternative Measurement of Race and Ethnicity	Choosing a Race: The Effects of Proxy Reporting on the Identification of Mixed Race Children	This paper examines the effects of household roster reporting on the distribution of racial identities among children of mixed race backgrounds. Though previous studies have examined links between family characteristics and patterns of racial identification among multiracial youth, the impact of proxy reporting, i.e., having a single household “lister” identify the race of multiple family members, has been left unexamined. Using recent CPS data, I find that multiracial children are far more likely to be identified with the race of the listing parent relative to the non-listing parent. Children living in households in which the non-white parent supplies the race of the child are two thirds more likely to be identified as non-white relative to children who whose race is supplied by their white parent. These patterns persist across a variety of interracial households, though the character and magnitude of the “proxy effect” varies by racial component groups.	Anthony	D. Perez
2006	120	The Marriage Revolution in Asia	Changing Expectations: Increasing Happiness and Unhappiness in Japanese Marriages	Marriage in Japan has traditionally been an essential adult status. Based on a functional division of labor, marriages remained intact out of obligation rather than personal choice. Hence, there was little point to evaluating one’s marriage: many couples were indeed happy or unhappy, but in general, “ok” was good enough. Nevertheless, the Japanese family system is undergoing major changes associated with increasing freedom of choice, including decisions to divorce.    In this context, using surveys from 1994 and 2000, we document movement away from concentration in a middle category on marital happiness, “so-so,” towards responses of either happy or unhappy. Multivariate analyses are conducted with respect to responses in the middle category, and of the five-point scale. Marital happiness is structured much more by social variables in 2000 than in 1994. Finally, we discuss these results in the context of the treatment of family issues in the Japanese media.	Larry	 Bumpass	Noriko	 Tsuya	Minja	K. Choe	Ronald	R. Rindfuss
2006	120	The Marriage Revolution in Asia	The Influence of Developmental Idealism on Marriage: Evidence from Nepal	We hypothesize that developmental ideas and models concerning family life have been disseminated widely around the world, where they have become forces for both ideational and behavioral change. In this paper, we examine the ways in which marriage has been influenced by these ideas of development in Nepal, a country that has historically practiced young age at marriage, arranged marriage, taboos against intercaste marriage, polygamy, and almost no divorce as recently as the 1950s. Using qualitative and quantitative data from recent face-to-face interviews, we demonstrate that large fractions of Nepalis now endorse marriage behavior similar to that found in the West. Preferred age at marriage has risen, tolerance for intercaste marriage has increased, divorce has become more permissible, young people are more likely to be involved in their spousal choice, and polygamy has greatly decreased. Further analyses examine potential mechanisms, such as education and media exposure, behind this recent change.	Julie	A J de Jong	Dirgha	J. Ghimire	Arland	 Thornton
2006	120	The Marriage Revolution in Asia	Marriage Squeeze in China: Historical Legacies, Surprising Findings	Since the late 1980s, the proliferation of prenatal sex testing in China has led increasingly to selective abortion of female fetuses. Yet these sex-distorted birth cohorts are still too young to marry. In 2000, a severe shortage of potential brides at peak marital ages was due to age structure. Grooms tend to be older than brides, and the age structure at 20-29 resembled an inverse pyramid. From 2005 to 2010, a temporary shift to a traditional pyramid will lead to a shortage of husbands. From 2015 to 2025, the cohorts affected by prenatal sex selection will experience a protracted deficit of brides, yet that deficit will still more likely be due to age structure. The accordion-like fluctuations in China’s age structure are due not only to patterns of fertility decline following the population policies established in the 1970s, they can be traced back to the Great Leap Forward (1958-1961).	Daniel	M. Goodkind
2006	120	The Marriage Revolution in Asia	The Marriage and Fertility Revolutions in Asia	Across Asia, the patterns of marriage have been changing is dramatic and complex ways. While attention has been focused on the delay in the age at marriage of both women and men, changes to patterns of divorce, widowhood and singlehood have been equally important in shaping family formations across the region. This paper utilizes a standard index of marital status to compare trends over time and differences between nations. This method is particularly useful in highlighting the potential impact of changing marital behavior on the fertility levels and trends in Asia. In particular, it points to the contradictory influences that marriage, divorce and widowhood have on fertility, and how the net impact has been to reduce fertility. This analysis points to numerous implications concerning the future trends in fertility if current marriage trends continue and open the chance to speculate on impacts of changing marriage behavior.	Terence	H. Hull
2006	120	The Marriage Revolution in Asia	Lifecourse and Marriage Timing in Indonesia	Past research on Asian marriage timing found the modernization framework insufficient for understanding the processes of marriage and non-marriage. Using insights provided by Western research on marriage timing, we examine marriage and non-marriage for Indonesia. We find that the correlates of industrialization – education and work – have counter-intuitive associations with marriage. While level of education doesn't delay marriage, school enrollment keeps people away from it. Work increases the odds of marriage while earnings from work have no effect. We argue that the processes of marriage and non-marriage are best understood using a life course perspective: events such as marriage are a part of a person’s life course that follow a normative sequence. People get married when they are considered ready for it. When in school they are viewed as minors unsuited to raising a family whereas working people are viewed as adults able to take on the responsibilities of marriage.	Aparna	 Sundaram
2006	121	Understanding the Dynamics of Health and Mortality	The Modal Age at Death and the Shifting Mortality Hypothesis	A mathematical expression for modal age at death is used to calculate the number of deaths at a particular age. Models that capture change in mortality over time show an asymptotic approximation towards a constant number of deaths, and survivors, at the modal age. The bell curve for the number of deaths centered around the modal age at death is also constant, while the modal age moves to higher ages over time. These findings are confirmed through applications to populations with historical mortality data. Results reveal a need to revise the rectangularization hypotheses about approaching a limit for longevity.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo
2006	121	Understanding the Dynamics of Health and Mortality	Convergence of the Aging Rates for Healthy and Unhealthy Elderly at Advanced Ages	We analyze the ability of a cumulative index of age-associated health disorders, called a “frailty index” (FI), to characterize individual rates of biological aging (BA) in elderly and, consequently, population heterogeneity in mortality models, using the National Long Term Care Survey data. We show that the FI age-patterns for “healthy” (low mean FI at younger ages) and “unhealthy” (high mean FI at younger ages) elderly converge at advanced ages suggesting that disorders might accumulate faster among the “healthy” than “unhealthy” individuals. Convergence of the FI age patterns in later ages is interpreted as a cross-sectional manifestation of compression of morbidity. Such behavior suggests existence of BA limits associated with given levels of health-maintenance in the society, i.e., they are not static and can be extended with improvements in health-care technologies. BA limits are found to be different for females and males corresponding to 109.4 and 92.5 years of chronological age, respectively.	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Kenneth	C. Land	Kenneth	G. Manton
2006	121	Understanding the Dynamics of Health and Mortality	Testing the Influenza-Tuberculosis Selective Mortality Hypothesis in Australia	I have postulated that there was selective mortality in the USA during the great 1918 influenza pandemic (Noymer & Garenne, PDR 2000). Tuberculosis morbidity enhances influenza mortality; this selection hypothesis is potentially important for the way we think about mortality change. Influenza pandemics are also a timely public health topic, and since TB remains very prevalent in developing countries, this work is highly relevant. Confirmation in another country is a next step. Australia is ideal, because (unlike many countries) there are good historical   vital statistics and, like the USA, the 1914-18 war was far-removed, at least physically. Using mortality sex differentials and an external event as a natural   experiment was the previous methodological innovation. Early analysis has already shown that the flu year (1919 in Australia) was a pivot point in TB mortality sex differentials;  this is confirmatory. This paper will provide a valuable comparison to the American results.	Andrew	 Noymer
2006	121	Understanding the Dynamics of Health and Mortality	The Triumph of Cohort Effects in the Explanation of Mortality Change: A New Age-Period-Cohort Analysis of Adult Cause-Specific Mortality in the United States	This study examined the temporal changes in U.S. adult mortality by cause of death and sex over a 40-year period in the second half of the 20th century. It applied the Intrinsic Estimator to log-linear APC models to simultaneously account for age, period, and cohort variations in mortality rates for four leading causes of deaths – heart disease, stroke, lung cancer, and female breast cancer. The results show that the large mortality reductions since the late-1960s continued well into late-1990s and that these reductions were predominately contributed by cohort effects. Cohort effects are found to differ by specific causes of death examined, but they generally show substantial survival improvements. Implications of these results are discussed with regard to epidemiological transition theory, the theory of technophysio evoluation, differential cohort accumulation of health capital and lifetime exposures to socioeconomic and behavioral risk factors, and period changes in diagnostic techniques and medical treatment.	Yang	 Yang
2006	122	Business Demography	Measuring the Market in Resort and Recreation Communities	To estimate consumer demand for a location, a standard approach is to characterize the population living within the trade area defined by a series of concentric rings. When the “usual place of residence” for customers is located within those rings then geo-demographic segmentation data based on decennial census characteristics are used. However, when the market is composed of persons with a “usual place of residence” elsewhere, developing consumer profiles is difficult. This paper presents three approaches used in three different communities to measure such elusive markets. These markets are for day visitors, overnight visitors and seasonal residents. In each case we used individual address information to geocode and characterize the consumers by geodemographic segment. The data sources were an intercept interview with day visitors, inquiries for lodging and attractions information via a website and 800 number, and local property tax records to identify home addresses for non-resident property owners.	Warren	A. Brown
2006	122	Business Demography	Competitive Impact on Store-Level Sales: The Interactive Effect of Population Density (Residential and Employment) and Competitor Type on Store-Level Sales	Leading retailers are always looking for better predictions of store sales performance. Analysis of the retail competitive market improves understanding of sales patterns. Geo-demographic approaches can be augmented by examining additional predictive factors, such as spatial distribution of direct competition, density of residential population, and the business environment (persons employed in the area). Rather than a direct inverse relationship between number of competitors and sales, the analysis showed that the “types” of competition around a store had an influence on category sales. Further, the competitors with the most impact may not have been considered by the retailer to be a major competitive threat. Stores can be clustered based on level and type of competitive impact. Such analyses can provide the impetus for major strategic shifts, including product pricing and promotions, increased focus on specific consumer segments, changes in merchandising configurations, and adjusted assortment and inventory levels.	Susan	 Haynie	Rod	 Brown
2006	122	Business Demography	Understanding the Potential Market of Selected Consumer Durables in India	The census of India 2001 collected data for the first time on six consumer durables: radio; bicycle; scooter, moped or motorcycle; car; telephone; and television.  Data was collected for the entire country, and for states and districts disaggregated by rural and urban area. This information was also collected in successive rounds of National Family and Health Survey, 1992-93 and 1998-99. Using these data, we attempt to understand the penetration of these durables in rural and urban areas of the country. We also assess the market for the near future, i.e., through 2015, using the trends. This enables us to assess the potential market for the country and has implications for domestic as well as global manufacturing of these assets. The results indicate that the potential market for durables like scooter, motorcycle and moped, car and telephone is large, while this is not the case for radio and bicycle.	S.	K. Mohanty
2006	122	Business Demography	Households and Housing Forecasts at State and Small Area Levels --A New Approach and Applications to the State, Two Counties and One Town of North Carolina	Employing the ProFamy method/program, this study examines the methodological and empirical issues of households and housing forecasting at state and small area levels with illustrative applications to North Carolina, Orange and Chatham counties, and the town of Chapel Hill. Our forecasts demonstrate that future housing consumption is directly linked with household size/type/income, age/race of the householder, and changes in demographic rates. The results show that there will be a 16-17% and 16-19% increase in owned and rental housing units from 2005 to 2015, respectively. The growth in housing consumption of smaller households, elderly households, low income households, less than 3-bedroom households, and Hispanic households will be faster than that of other household types. Our analysis shows that the headship-rate method may substantially bias the forecasts of owned and rental housing markets due to its inherent deficits of being unlinked to demographic rates and excluding household size and cohort-component effects.	Zhenglian	 Wang	Danan	 Gu	Yi	 Zeng
2006	123	Religion and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Village Sexual Norms and Links between Religion and HIV Infection Risk in Rural Malawi	HIV infection rates in southern Africa range from just under 40 percent in Botswana and Zimbabwe to about five percent in Uganda. In Malawi, the national prevalence of HIV is approximately 15 percent; there is, however, wide variation across testing sites, suggesting that some communities have been more successful in avoiding infection than others. Using a sample of married men and women from rural Malawi, we examine whether or not individuals’ HIV status and risk behavior are associated with religious affiliation or with religious involvement, and whether their effects are conditioned by local prevalence rates and village norms about the permissibility of extramarital sex. We analyze data from the third wave of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project, which was collected in 2004.	Mark	 Regnerus	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2006	123	Religion and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Attitudes towards Abortion, Contraception and Abstinence in Rural and Urban Burkina Faso, 2000-2001	The main mode of fertility control in rural, high fertility, African contexts is female abstinence; secret abortions repair occasional bents to the sexual code. Fertility control patterns in urban, low fertility, African settings are more complex: why is contraceptive use low and abortion use high? We will examine how the meaning systems framing individuals’ birth control choices are changing as fertility declines in West Africa. Using quantitative data, we will compare attitudes towards two means of family planning, contraception and abortion, distinguishing circumstances where abstinence has been a favorite local social script, from situations where abstinence is absent from the cultural repertoire. To capture the effect of social change (including religious change) on individuals' visions of varied birth control modes, we will contrast attitudinal data collected in a high fertility Burkinabe rural setting in 2000 (n=1500 individuals) to a similar survey undertaken in 2001 in the capital of Burkina Faso.	Clementine	 Rossier
2006	123	Religion and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Religion and the Timing of Births in Sub-Saharan Africa: Evidence from Ghana	Due in large part to the pervasiveness of religious institutions in Ghana, a growing body of literature has emerged that examines the role of religion in a host of socio-demographic outcomes including contraceptive behavior and the timing of premarital sex. Surprisingly, few analytic studies have examined the relationship between religion and fertility behavior. This study contributes to the discourse on religion by assessing its relationship with fertility behavior using data from 1998 and 2003 Demographic and Health Survey. Employing count data and event history models, we argue that denominational differences in moral proscription as well as pronatalist orientations of religious bodies may differentially impact on fertility behavior. Such differences, however, are hypothesized to be accentuated by what Ali Mazrui calls the triple heritage on the enmeshing of Islam and Christianity with traditional African religion.	Baffour	K. Takyi	Stephen	Obeng  Gyimah	Isaac	 Addai
2006	123	Religion and Reproductive Health in Sub-Saharan Africa	Religion and HIV Status in Sub-Saharan Africa: Examining Influence and Pathways	A growing body of research examining the relationship between religion and HIV risk in sub-Saharan Africa has suggested that members of certain religious groups (particularly Pentecostal ones) may have distinctive risk behaviors. Using a sample of married women and their husbands in rural Malawi, this study moves beyond the reliance on self-reported risk behaviors that characterizes this body of literature and uses survey data combined with biomarkers to examine whether or not HIV status is associated with religious affiliation or with religious involvement. Analyses of survey data from the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (2004) reveal differences in risk behavior, perceived risk, and HIV status according to several measures of religiosity. Regular attendance at religious services, for example, is associated with reduced odds of reporting extramarital partners, lower levels of perceived risk of infection, and reduced likelihood of testing positive for HIV for men.	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2006	124	Collection and Methods for Analysis of Biomarker Data for Demographic Studies	What a Drop Can Do: Expanding Options for the Analysis of Blood-Based Biomarkers in Population-level Health Research	Methodological constraints associated with the collection and analysis of biological samples in community-based settings have been a significant impediment to integrative, multi-level biodemographic research. We pursue the following objectives in an effort to advance the development and implementation of biomarker methods: (1) Describe the advantages and disadvantages of dried blood spots as a minimally-invasive method for biomarker collection and analysis; (2) Evaluate the range of analytes with validated blood spot assay protocols; and (3) Discuss additional and emerging options for the analysis of capillary blood collected from a simple finger stick. The primary advantages of blood spots include the relative ease and low cost of sample collection, and a disadvantage is the requirement for assay validation prior to analysis. Protocols have been developed for over 100 analytes, providing a wide range of viable biomarker options that are increasingly being incorporated into population-based health research.	Thomas	W McDade	Sharon	R Williams	James	J Snodgrass
2006	124	Collection and Methods for Analysis of Biomarker Data for Demographic Studies	Health Status of Filipino Children: Biologic and Subjective Measures Used in the Quality Improvement Demonstration Study	Health status measurements in large population-based surveys have traditionally relied on self-reported health measures. Concern has often been raised that these are subjective and may not be as reliable as more objective biomarkers. Collecting biomarker data, however, has been particularly challenged by the logistics and feasibility in developing countries. Moreover the most vulnerable populations are children and the poor who typically live in the most remote settings, furthest from environmental standards necessary to do bioassays. This paper describes how we identified the tests to include in a large population survey we are undertaking, determined a sample frame from a general population, then collected and assayed the biologic data. We also describe the steps taken to ensure the reliability and the validity of four tests. We compare the results of our four bioassays with self-reported health status measures. We conclude by evaluating the contribution of objective biologic data in population-based surveys.	John	 Peabody	Orville	 Solon	Stella	 Quimbo	Elizabeth	 Butrick
2006	124	Collection and Methods for Analysis of Biomarker Data for Demographic Studies	Measuring Indoor Air Pollution and Lung Functioning in Indian Field Settings	Research on indoor air pollution (IAP) is finally catching up with the size of the health risks posed by this environmental hazard. Unfortunately, most studies use fuel and kitchen variables as proxy measures of IAP exposure and self-reports as the only indicator of respiratory illness. On the other hand, household research using physical measures of IAP or lung functioning have been limited to small, geographically focused designs. This paper reports results from a pilot study of 617 households in four geographically dispersed states of India that integrates physical and questionnaire measures in ways that are cost effective and can be scaled up for larger studies. Portable spirometers and new compact IAP monitors were successfully used in combination with a detailed household survey. Results are reported for these instruments, compared with other physical and questionnaire measures, and tested for significant interrelationships.	Reeve	 Vanneman	Kalpana	 Balakrishnan	Douglas	 Barnes	Kyra	 Naumoff	Kirk	 Smith	R	 Uma
2006	124	Collection and Methods for Analysis of Biomarker Data for Demographic Studies	Evaluation of Dried Blood Spots Collected by Non-medically Trained Interviewers: Number, Size and Quality of Spots	The use of minimally invasive techniques for biomarker collection in population-based research has recently become both feasible and desirable. Collection of blood spot specimens on filter paper offers many advantages over blood collection via venipuncture, including: significant reduction in participant burden and discomfort, utilization of non-medical data collectors rather than phlebotomists, and efficiency of storage and transportation. However, the feasibility of blood spot collection in large-scale population-based research using non-medical data collectors has not been evaluated. Blood spot quantity and quality has important implications for the number and type of biological assays that can be conducted. This paper presents an analysis of blood spot number, size and quality collected by non-medical field interviewers from a nationally-representative sample of community-dwelling participants in the National Social Life, Health and Aging Project. The majority of interviewers (93%) obtained at least 4 blood spots, however, both size and quality of spots were highly variable.	Sharon	R Williams	Stacy	 Lindau	Thomas	W McDade
2006	125	Living Arrangements and Work	Does the Creation of Three-Generation Households Lead Grandmothers to Leave the Work Force?	Much is known about the consequences of non-marital child bearing on children and mothers. What is less known, however, is the consequences for co-resident grandmothers, many of whom live with adult sole-parent daughters and new grandchildren. Heretofore, little research has identified outcomes for the newly-formed, three-generation household. This study fills part of this gap in our knowledge by investigating a potential consequence of non-marital childbearing on the family of origin, namely, grandmother exits from the labor force. Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation and discrete-time hazard models, I found that non-marital childbearing increases the risk of grandmothers’ leaving work. Family structure also mattered with grandmothers’ risks of leaving jobs being strongest when early childbearing and unmarried parenthood were jointly considered. The findings extend the literature on the consequences of non-marital child bearing and reveal its broader impact on the family of origin.	Peter	D. Brandon
2006	125	Living Arrangements and Work	Do Downward Transfers Enhance Maternal Labor Supply? Evidence from around Europe	With the use of a theoretical model of private transfers of time and money with endogenous labor supply and recursive econometric models based on 2317 mother-daughter pairs from the 2003 SHARE data on 10 European countries, we investigate the impact of private transfers on  the career choices of transfer-receiving young mothers. For Europe as a whole, we find a strong positive impact of grandchild care on the labor force participation decision of the mother, but no clear impact of either grandchild care or monetary transfers on the mother’s degree of labor market involvement. However, the link between intergenerational transfers and labor supply exhibits an interesting pattern across institutional settings. While both recipients and donors with better endowments are more likely to participate in a monetary transaction, time transfers are such that mothers with lower level of human capital tend to assist the professional development of their better endowed daughters.	Ralitza	 Dimova	François-Charles	 Wolff
2006	125	Living Arrangements and Work	Household Responses to Adverse Income Shocks: Pensioner Out-Migration and Mortality in South Africa	How do households cope with negative income shocks in developing countries? South Africa’s unique social pension system results in most of the poor elderly receiving a generous income transfer from the state. This generally makes the pensioner the primary ‘breadwinner’ in the household. Several researchers have shown that pension recipiency in South Africa results in improved household welfare, along dimensions including child health, schooling enrollment of children and the consumption of leisure of prime aged adults. In this paper, I estimate the effects of a pensioner leaving the household, using nationally representative matched panel data from several waves of the South African Labour Force Surveys. Preliminary results suggest that the main coping mechanism is for prime aged adults to increase their labor supply, with no evidence that schooling enrollment of youth is adversely affected, and only limited evidence that it affects youth labor supply.	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2006	125	Living Arrangements and Work	Living Arrangements of Widowed Oldest Old Women, China: Who Are They Living With?	According to the Chinese 2000 national census, ten percent of the Chinese population are elderly (age 60+), among which eight percent are oldest old (age 80+). Of the oldest old, women account for over 60 percent, and 83 percent are widowed. My question is, after losing their spouses, with who are these women living? Based on data from the 1998 Chinese Longitudinal Healthy Longevity Survey (CLHLS), my analysis shows a substantial proportion of widowed oldest old women are not living with offspring, despite Chinese tradition and the efforts of the Chinese government with regard to family care. The results also reveal that demographic and socio-economic factors play an important role in oldest old widows' living arrangements. Additionally, some in good health and economic conditions can choose to live alone voluntarily, whereas others are forced to live alone because they have no living children, spouse, or other family members to depend on.	Qiong	 Zhou
2006	126	International Demography of Disability	Functional Disability and Diabetes among Latin American and Caribbean Elders	In the last fifty years, life expectancy at birth in Latin America has increased by about 20 years and further increases are expected in the next decades. Therefore, one of the main concerns nowadays is whether such increases in life expectancy imply better health for this larger surviving aging population. This paper uses recent data from two large surveys conducted in seven countries in Latin America and the Caribbean to examine the prevalence and incidence of functional disability associated with diabetes among elderly individuals. The main hypotheses are: a) the odds of functional disability are significantly higher in individuals with diabetes; b) individuals with diabetes are more likely to become functionally disabled; and c) those with diabetes at baseline are less likely to recover from disability. Results confirm all these hypotheses. Public health institutions in these countries should target diabetes in order to reduce the disability and mortality costs associated with the disease.	Flavia	 Andrade
2006	126	International Demography of Disability	Magnitude of Disabled Persons in Karnataka: A Census Analysis	This paper makes use of data from the 2001 census of India. In India, about 21.9 million and in Karnataka a comparatively smaller number (940,000) of persons are disabled. Differential analysis indicates that 70 percent of India's total disabled are in rural areas, and that more males (57 percent) are disabled than females. A majority of the disabled have a visual disability, and more than one–fourth (28 percent) have a physical handicap. About 10-11 percent of total disability is attributed to mental handicaps in all the districts. In rural and urban areas, the rate of disability is 19 persons per thousand and 16 persons per thousand, respectively. The rate of disability by sex is 20 males per thousand and 16 females per thousand. These rates are higher among the illiterate and non-working groups.	Anil	Srinivasarao  Kulkarni	Nakka	Venkata  Rajeswari
2006	126	International Demography of Disability	Measuring Disability in India: Spatial and Socioeconomic Variations	This study is based on Indian Census (2001) data on disability. The Indian census considers the five types of disability, namely, disabilities in: (i) seeing (ii) speech (iii) hearing (iv) movement and (v) mental disorder. In this paper, we compute the disability indices specific to five types of disability measurement based on Crude Disability Rates. Then a weighted disability index has been developed to measure the true status of disability. Disability Indices are estimated for all 26 Indian states and Union territories: for literate and illiterate, urban and rural, and workers and non-workers, male and female. The Disability Index is largest in Kerala and smallest in a tribal state Nagaland. Many Indian states have very high level of disability indices portraying a very grim disability picture. There are significant variations in disability status between urban and rural areas, between workers and non-workers, and between males and females.	Dilip	C. Nath	Mousumi	 Nath
2006	127	Internal Migration and Geographic Dispersion of U.S. Immigrants	Network Saturation and Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants to and from Leading Gateway Cities	Extensive research on immigrant incorporation in the United States has emphasized its spatial and economic concentration in leading gateway cities, providing limited understanding of foreign-born dispersion from these cities to other U.S. destinations. More recent research has documented immigrant settlement in “new destinations,” but it has treated these new destinations in isolation from traditional gateway regions. The goal of the proposed research is to address these gaps through an investigation of the increasing volume and selectivity of foreign-born outmigration from the nation’s two leading gateway regions (New York and Los Angeles) to other U.S. destinations. A central methodological goal will be to develop a research paradigm that will elucidate the extent to which such migratory flows stem from the saturation of local ethnic economies in these gateway regions and result in subsequent reproduction of similar employment concentrations elsewhere in the US.	James	 Elliott
2006	127	Internal Migration and Geographic Dispersion of U.S. Immigrants	Mexican-Born Persons’ Earnings and Settlement in New Destinations: A Decomposition Analysis	In the 1990s, the proportion of Mexican-born persons residing outside the five traditional destination states of Mexican migration (AZ, CA, IL, NM and TX) increased from 10 percent to almost 25 percent. Does increased dispersion to new destinations facilitate socioeconomic incorporation for the Mexican-born population? What are the implications of settlement in new destinations on individual incorporation? Preliminary results show that at the national level, group dispersion contributed to slower earnings growth among Mexican-born persons and that their relative earnings declined at a faster rate than what might have occurred had they not dispersed, ceteris paribus. At the regional level, earnings among Mexican-born persons in new destinations, although lower in absolute terms, appear to be higher relative to earnings among non-Latino white persons. These results add a new dimension to previous findings that attribute slow wage growth to structural and compositional factors without considering geographic distribution.	Mark	A. Leach	Frank	D. Bean
2006	127	Internal Migration and Geographic Dispersion of U.S. Immigrants	Homeownership and Residential Overcrowding of Immigrant Migrants: Southern California as a Stepping Stone for Assimilation?	New immigrants continue to flock to Southern California and gradually replace settled immigrants who migrate to other parts of the United States. Although migration is integral to immigrant assimilation, little work has been done. This paper examines the housing outcomes of immigrant migrants. Overall, when immigrants migrate away from Southern California, they not only have higher homeownership rates and lower overcrowding than immigrants who recently moved to the region, but also reduce the housing deficit relative to native-born, non-Hispanic white migrants. Latinos see the largest advancement. While immigrants improve housing outcomes in tandem with their higher English proficiency and longer U.S. residence, the two housing measures yield contrasting results. Immigrants experience a rapid increase in homeownership, but not a significant reduction in overcrowding. Migration, which leads to better housing outcomes for immigrants, is a stepping stone for assimilation. Economic integration seems to progress faster than social adaptation.	Zhou	 Yu
2006	127	Internal Migration and Geographic Dispersion of U.S. Immigrants	Internal Migration of Mexicans in the United States, 1990 and 2000	This study examines the relationship between internal migration of Mexicans and their assimilation progress. Using micro data from Census 1990 and 2000, I examine three main questions. First, what kinds of people are more likely to be migrants? Second, what are the mobility consequences of internal migration? Third, how do individual attributes affect contextual mobility through migration? The general hypothesis is that immigrant group members with better individual characteristics are more capable of taking advantage of migration in order to achieve further spatial and economic mobility. This hypothesis is, by and large, confirmed by findings from comparative studies of data from two Census periods. They point to similar patterns in which immigrants with greater individual attributes have higher migration propensity. In addition, these immigrants are more likely to achieve upward mobility in terms of changes in contextual conditions. Therefore, internal migration is most likely another important venue that facilitates assimilation among immigrants.	Wenquan	(Charles)  Zhang
2006	128	Variations in the Lowest-Low Fertility	Analyzing Fertility Trends in Russia, 1985-2001, Using Individual Fertility Histories	Since the early 1980s, Russia has experienced dramatic fertility decline, entering the ranks of “lowest low” fertility countries in 1996. Also, the proportion of births to unmarried women has surged. Scholars have suggested a variety of economic, socio-cultural, and policy explanations for these trends. However, there have been few if any empirical tests of these explanations, mainly because of data limitations. We analyze the factors behind the decline of overall fertility and growth of non-marital childbearing using individual-level fertility, marital, work, and residential histories spanning 1985-2001 from the Survey on Stratification and Migration Dynamics in Russia (N = 7167). We estimate event history models for first births and any births, for all women and for married and unmarried women separately. Unadjusted models provide us with baseline estimates of trends. We incorporate covariates corresponding to the main explanations for fertility decline and test for temporal changes in certain effects.	Theodore	P. Gerber	Erika	Barth  Cottrell
2006	128	Variations in the Lowest-Low Fertility	Localized Fertility Policies and Below Replacement Fertility in China	Below-replacement fertility is becoming a worldwide phenomenon, with forces shaping such a new global social reality varying from one country to the other. In the case of China, where fertility is believed to have reached a level of 1.5 by the end of the 1990s, a prominent determining factor has always been the forceful government fertility control policy that has been in place for three decades. Yet, with few exceptions, not much is known about the process of fertility policymaking and its outcomes. Utilizing data on fertility policies from China's over 400 prefecture level administrative units, and on policies and fertility levels for China's provinces, this paper examines the localized nature of fertility policymaking in China in the 1990s, reports local variations in fertility policies, and discusses the relationships between government fertility policy and reproductive outcomes by comparing policy required and achieved fertility levels.	Baochang	 Gu	Feng	 Wang
2006	128	Variations in the Lowest-Low Fertility	The Inadequacies of Current Theory on Very Low Fertility: Lessons from the Italian Case	Demographers have offered two main lines of theory to explain the unanticipated emergence of very low fertility in a rapidly expanding number of countries. One stresses economic and political economic factors, in good part linked to the upsurge of women in the labor force and to the extent of state support for childbearing and childrearing. The other, identified with Second Demographic Transition Theory, stresses changing values, particularly weakened family ties and increases in emphasis on individual self-fulfillment. This paper looks at the case of Italy, which by the early 1990s had virtually the lowest fertility rate in the world, offering new evidence to show the inadequacies in both major demographic theoretical approaches to the explanation of very low fertility. Evidence from two recent nationally representative surveys, utilizing life history data, is combined with results from recently completed intensive ethnographic research in four Italian cities to offer an alternative explanatory model.	David	I. Kertzer	Laura	 Bernardi
2006	128	Variations in the Lowest-Low Fertility	The Changing Effects of Education on Family Formation during a Period of Rapid Social Change: Lowest-Low Fertility in Post-Soviet Ukraine	This study demonstrates how broad societal-level change not only alters the composition of individual-level characteristics in a population, but also affects the relationship between mechanisms and behavior. Focusing on post-Soviet Ukraine, the paper examines how massive economic, political, and social transformations changed individual-level decision-making. Specifically, I investigate how social change in Ukraine altered the effects of one institution – education – on the timing of first and second births and marriage. I find that before Independence, more highly educated women would have had higher first birth rates once school enrollment and marriage were controlled, and after Independence, women with higher education delayed childbearing. The timing of second births and marriage also changed after Independence, as did the relationship between education and second births. Explanations for the changing effects of education on family formation include the restructuring of the educational system, shifting opportunity costs, and exposure to new ideas and values.	Brienna	 Perelli
2006	129	Does Community Matter for Health?	Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities in Los Angeles: The Role of Immigration Status and Neighborhoods	In this paper, we examine the determinants of health insurance  coverage, health care utilization and access to a usual source of  care, and health status. Using the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood  Study, we analyze outcomes for children and adults in Los Angeles  County. We look at differences by race and ethnicity while controlling  for other key determinants of health outcomes. We pay particular  attention to differences in coverage, utilization, and health status  by nativity (born in the U.S. or elsewhere), citizenship (naturalized  or U.S.-born) and immigration status (among non-citizens, documented  or undocumented). The ability to differentiate the undocumented from  the documented is relatively novel. We find many of the SES gradients  in health outcomes found by others. We find that documentation status  (for adults) and parent's documentation status (for children) are  important drivers of health differences across race and ethnicity. We  find a much smaller role for neighborhood characteristics.	Marianne	 Bitler
2006	129	Does Community Matter for Health?	A Fixed-Effects Analysis of How Individual Mortality Is Influenced by the Proportion Who Are Not Married in the Municipality	Using register data for the entire Norwegian population aged 50-89 in 1980-1999, we estimate how the proportions divorced or never-married in a municipality have affected all-cause mortality, net of individual marital status. The data include individual histories of changes in marital status and places of residence, and provide a rare opportunity to include municipality fixed-effects that capture the time-invariant unobserved factors at that level. The beneficial health externality of marriage that has been suggested in the literature is not confirmed. Among men, mortality was low in municipalities with a high proportion divorced or never-married, while such effects do not appear clearly among women. These findings may indicate that a high level of social cohesion in the community is not as beneficial as often claimed, at least not for both sexes, that marriage perhaps undermines rather than strengthens social cohesion, or that other mechanisms are involved, for example related to relative health.	Oystein	 Kravdal
2006	129	Does Community Matter for Health?	Neighborhood Attributes Associated with Poor Diet and Inadequate Weight Gain during Pregnancy	Neighborhood factors have been associated with health outcomes, mainly in US northern urban areas. To estimate relationships between neighborhood attributes, health behaviors and health indicators in pregnancy, residential and commercial areas were assessed in the context of the Pregnancy, Infection and Nutrition study. A 39-item instrument used in Baltimore, MD was adapted for a southern urban area. Confirmatory factor analysis was used to test previously identified scales of physical incivilities, (i.e., neighborhood condition), and territoriality, (i.e., display symbolic and physical boundaries). Neighborhood attributes distinguished areas in which low-income pregnant white and black women live. Logistic regression, controlling for several individual level socio-demographic measures, found that high levels of neighborhood territoriality were independently associated with poor diet quality, and high incivility was associated with inadequate weight gain among pregnant women. These findings suggest neighborhood characteristics are relevant to the study of reproductive health indicators and, possibly, to the design of interventions.	Barbara	A. Laraia	Lynne	 Messer	Jay	S. Kaufman	Nancy	 Dole	David	A. Savitz
2006	129	Does Community Matter for Health?	The Relationship between Attitudes toward Work and Suicide in Sweden	Sweden once had one of the highest suicide rates in the world. The suicide rate declined by more than one-third between the years 1970 and 2002. The greatest declines in the Swedish suicide rate have occurred among the working-aged population. Attitudes about work in Sweden have changed, and this attitude transformation may be associated with the decline in Swedish suicide. The changes in attitudes toward work among Swedes may be associated with changes in their attitudes toward solidarity. This paper combines individual level survey data from the World Value Surveys conducted in 1981, 1990, 1996, and 2000 and aggregate level data from various branches of Statistics Sweden (the national central bureau of statistics) to evaluate the relationship between unemployment, solidarity, attitudes about the importance of work, and suicide. Results of the time series regression will be presented.	Julianne	 Ohlander
2006	130	Temporary Migration	Nonimmigrants in the United States: Flow Data and Stock Estimates for 2005	Each year, millions of foreign nationals are admitted into the United States. Those who are temporarily admitted for a defined period of time and for a specific purpose are referred to as nonimmigrants. This paper will first define the term “nonimmigrant” and describe the major categories and classes of admission used in publications by the Office of Immigration Statistics (OIS). It will then review the primary federal data sources available for analyzing nonimmigrant flows and generating stock estimates. The number and characteristics of nonimmigrant admissions will also be presented. This paper will then present the methodology used by OIS to generate nonimmigrant stock estimates and discuss the trends in the size and composition of the nonimmigrant population between 2000 and 2005.	Elizabeth	M. Grieco
2006	130	Temporary Migration	Emigration of the Highly Skilled from Germany to the US: “Brain Drain” or “Brain Circulation”?	Our paper tackles the question of whether the emigration of highly skilled Germans to the US resembles a “brain circulation” rather than a “brain drain.” Our findings show that the skill level as well as the number of Germans living in the US has increased substantially between 1990 and 2000. Further analyses reveal, however, that these processes are mainly due to a substantial increase in the number of highly skilled Germans who stay in the US temporarily. The share of those who adjust their status to become permanent residents has remained stable. This led to an increase in the number of permanent immigrants from Germany. Much of this increase can thus be attributed to a growing integration in research and business: Some temporary migrants built social and institutional ties in the US and stayed. Push factors in the country of origin seem to be less important in explaining increasing numbers of Germans settling abroad.	Claudia	 Diehl	David	 Dixon
2006	130	Temporary Migration	Which Skilled Temporary Migrants Become Permanent Residents and Why	Most labor migration flows are temporary, as destination countries often impose strict conditions to ensure that foreign workers return home at the end of their work contract. It is also inevitable that some temporary migration will become permanent as some temporary migrants decide they would like to remain on a longer term or indefinite basis. In today's global competition for skilled labor, countries are usually more amenable to allowing skilled , rather than unskilled, temporary migrants to become permanent residents. This paper examines the factors that are associated with skilled temporary migrants' decision to become or not become permanent residents and the reasons for their decision. The paper is based on data from a recent survey of skilled migrants in Australia's temporary business entry program, which is similar to the H-1B visa program in the United States. Policy implications of the research findings for destination countries are discussed.	Siew-Ean	 Khoo	Graeme	J. Hugo
2006	130	Temporary Migration	High-Skilled Temporary Immigrants in a Segmented Labor Market: A Study of H-1Bs	Prior work demonstrates that skilled immigrants to the U.S. (H-1Bs) are paid the prevailing wage, yet they continue to be recruited despite unemployment and wage stagnation in H-1B sectors. I broaden the debate on the impact of skilled immigration by examining the relationship between recently arrived immigrant status and two crucial labor market dimensions: contingent employment and eligibility for employer-subsidized healthcare and retirement benefits. In addition, simultaneous equation modeling is utilized to assess the possibility of differing wage models for contingent and core workers in H-1B industries. I argue that the flow of skilled immigrants to the US is better understood in terms of the broader advantages they provide: flexible labor, the most recent skills, and lower expectations in terms of work conditions and benefits. Findings support former conclusions that H-1Bs are not “cheap labor;” rather, this study shows that they are instead utilized as flexible labor.	Renee	 Reichl
2006	131	Non-Standard Work Schedules and Family Time	The Impact of Nonstandard Work on Caregiving	Our paper examines how mothers’ employment choices (full-time vs part-time) and work schedules (standard vs shiftwork) affect mothers’ caregiving, including total time spent with children and the activities engaged in with children. Working full time versus part time or standard versus shiftwork is itself a choice and so we model the simultaneity of the time spent with children and employment status. Full time/part time work status and standard/nonstandard work status are analyzed in separate estimations using data from the newly released American Time Use Survey (ATUS). This analysis permits the examination of questions such as whether there is a difference in mothers’ time spent on human capital investment for her children among full time, part time and nonworking mothers; what role education plays in the way mothers spend time with children, controlling for employment choices; and does shiftwork permit more direct child contact or affect the quality of that contact?	Jean	 Kimmel	Rachel	 Connelly
2006	131	Non-Standard Work Schedules and Family Time	Short-Term and Long-Term Impact of Parental Job Characteristics on Children's Well-Being	Using three waves of the National Survey of Families and Households, this paper examines the short-term and long-term impact of parental job characteristics on children’s well-being. The results show that school-age children had more adjustment problems if either parent experienced job disruptions and dissatisfaction. When a mother worked longer, irregular schedule, but fewer weeks, children also had more adjustment problems. These effects were partially mediated by parental marital quality and parenting behavior. Mother’s irregular work schedule and father’s job disruptions decreased marital happiness and increased marital conflict. Mothers with fewer work hours and more job disruptions and fathers with irregular schedules and more job satisfaction were more involved and supportive. Parents with less satisfying jobs were more likely to use harsh punishments. Children had higher levels of mental well-being in adulthood if, in their childhood, their father worked long hours, had a less irregular schedule, and worked long weeks.	Ye	 Luo
2006	131	Non-Standard Work Schedules and Family Time	Are Nonstandard Workers Nonstandard Parents? The Daily Rhythms of Work and Family in a 24-Hour Economy	Presser’s book Working in a 24/7 Economy (2003) highlights the increasing trend toward nonstandard work arrangements, suggesting that the hours in which people engage in market work are spreading over the 24-hour day and across the seven-day week. However, to date, few studies have been able to capture how the diffusion of work hours outside of the “standard” weekday 8am to 4pm range has implications for how time is allocated outside of work. Using the data from recently released American Time Use Survey (ATUS), we propose to examine the scheduling of work and its relationship to time spent in family-related and leisure activities. Using a sample of work days across the year, this paper provides a new measurement perspective on nonstandard work and also informs the discussion of the “costs and benefits” of differing parental work schedules with new information on family and leisure time allocations unique to time-diary collections.	Vanessa	 Wight	Sara	 Raley	Suzanne	M. Bianchi
2006	132	Approaches for Reaching Youth with RH/FP and HIV/AIDS Information and Services	Adolescents’ Knowledge About, Use of and Barriers to Sexual and Reproductive Health Information and Services in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi and Uganda	Current evidence of adolescents’ knowledge about, use of and barriers to sexual and reproductive health information and services highlights promising directions and persistent challenges in preventing pregnancy and treating sexually-transmitted infections (STIs) and HIV among young people. This paper draws on data from nationally-representative, household-based surveys in 2004 of 12-19 year olds in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi and Uganda. Results show that adolescents get sexual and reproductive health information from a range of sources, particularly mass media, friends and teachers/schools. Yet only about one in two sexually-experienced adolescents have ever used a modern contraceptive method (mainly male condom) and 4-10% ever had an HIV test. A substantial proportion of sexually-experienced adolescents do not know of any source to obtain contraceptive methods, get STI treatment or get an HIV test. Social-psychological reasons (e.g., embarrassment or fear) and financial cost remain common barriers to getting these types of services in all four countries.	Ann	E. Biddlecom	Alister	 Munthali	Susheela	D. Singh	Vanessa	 Woog
2006	132	Approaches for Reaching Youth with RH/FP and HIV/AIDS Information and Services	Levels and Determinants of Attitude toward Sex Education in America	This paper examines the views of American people on the sex education in public schools through the analysis of the 2002 General Social Survey. The likelihood of being in favor of sex education in public schools was predicted in logistic regression models. The results show that the majority of respondents approved of the teaching of sex education in public schools (88% in favor versus 12% against). However, there were significant differences by respondents’ socio-demographic characteristics, with most variations observed across levels of education. Respondents with a high school degree and those with at least some college education were respectively three and four times more likely to be in favor of the teaching of sex education in public schools than those without a high school degree (odds ratios, 3, 4 versus 1), net of the effects of other variables. Nonetheless, there were also significant ideological, cultural, local, and socioeconomic differences.	Yanyi	K. Djamba
2006	132	Approaches for Reaching Youth with RH/FP and HIV/AIDS Information and Services	Women’s Knowledge and Attitudes about HIV/AIDS Prevention Policy in Post-Socialist Georgia	The current paper explores factors influencing women’s decisions to oppose school-based HIV prevention programs. Examining the individual characteristics common among those opposed to reproductive and sexual health programs in schools can assist in understanding the correlates of opposition and lend insight into how best to build popular support for this important public health intervention. Using data from CDC 1999/2000 Georgian Women RHS, I test if HIV knowledge predicts women’s attitude toward school-based health education. The results show very low level of HIV knowledge and high misconception among educated women. The lack of HIV knowledge and misconceptions concerning HIV transmission are powerful predictors, among other socio-demographic and cultural factors, of opposition to school-based HIV prevention programs among Georgian women. This analysis supports the importance of adult education programs in the realm of reproductive and sexual health, in order to create a supportive legislative environment for school-based program implementation.	Khatuna	 Doliashvili
2006	132	Approaches for Reaching Youth with RH/FP and HIV/AIDS Information and Services	Impact Evaluation for the LPS Training Program in China	Youth in many developing countries are at acute risk of STI, HIV infection and unintended pregnancies, thus ARH programs are growing in these countries. However, most programs are oriented towards specific RH issues, so comprehensive ARH programs are limited or lack well-documented evaluations. The five-year China Youth Reproductive Health Project aims to improve RH status of youth ages 10-24 in China by addressing contextual factors for ASRH. The project’s Life-Planning Skill training program offers comprehensive sex education covering HIV/AIDS prevention, family planning, and RH issues. Using post-test/pre-test nonequivalent comparison group study design, this study evaluates the program impacts in terms of adolescents’ RH knowledge, attitudes and behaviors. Significant improvement is found in RH knowledge, including knowledge about STI, HIV/AIDS and contraceptive use, and in attitudes towards sexuality and HIV/AIDS. However, behavioral change is minor and may need further follow-ups to assess. The results have policy recommendations to inform future ARH programs.	Yingying	 Zhou	Qian	 Geng	Lisa	 Mueller
2006	133	Determinants and Consequences of Union Stability	Cohabitation Then and Now: Changes in Stability, Transition to Marriage, and Partner Choice	How has the meaning of cohabitation changed over time? We explore this question by comparing individuals who started first cohabitation in the 1980s with those in the 1990s. Specifically, we compare how cohabitation between the two cohorts differs in stability, in transition to marriage, in partner choice, and in comparison with the married unions. We use data from waves 1 and 3 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH) and analyze union experiences of individuals aged 18 to 34 who started first cohabitation or direct marriage within three years before each interview. Our results reveal that the later cohort individuals are not significantly different from the earlier cohort in union disruption, but cohabitation for the later cohort is less likely to end in marriage compared to the earlier cohort. These results suggest that the transition to marriage has become less an alternative for cohabitors in recent years.	Anna	 Cunningham
2006	133	Determinants and Consequences of Union Stability	Cohabitation and Marital Dissolution	An intriguing question for family researchers has been to explain why a positive association exists between cohabitation and marital dissolution when the primary reason to cohabit is to test relationship compatibility. Recently, researchers have discovered that the relationship between cohabitation and marital instability is complex and depends on sexual history, cohabitation history, and race/ethnicity (Teachman 2003; Phillips and Sweeney 2005). Drawing on the National Survey of Family Growth, we examine whether and to what extent variation in premarital cohabitation experiences influence marital stability. We build on prior work by examining recent patterns, including both men and women, incorporating variation in cohabitation experiences, and focusing on race and ethnic similarities and differences. Premarital cohabitation history (number and who) has different effects on marital instability for men and women. Both married men and women with marriage plans at the start of cohabitation share similar dissolution rates as couples who never cohabited.	Wendy	D. Manning	Antwan	 Jones
2006	133	Determinants and Consequences of Union Stability	Marital Status, Marital Transitions, and Smoking Behavior: Gender and Life Course Considerations	We analyze national longitudinal data to assess the impact of marital status and marital transitions on subsequent change in smoking behavior. Results from Zero-Inflated Poisson regressions show that, compared to the married, the odds of smoking are significantly greater for the continually never-married and continually divorced/separated men and women. The transition into marriage has no impact on subsequent change in smoking—providing no support for the idea that becoming married promotes health behavior change. Marital duration is associated with a reduction in the odds of smoking and in the amount of smoking over time—suggesting that marriage may have a cumulative positive impact on smoking behavior over the life course. Becoming divorced/separated exacerbates smoking among men but not women, having implications for long-term gender and marital status differences in health. Finally, life course stage is more important than gender in explaining how the transition to widowhood affects smoking behavior.	Debra	J. Umberson	Hui	 Liu
2006	133	Determinants and Consequences of Union Stability	On the Rebound: Time to Remarriage and Subsequent Union Stability	Self-help books frequently advise readers to avoid rushing into new relationships after a break-up. To date, there has been little evidence supporting this recommendation. This paper tests the effects of rebound time, measured as time elapsed between marital dissolution and the formation of a new union, on remarriage stability. Data from the first wave of the National Survey of Families and Households and generalized additive models reveal no evidence of a rebound effect on remarriage stability. This finding remains unchanged after adjusting for various demographic differences between respondents.	Nicholas	H. Wolfinger
2006	134	Demography of Poverty: Mapping Poverty in Rural and Urban Areas	Feeding the Poor? Spatial Patterns and Consumer Demographics in the Informal Food System of Metropolitan Santiago	Food systems are closely linked to urbanization patterns. Recent research in Latin America has shown how globalization is affecting the population distribution by SES within main cities, and the capacity of these cities to connect with the local agricultural production. Still, there is little research documenting how segregation is affecting urban food systems. This paper intends to contribute to this field of research by analyzing the informal food systems in Santiago de Chile, composed mainly by street markets. Using census data from 2002 census and complete records of street market locations, a spatial analysis is performed in order to identify the demographics of the potential consumers of informal urban food systems. Comparing this data to a recent survey performed on street market consumers, I aim to test whether or not the socioeconomic segregation pattern is also manifested in a spatially segmented consumer market.	Lissette	 Aliaga Linares
2006	134	Demography of Poverty: Mapping Poverty in Rural and Urban Areas	Chronic Poverty and Remote Rural Areas in Eastern India	People living in remote rural areas comprise a substantial proportion of the chronically poor. Spatial poverty traps result from low endowments of “Geographical Capital”, with one household poverty reinforcing another. This paper examines remote rural areas' effects on chronic poverty in the eastern part of the country. The evidence for this will be gathered from longitudinal quantitative studies which come from NFHS-2, covering a sample of 92,486 households. The analysis suggests that prevalence of chronic poverty is widespread in the remote rural eastern part of India, and profiles the variation pattern of severity in chronic poverty in the same region where the pattern of the poverty trap is shaped by factors such as no political voice, high dependency ratio, disabled population, low reserve of social capital, and social and political factors. The study suggests that policy makers need to develop methodologies for giving space and incentives to poor people to organize themselves in a participative manner.	Bijaya	Kumar Malik	S.	K. Mohanty
2006	134	Demography of Poverty: Mapping Poverty in Rural and Urban Areas	Poverty and Inequality in Southern Africa: Results from a Poverty Mapping Study	The scope of research on poverty in developing countries has often been confined to individual-level factors, such as education, sex, and age, that are associated with levels of income and consumption. Work on inequality has generally been confined to the country level or to other broad aggregate units. But these research traditions have tended to overlook determinants of the spatial distribution of poverty and inequality. The World Bank and its research partners have recently encouraged national statistical offices to link census and survey data in detailed poverty mapping exercises. In this paper, we examine such data for South Africa, Malawi, and Mozambique, using spatial econometric techniques to analyze the geographic correlates of poverty and inequality. We focus on how rural poverty and inequality is affected by proximity to urban areas, and examine the effects of access to roads, ports, and other networks for the distribution of goods and services.	Mark	R. Montgomery	Marc	 Levy	Maria	 Muniz	Adam	 Storeygard
2006	134	Demography of Poverty: Mapping Poverty in Rural and Urban Areas	The Geography of Opportunity: Social Segregation and Its Effects on Public Education in the Metropolitan Region of Campinas, Brazil	Rapid urbanization in Latin America has created mega-cities characterized by income inequality, poor housing conditions and reduced access to public services. In recent years decreasing urban primacy in Latin America has led to high growth rates within smaller urban agglomerations. While research has documented the extent of social segregation in the mega-cities of Latin America, less attention has been given to that of its secondary cities, and little research has been done on the relationship between poverty, segregation and access to public services in secondary cities. Using data from the national census, 2003 school census, and 2000 SARESP scores, we demonstrate that in Campinas concentrated areas of low socioeconomic status lack public school infrastructure and have worse educational achievement among its students. While measures of school quality are not singly explained by the characteristics of the areas in which they are located, our results clearly show a strong relationship between the two.	Jose	Marcos  Pinto da Cunha	Alberto	A.E. Jakob	Maren	Andrea  Jimenez
2006	135	Early Life Experiences and Mortality	Childhood Conditions and Exceptional Longevity	This study explores the possible impact of childhood conditions on survival to 100 years and beyond. To this aim, we extracted and validated records for over 500 alleged centenarians born in 1890-1899 in the United States from over 300,000 online family histories. This study suggests that there may be a link between exceptional longevity and a person's birth order and this effect is gendered: the first-born daughters are three times more likely to survive to age 100, compared to daughters of higher birth orders (7+). Our study confirms earlier findings by Preston et al. (1998) that farm background is an important factor of survival to old ages. We also found that chances for exceptional survival are higher for persons born in the Western regions of the United States where the childhood mortality levels in 1900 were reported to be particularly low.	Leonid	A. Gavrilov	Natalia	S. Gavrilova
2006	135	Early Life Experiences and Mortality	Early Life Conditions and Adult Mortality in the St. Lawrence Valley, Canada 1720-1800	A number of studies in medicine and related disciplines show that malnutrition and infection in early life affect later life health. Several studies based on historical data on individuals have shown that conditions in early life affect mortality. This study investigates if early life conditions affected adult mortality in the population of the St. Lawrence Valley, Canada in 1720-1800. Additional to the basic interest of studying early life condition effects on mortality in general, this population is interesting since it is an immigrant population, living in a different environment compared to the European populations, who have been mainly investigated up to now. The effect of early life conditions on mortality at age 60-80 is analyzed, with multi-level survival regressions accounting for family frailty, using local infant mortality rates as proxy for conditions in early life. Preliminary results confirm the expected influences of early life conditions on adult mortality.	Kent	 Johansson	Jan	 Beise	Bertrand	 Desjardins
2006	135	Early Life Experiences and Mortality	Testing the Influenza-Tuberculosis Selective Mortality Hypothesis with Union Army Data	In 2000, I postulated that there was selective   mortality in the great 1918 influenza pandemic   (Noymer & Garenne, in PDR). This hypothesis ---   that tuberculosis (TB) enhances risk to death   from influenza --- is potentially important for  mortality studies generally, and may add new   information to the frailty modeling approaches   that have been predominant in mortality studies  since the 1979 watershed methodological papers   of Keyfitz & Littman; and Vaupel, Manton, &  Stallard.     Elaboration with historical microdata is a   next step. Fogel's Union Army data, which by   now are well-known to historical demographers,   fits the bill. I use UA data to examine, using   Cox regressions (etc), if lifetime TB exposure   influences death due to influenza. The   hypothesis predicts: Yes. The data agree. The  risk ratio is large and is statistically   significant.    This informs current debates in demographic   methods, and tells an interesting story about   life and death in the UA cohorts.	Andrew	 Noymer
2006	135	Early Life Experiences and Mortality	Occupational Mobility and Old-Age Survival: Evidence from Union Army Veterans 1861-1946	This paper explores the relationship between occupational mobility and old-age survival among Union Army veterans (N=11,978) who fought the American Civil War. Being a farmer at enlistment is associated with a significant survival advantage at old ages, and this advantage is robust regardless of socioeconomic conditions in later life. Occupational immobility for manual labors poses a serious threat to old-age survival. Living conditions circa birth and war-related traumatic experience both play a significant role in veterans' old-age survival. These findings highlight the impact of early life conditions on old-age survival. The advantages of a life course approach to health inequality at old ages were discussed.	Dejun	 Su
2006	136	Demographic, Health and Economic Consequences of Weather Risk	The Effects of Air Pollution on Health and Health Spending: Evidence from Forest Fires	This paper uses a natural experiment approach to estimate the causal effect of air pollution (specifically particulate matter) on mortality, morbidity and Medicare spending in the United States. In particular, we examine the effects of air pollution from large-scale forest and brush fires between 1990 and the present. Pollution from fires has a similar composition as industrial pollution but has the advantage of being concentrated in time and space. First, we examine the causal effect of particulate matter (PM) on mortality and the extent to which the effect represents “harvesting.” Second, we estimate the effect of PM on morbidities including acute myocardial infarction and respiratory problems. Third, we analyze the Medicare health care costs associated with pollution-induced health problems. We also assess whether certain populations are more susceptible to pollution (race, gender, and age).	Seema	 Jayachandran	Sarah	 Reber
2006	136	Demographic, Health and Economic Consequences of Weather Risk	The Mortality Impact of the August 2003 Heat Wave in France	In the Summer of 2003, Europe experienced an unprecedented heat wave to which over 50,000 deaths were directly attributed. The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the long term mortality impact of the heat wave in one of the most affected countries, France, where the number of victims reached 15,000. Applying an indirect estimation technique to the monthly number of deaths by sex, age and place of residence for the period 1997-2003, a method that can easily be reproduced in other contexts, we estimate the number of years that would have remained to those who died from the heat wave had they been spared. The paper also evaluates the role of the 2003 heat wave harvesting effect in explaining the dramatic deficit of deaths recorded in 2004 (estimated at 25,500 out of a total expected 535,000 deaths).	Magali	 Barbieri
2006	136	Demographic, Health and Economic Consequences of Weather Risk	Flood Exposure and Child Health in Bangladesh	In the summer of 1998, Bangladesh was inundated by significant flooding that covered two-thirds of the country and affected more than 30 million people. Although annual flooding is normal and expected in Bangladesh, the 1998 floods caused extraordinary devastation and were considered a “century” flood. Homestead flooding, crop loss and infrastructure damage all compromised food security in rural areas. In this paper I use longitudinal data from the post-flood period in rural Bangladesh to examine how children’s health and nutritional status responded to the severe flooding. I ask whether 1998 flood exposure caused growth faltering among children, or if 1998 flood exposure and growth faltering are both manifestations of more chronic household vulnerability. Future work will extend this analysis to other welfare measures including household food security and disease prevalence, and to the use of specific coping strategies.	Alison	M. Buttenheim
2006	136	Demographic, Health and Economic Consequences of Weather Risk	Understanding Pareto Inefficient Intrahousehold Allocations	Udry (1996) uses household survey data and finds that the allocation of resources within households is Pareto inefficient, contradicting the main assumption of most collective models of intrahousehold bargaining. He finds that among plots planted with the same crop in the same year, within a given household, those controlled by women produce lower yields than the men's plots. This paper challenges that finding. Using an alternative nationally representative dataset, I find that only households in regions geographically proximate to those studied by Udry exhibit Pareto inefficient intrahousehold allocations, while the rest of the country reveals no evidence of Pareto inefficiencies. Households in regions experiencing negative rainfall shocks are on average less likely to exhibit Pareto inefficient intrahousehold allocations, and these negative rainfall shocks are correlated with increases in labor resources allocated to the wife's plots, further confirming that in bad years, households try to avoid losses from Pareto inefficiency.	Richard	 Akresh
2006	136	Demographic, Health and Economic Consequences of Weather Risk	Sharing the Burden of Death: Implicit Family Insurance, Mortality Shocks, and Fertility and Child Health	This paper studies the effects of insurance in kinship networks on fertility and child health. Using demographic data from Malawi and exploiting differences between the patrilineal and matrilineal kinship in the composition of family network groups, we find that the death of an adult kin and the resulting orphan care in a risk sharing network significantly reduces fertility. We do not find evidence for intra-household discrimination against fostered orphans in terms of human capital investments, but orphans provide more labor than biological children. This income effect translates into improvement in the nutritional status of biological children of preschool age. The results suggest ways in which risks and informal insurance affects demographic outcomes in societies characterized by implicit family contractual insurance. The presence of these effects also suggests that demand decisions under social insurance may depend on a set of constraints that is larger than those assumed in the fertility literature.	Olumide	 Taiwo
2006	137	Race, Ethnicity, Human Capital, and the Labor Market	Labor Force Attachment and the Evolving Wage Gap between White, Black and Hispanic Young Women	We analyze the role of labor force attachment in shaping the diverging wage trajectories of white, black and Hispanic women during their first post-schooling decade. We take advantage of the longitudinal aspects of the NLSY Work History data by constructing detailed annual and cumulative measures of labor force attachment and use them to examine women’s wage profiles. Results show that the race/ethnic wage gap in starting wages widens over time. Minority women are less likely than whites to participate in the labor force every year and tend to work for a smaller fraction of time. These differences in labor force attachment, opened upon career launching, are detrimental for future earnings gaps between white and minority women.	Sigal	 Alon	Yitchak	 Haberfeld
2006	137	Race, Ethnicity, Human Capital, and the Labor Market	Learning but Not Earning? The Value of Job Corps Training for Hispanic Youths	The National Job Corps Study (NJCS) was a four-year randomized longitudinal study. Using experimental estimators, Job Corps was found to have positive impacts in the weekly earnings of white and black participants, but not for Hispanics. We consider explanations for why Job Corps does not increase the earnings of Hispanics. First, we show that the randomization in the NJCS failed to create comparable treatment and control groups for Hispanics. We then apply alternative estimators to the Hispanic subsample but still find statistically insignificant effects of Job Corps. Finally, we advance an explanation to the lack of benefits for Hispanics through the estimation of the “net treatment effect”: non-treated Hispanics earn a significant amount of labor market experience during the study compared to treated Hispanics, which translates into higher earnings that Hispanic treated individuals are not able to overcome by the end of the study.	Alfonso	 Flores-Lagunes	Arturo	 Gonzalez	Todd	 Neumann
2006	137	Race, Ethnicity, Human Capital, and the Labor Market	Diversity by Design or Default? Minority Students and the Texas Top 10% Law	In response to the judicial ban on affirmative action in college admissions, the Texas legislature passed H.B. 588, which guarantees admission to any Texas public college or university for all seniors graduating in the top decile of their class. In this paper, we examine the selection regime undergirding college enrollment decisions for a cohort of Texas high school graduates, focusing on who achieves top 10% class rank status and knowledge about the law among qualifying students. We find that, even at minority-dominant schools, Blacks and Hispanics are less likely to make it top 10%, even after controlling for family SES. Hispanic top 10% students are less likely to “know a lot about the law,” largely due to low family SES. Hispanic top 10% students from predominately minority schools are particularly disadvantaged – they are less likely to “know a lot about the law” net of differences in SES.	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu	Teresa	A. Sullivan	Marta	 Tienda
2006	137	Race, Ethnicity, Human Capital, and the Labor Market	The Changing Educational Attainment of Ethnic Groups in the United States: 1980-2000	This paper describes and seeks to account for relative changes in the educational attainment of ethnic groups in the United States during the 1980 to 2000 period. We focus on the most recent decades to determine what changes have occurred in the educational attainment of ethnic groups and the role that immigration status and length of residence might have played in these changes. Motivated by the need to monitor trends in educational attainment and assess their implications for ethnic group differences in labor market outcomes, we employ a synthetic age cohort approach to decompose changes in educational attainment. Our analyses draw upon the following data sources: 1980 to 2000 IPUMS, National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), 1986-94 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), 1979-2000 Multiple Cause of Death file (MCD), 1986 & 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey (NMFS), and the National Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS).	Franklin	D. Wilson	Salvador	 Rivas	Uzi	 Rebhun
2006	138	Timing of Childbearing: Economic and Cultural Contexts	Birth Control Use Prior to First Conception in the Islamic Republic of Iran	Using data from the 2002 Iran Fertility Transition Survey collected in four Iranian provinces, the authors explore changes in elapsed time between marriage and first conception. Across marriage cohorts, a u-shaped pattern is observed. This pattern can be explained by: i) a monotonic decline in conception interval length possibly associated with a shift from arranged to romantic marriages overlaid by ii) a sharp increase in birth control use among those married after 1990. The authors focus on the post 1990 increase in contraceptive use and develop two possible explanations. The first posits that birth control use before the first conception reflects a new marriage form, the conjugal marriage that places a heightened value on the spousal relationship while de-emphasizing the centrality of parenthood. The competing explanation stresses the power of Iranian political/religious actors to encourage early marriage while allowing women access to higher education and birth control.	Mohammad	J. Abbasi-Shavazi 	Meimanat	 Hosseini Chavoshi	S.	Philip  Morgan
2006	138	Timing of Childbearing: Economic and Cultural Contexts	Fertility Changes in Latin America in the Context of Economic and Political Uncertainty	During the last three decades, fertility rates have declined sharply across Latin-America. These decades have also witnessed a high degree of economic and political uncertainty. Here we explore whether cross-country differences in the environment where childbearing decisions are made explain in part cross-country changes in fertility. To proxy for economic uncertainty we use unemployment and growth rates, changes in consumer prices and dummies for periods of high inflation. To account for political conditions we use measures of democracy, political unrest, and civil war. Control variables include urbanization and literacy rates, and access to electricity. First, we use a panel of 18 Latin American nations for over 35 years to study the fertility trends of different age groups. Second, we use Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) for Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, and Paraguay to analyze the effect of those aggregate conditions on the individual spacing of children.	Alicia	 Adsera	Alicia	 Menendez
2006	138	Timing of Childbearing: Economic and Cultural Contexts	Education, Work, and Parenthood: The Experience of Young Men and Women in Post-War Sweden	This paper analyzes the determinants of young men’s and women’s entry into parenthood, applying hazard regressions to data made up by annual aggregate time series as well as longitudinal micro-data from the 1992/93 Swedish Family Survey. We study the impact of education, labor market attachment and macro-economic change, as well as civil status and family of upbringing, on becoming a parent for both men and women in Sweden since the mid-1960s. Our results show a general tendency over time to delay the transition to parenthood among both men and women. When it comes to the determinants of conception leading to first birth, there are clear gender differences both when it comes to individual characteristics and aggregate-level factors. Education and labor market attachment are key factors determining the transition to parenthood for both men and women, even though the effects, in several respects, differ between the sexes.	Martin	 Dribe	Maria	A. Stanfors
2006	138	Timing of Childbearing: Economic and Cultural Contexts	Motherhood Postponement: Explaining Differences across Europe	In this paper, we aim to assess some of the potential determinants of first childbirth timing in Europe, in a comparative perspective, using micro-data from the European Community Household Panel Survey. We follow the demographic approach to decompose the differences between rates, in the part due to the national population composition by specific characteristics, and in the part due to different propensities for women with given characteristics. Specifically, we show what the probability of entering into motherhood would be for Italian women if they had the same human capital, the same level of labor participation, the same timing in terms of education and first job start as women living in another European country. On the basis of our results, we discuss the possible effect on comparative fertility of policies favoring changes in the work and educational characteristics of Italian women to allow them to be more like women in other European countries.	Maria-Letizia	 Tanturri	Cheti	 Nicoletti
2006	139	New Methods for Understanding the Distribution of Health and Family Planning Services in Africa	District-Level Estimates of Home Deliveries in Ghana: Application of Small Area Analysis Using DHS and Census Data	National estimates show that home deliveries under the supervision of unskilled attendants are high in Ghana. Spatial inequalities across administrative regions, where health planning and monitoring is focal, are not known. This study aims to derive district-level estimates of home deliveries and assess spatial variations between districts using data from the 2000 Ghana census and the 2003 DHS. The Fay-Herriot model for small area analysis is used to produce estimates for the 110 districts of Ghana. Most of the districts in the Savannah zone, where maternal mortality is very high, have the highest proportion of home deliveries. Home deliveries range from 73% to 95% in districts of the Northern Region compared to 13% to 22% for districts in the Greater Accra Region. Using five diagnostic procedures, the reliability of the estimates were assessed. The estimates show a significant clustering effect in delivery care uptake across districts that warrants policy and program attention.	Fiifi	 Amoako Johnson	Sabu	S. Padmadas	James	 Brown
2006	139	New Methods for Understanding the Distribution of Health and Family Planning Services in Africa	Density of Family Planning Service Availability: Kernel Density Estimation of Access to Contraceptives in Malawi	Malawi faces immense reproductive health challenges, many of which could be ameliorated with an increase in contraceptive use. The main objective of this paper is to see if analysis of spatially referenced facility and health data can identify a gradient of access to specific services and determine whether and how the gradient affects the utilization of contraceptive services in Malawi. The methods employed in this paper include one of the first examples of kernel density estimation as a means of identifying the presence and health significance of access to health services. Results show that Malawian women who lived in areas of medium and low density family planning availability were significantly less likely to use modern contraception compared to women who live in high density areas. These results suggest a novel means of identifying disparities in access to family planning services in Malawi and perhaps more broadly in sub-Saharan Africa.	Nathan	 Heard
2006	139	New Methods for Understanding the Distribution of Health and Family Planning Services in Africa	Spatial Modeling of HIV Prevalence in Cameroon, Kenya, and Tanzania	The 2004 Cameroon Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), the 2004 Tanzania HIV/AIDS Indicator Survey (THIS), and the 2003 Kenya DHS are among the first national population-based household surveys to include HIV testing among adults. These surveys contain individual HIV test results for women and men, as well as the full set of behavioral, social, and demographic information for the individuals and their households. Geographic coordinates of the communities where survey respondents lived were collected in each survey. The coordinates were used to estimate spatial indicators such as distance to roads, health facilities, and the hierarchy of nearby towns and cities. A model was developed to predict HIV prevalence. The predictions were applied to population density distribution surfaces to map sub-provincial concentrations of HIV prevalence and to assess access to HIV-related health services in each country.	Livia	 Montana	Melissa	 Neuman	Vinod	 Mishra	Rathavuth	 Hong
2006	139	New Methods for Understanding the Distribution of Health and Family Planning Services in Africa	Calculating Accessibility Ratios in Nicaragua Using Kernel Density Estimation	Typically, accessibility ratios have been calculated through a simple mathematical division of the number of people in an area by the number of facilities (or staff) in the area. This approach does not take into account the service area of the facility or its proximity to population centers, and is often performed using aggregate numbers for an administrative region. This paper describes an approach to calculating accessibility ratios such as population to physician ratios or population to staff ratios using kernel density estimation (KDE) within a geographic information system. By definition, KDE disperses discrete phenomena across continuous space and is unrestrained by administrative boundaries. Therefore it provides a better representation of the spread of people and services across the landscape. Two types of accessibility ratios are calculated on a national level for Nicaragua: population per facility and population per staff; the merits of using KDE over traditional approaches are discussed.	John	 Spencer
2006	140	Social Context and Mental Health	Gender Differences in Adolescent Depressive Symptoms: The Effect of School Context	The gender difference in depression is a well-documented health disparity in which females are disproportionately affected. This study explores the influence of social stratification and psychosocial resources on the gender gap in depressive symptoms during adolescence using two levels of analysis: individuals and schools. Schools are a particularly salient context to adolescent development in need of investigation. Using two waves from the Add Health study (N=12,470 teens, 128 schools), hierarchical linear modeling is used to assess the random effects of both depressive symptoms and the gender gap across contexts. Analyses yielded significant contextual-level variation in depressive symptoms net of prior symptomatology, individual-level sociodemographic characteristics, and perceived parental support. The gender gap in symptoms also varied across schools after adjusting for the individual-level variables and is associated with school-level socioeconomic disadvantage. These findings highlight the importance of context to mental health and the use of multilevel approaches in understanding health disparities.	Amanda	 Botticello
2006	140	Social Context and Mental Health	Poverty, Material Well-Being and Mental Health	A large number of studies have linked living in poverty to poor mental health outcomes. However, less is known about the types of poverty-associate hardships that produce poor mental health. Recent evidence suggests that there can be substantial differences between the population defined as poor according to the federal poverty measure and the population reporting material hardships such as food insecurity and housing problems (Iceland and Bauman 2004). We use measures of mental health at two points in time from the longitudinal Fragile Families Survey to better discern the causal direction of the relationship between income poverty, hardship, and mental health. More specifically, we will use fixed-effect models that control for time-invariant unmeasured heterogeneity in the sample.	Colleen	 Heflin	John	 Iceland
2006	140	Social Context and Mental Health	Adolescent Mental Health: Neighborhood Stress Effects on Emotional Distress	This paper investigates the influence of neighborhood context on emotional distress among youth. The majority of research on adolescent mental health has generally not emphasized the role of contextual factors such as neighborhood disadvantage or disorder conditions. While such contextual conditions have been linked to general health for adults and children, specific links to mental health are under-explored. The analysis uses a stratified random cluster sample of 2,025 high school aged youth from the Seattle Metropolitan area to explore the relation between neighborhood measures of disadvantage and instability and youth depression, hopelessness, and suicide behaviors. Hierarchical linear models are employed to explore both direct and moderating effects on context.	Jerald	 Herting	Karen	A. Snedker	Emily	C. Walton
2006	140	Social Context and Mental Health	Trajectories of Adolescent Depression and Gender/Racial Disparity	This paper attempts to understand the trajectories of adolescent depression and gender/racial disparities. I conduct data analysis using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health. I use growth curve models that trace individual depression trajectories over different ages employing a measurement that is comparable across gender/race. I find that depression increases at early adolescence and decreases at late adolescence. This pattern is consistently found among both males and females. Females are found to be significantly disadvantaged in depression when compared to males for all races. Racial disparity, unclear in previous literature, is clarified in this study. Minority groups do encounter greater levels of depression, ad compared to their white counterparts, female minorities face greater disadvantages compared to male minorities. However, in spite of gender and racial gaps, after the respondents enter their 20s, the disparities are greatly reduced, as the depression overall has decreased for all groups.	Lin	 Wang
2006	141	Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Interracial Unease in an Urban Setting: The Influence of Neighborhood Social Context	The state of social relationships between Blacks and Whites is typically investigated by means of individual-level factors and their influence on perceptions of comfort or unease. We hypothesize that neighborhood-level factors have an independent effect on these perceptions. We examine perceptions of interracial unease separately for Blacks and Whites and ask whether they are influenced by the context in which they are embedded. Theories of social organization and collective efficacy are invoked. We combine the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods-Community Survey with two other data sources and employ Hierarchical Modeling techniques. We find that propinquity behaves differently depending on race. Whites consistently perceive more unease, particularly when they live in relatively integrated neighborhoods. Blacks, in contrast, exhibit a curvilinear pattern, with those residing in relatively integrated neighborhoods reporting the lowest levels of perceived unease. Collective efficacy exerts an unexpected positive effect on unease for both Blacks and Whites.	Kathleen	A. Cagney	Danielle	 Wallace	Christopher	 Browning
2006	141	Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	This School’s Gone Downhill: School Integration and Perceived School Quality	This research questions the extent to which residents’ perceptions of declining school quality in the past five years are tied to measurable indicators of this decline, such as decreasing test scores and rising incidences of school violence, and the extent to which they may be related to increasing school integration. We use unique data from the 2003-2004 Philadelphia Area Study that link neighborhood residents with their closest elementary, middle, and secondary schools. We find that even when controlling for the current characteristics of these schools, and changes in standardized test scores and rates of violent incidents over five years, a greater than 2% increase in the percentage of a school that is Black over the five year period affects the likelihood of saying school quality has decreased.	Kimberly	 Goyette	Joshua	 Freely	Danielle	 Farrie
2006	141	Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Sleep and the Inner City: How Race and Neighborhood Context Relate to Sleep Duration	The biobehavioral mechanisms that contribute to racial/ethnic disparities in health are not fully understood.  Studies show that short (8.5 hours) sleepers have higher health risks than mid-range sleepers.   We investigate whether sleep duration varies by racial and neighborhood characteristics, particularly by neighborhood racial segregation patterns. With data from the National Health Interview Study (NHIS), we estimate a multinomial logistic regression that predicts short, mid-range, and long sleep behavior including covariates for race/ethnicity, neighborhood context, among other health and demographic characteristics.  Black respondents have an increased risk of being short and long sleepers relative to the white respondents.  Living in a large city is associated with an increased risk of short sleeping compared to living in non-urban areas.  These results are consistent with the hypothesis that unhealthy sleep patterns among blacks and large city residents may contribute to health differentials.	Lauren	 Hale	D.	Phuong  Do
2006	141	Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Desegregated Fertility: A Spatial Proximity Analysis of Black and White Biracial Fertility in the United States	Since the abolishment of laws regulating interracial sex and marriage, there has been a steady rise in the number of biracial children born in the United States each decade, particularly between black men and white women. And although biracial fertility has been a reality in the United State its entire history, the topic of multi-race fertility is rarely discussed publicly or analyzed scholarly. Using US census data and the national center of health statistic’s fertility data, the present study examines the effects of spatial concentration on black-white biracial fertility in the United States for 1990 and 2000. Preliminary findings reveal very strong support for the study’s hypotheses that biracial fertility is the outcome of reduced segregation and inflated sex ratios. Seventy percent of variance in county rates of biracial fertility is explained by segregation and sex ratio.	Carolette	R. Norwood
2006	141	Consequences of Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	From the Ghetto to the Ivory Tower: Gendered Effects of Segregation on College Achievement	The effects of segregation on college GPA are estimated with longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Freshmen (NLSF).  Whereas theories suggesting that males from segregated communities form “street orientations” relative to female “home orientations” imply male susceptibility to exposure to violence and social disorder, this analysis suggests that among elite college students, females experience the negative effects of segregation relative to their male counterparts in ways unexplained by family SES, prior school quality, and environmental factors.  The effects of family stress and family involvement in college also differ depending on race and gender interactions.	Nick	 Ehrmann
2006	142	Immigration and Intergenerational Mobility	Intergenerational Earnings Mobility among the Children of Canadian Immigrants	We analyze the intergenerational income mobility of Canadians born to immigrants using the 2001 Census. A detailed portrait of the Canadian population is offered, as are estimates of the degree of generational mobility among the children of immigrants from 70 countries. The degree of persistence as estimated in regression to the mean models is about the same for immigrants as for the entire population, and there is more generational mobility among immigrants in Canada than in the United States. We also use quantile regressions to distinguish between the role of social capital from other constraints limiting mobility and find that these are present and associated with father’s education.	Miles	 Corak	Abdurrahman	 Aydemir	Wen-Hao	 Chen
2006	142	Immigration and Intergenerational Mobility	Are Immigrant Youth Faring Better in U.S. Schools?	In spite of the growing numbers and geographic dispersion of foreign-born children, the school outcomes of foreign-born teens improved during the 1990s. Analysis of decennial Census data reveals that fewer immigrant youth dropped out of school and their English language proficiency improved. Some of the improvement is due to compositional change in the foreign-born teen population. Levels of parental education increased over the decade. Poverty among foreign-born adolescents declined. Other youth background characteristics did not change in a favorable direction. Multivariate analysis reveals that there was a large decline in the likelihood of immigrant teens dropping out of school above and beyond the demographic changes over the decade. For example, the likelihood that a Mexican-born teen educated in U.S. schools drops out of school declined by an estimated 43 percent over the 1990s. There is little evidence, however, that U.S. schools have improved in their English language instruction over the decade.	Richard	A. Fry
2006	142	Immigration and Intergenerational Mobility	Post-Secondary Educational Attainment of Immigrant and Native Youth	This paper adds to the growing immigrant literature and seeks to examine generational differences in post-secondary educational outcomes in the United States. We specifically seek to better understand immigrant educational arrangements in the years immediately following high school graduation. Although some recent research finds that immigrant school children are generally successful in terms of educational outcomes, it is unclear to what extent this advantage translates into educational gains after high school. We use data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to examine immigrant generation and country-of-origin differences in predicting college attendance of young adults between the ages of 18 and 28. We explore whether immigrant generational differences can be explained by parental expectations, behaviors and values or family relationships. The results indicate that first- and second generation immigrant youth are significantly more likely to attend college than their third-plus generation counterparts of similar race/ethnicity, socioeconomic and family characteristics.	Ursula	 Keller
2006	142	Immigration and Intergenerational Mobility	Educational Status of Temporary Migrant Children in China: Determinants and Regional Variations	This paper examines the educational status of temporary migrant children in China, using a unique data set specifically designed for studying the migrant child population and which covers a wide range of migration destinations. I study the determinants of migrant children’s schooling at both the micro-level (child and family level characteristics) and macro-level (city-level contexts), and use multiple measures of educational status to provide a more comprehensive picture. Emphasis has been placed on city-level variations associated with distinct levels of socioeconomic development and migration controls. Results show that in migrant families, there tends to be less gender bias regarding children’s education. Household composition, parent’s reasons for migration and family economic conditions are all strong predictors of migrant children’s schooling. Importantly, variations across destination-specific contexts are evident: migrant children in more developed coastal regions and in destinations with high concentrations of migrants tend to be more disadvantaged, due to more restrictive migration controls in such destinations.	Yao	 Lu
2006	143	Recent Developments in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic	Gender Differences in AIDS Mortality since the Introduction of Antiretroviral Therapy in Ethiopia	The rollout of antiretroviral treatment (ART) in eastern and southern Africa will be one of the most important public health interventions in the years to come. Among the lingering dangers in that effort is that inequalities in infection rates will be compounded by inequities in the access to treatment. Because of a lack of vital registration systems, however, the settings where these concerns are probably most legitimate go without monitoring. We use 5-year data from an ongoing surveillance of burials at all cemeteries of Addis Ababa to investigate the population level impact of antiretroviral treatment on sex-specific adult mortality trends. To that end, we use life table techniques as well as methods that are based on the lay reports of the causes of death. Preliminary results suggest that AIDS mortality indeed declined since the introduction of ART, but more so for men than for women.	Georges	 Reniers	Tekebash	 Araya	Eduard	J. Sanders
2006	143	Recent Developments in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic	The Demand for and Impact of Learning HIV Results	It is commonly believed that HIV testing is essential for disease prevention, despite the lack of rigorous evidence. I designed a randomized experiment to evaluate the demand for learning HIV results and subsequent behavior. In the experiment, individuals in Malawi were randomly assigned monetary incentives to learn their HIV results after testing. Two months later, they were re-interviewed and given the opportunity to purchase condoms. While less than half attended clinics to learn their HIV status without any incentive, even a very small incentive significantly increased the share learning their results. Using the exogenously assigned incentives and distance from results centers as instruments for HIV knowledge, I find that HIV positives with a sexual partner who learn their status purchase significantly more condoms although the average number purchased is low. I calibrate an epidemiological model of infection that suggests that HIV testing is not as cost-effective as other prevention strategies.	Rebecca	L. Thornton
2006	143	Recent Developments in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic	Degree Distributions of Sexual Networks: Should We Buy Scale Free?	The degree distribution is a fundamental characteristic of any network and a focus of research on STI transmission. When the degree distribution has high variance the level of infectivity requisite for a disease to generate an epidemic is close to zero and the critical vaccination fraction approaches unity. Many authors have focused attention on so-called scale free distributions - a set with power law tail behavior and sometimes infinite variance. Given the potential policy implications, claims of infinite variance degree distributions merit further scrutiny. Prior analyses have underestimated the amount of error in the tail of the distribution, ignored social process in favor of simple curve fitting and assumed random mixing despite empirical evidence to the contrary. We test the fit of 11 models to five nationally representative samples of the US. Our results indicate social process models fit the observed demographic information as well or better than scale-free models.	Deven	 Hamilton	Mark	S. Handcock
2006	143	Recent Developments in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic	Use of Condoms by Ugandan Couples in Stable Relationships	Condom use among stable couples in developing countries is low. Yet, the concern about getting infected with HIV is real, given that some partners have other partners. This qualitative study focuses on couples in stable relationships in Uganda who managed to use condoms, either consistently or inconsistently. Research methods included in-depth interviews with 39 couples using condoms consistently, 10 couples using them inconsistently and four focus groups. In this study, female partners more often took the initiative to introduce condoms. Women used different strategies to initiate use and had to overcome fear of a negative reaction. Fortunately, men’s reactions were more positive than the women expected. Although condom use is a couple behavior, a supportive environment (health care providers, media, availability of condoms, HIV testing) is also crucial.	Nancy	 Williamson	Kerry	 McLoughlin	Jennifer	 Liku
2006	144	Recent Patterns of Internal Migration in the U.S.	Immigrant Settlement Patterns: The Role of Metropolitan Characteristics	As immigration continues to redefine the U.S., interest in the settlement patterns of immigrants grows. In this analysis we pay special attention to the settlement patterns of immigrants who entered the U.S. between 1990 and 2000. We assess those theories that emphasize the social, and those that emphasize the economic, characteristics as the principal pulls of immigrants to metropolitan areas. Moreover, we consider a variety of other metropolitan-level characteristics that may, or may not, predict the settlement patterns of immigrants. Using a representative sample of 150 metropolitan areas from the Census 2000, we regress the percentage increase in foreign-born persons between 1990 and 2000 on metropolitan-level variables such as percentage employed in manufacturing and percentage black. A key finding is that the higher a metropolitan area stands on a measure of globalization, the greater the increase in percentage foreign-born between 1990 and 2000.	Jim	 Baird	Robert	M. Adelman	Lesley	 Reid	Charles	 Jaret
2006	144	Recent Patterns of Internal Migration in the U.S.	Migrants from California to Other States, 1995 to 2000	We use Census 2000 files to study the destinations and characteristics of people who lived in California in 1995 but were living in other states in 2000. Data from the county-to-county migration file showed that Californians comprised the largest portion of residents in those Oregon, Nevada, and Arizona counties closest to California, where they represented between six and eighteen percent of all residents in 2000. The PUMS file permits comparison of White, Black, Asian, and Hispanic out-migrants to people who remained in California and to residents of destination states in both 1995 and 2000. In the percent in the retirement ages, percent returning to their state of birth, percent college graduates, and percent employed in leading industries there was much variation by ethnic group and by the leading destination states, suggesting the need for caution in generalizing about characteristics of out-migrants.	James	P. Allen	Eugene	 Turner
2006	144	Recent Patterns of Internal Migration in the U.S.	Onward Migration Differentials among Hispanics and Non-Hispanic Blacks and Whites	Although movement to new and unfamiliar places is prominent in the conceptualization of migration, few studies have detailed differentials specific to onward migration. A larger body of research is focused on return migration, or the movement back to familiar places. This study utilizes the NLSY79 to build on the earlier panel based investigation of repeat migration by DaVanzo and Morrison, whose data did not allow for analysis of possible racial/ethnic differences in forms of repeat migration. Multivariable logistic regression is utilized to examine the characteristics of onward migrants compared across Hispanics, non-Hispanic blacks and non-Hispanic whites, as well as a variety of human capital variables in the NLSY79. The most important finding of this study is significantly lower rates of onward migration for blacks and Hispanics than for whites.	Beth	A. Wilson	Michael	B. Toney	E.	Helen  Berry
2006	144	Recent Patterns of Internal Migration in the U.S.	Just a Short Hop Home: Migration within the South during the Southern Exodus, 1940-1980	Numerous studies of southern outmigration have argued that blacks and whites who left the region during the twentieth century were relatively advantaged compared to those who stayed home. This paper seeks to problematize this well-established dynamic by considering the experiences of a much larger group of southern migrants: those who moved within the South. Relevant migration theories and the existing studies of the Great Migration suggest that the intra-South movers should have been less advantaged than those who made the move out of the South. This paper will argue that much of the twentieth century migration within the South deviated significantly from this expected pattern. Those moving within the South were always at least as advantaged as those moving North, sometimes strikingly moreso. These findings call into question recent research on the meaning of selectivity and distance in the Great Migration and in long-distance migrations more generally.	Trent	 Alexander
2006	145	Demographic Impacts on Parental Time with Children	Changing Effects of Education on Parents’ Time with Children	I examine differences based on (parents') education in the time that American parents spend with their children, and how these differences have changed between 1985 and 2003. I also examine educational differences in the ratio of mothers’ child time to fathers’ child time. The results indicate that better-educated parents used to and continue to spend more time with their children than the less-educated. Although parents at all levels of education have increased their time with children, the better-educated have made relatively larger gains. Further, the ratio of mothers’ to fathers’ child time was and continues to be lower for the better-educated than the less-educated. Finally, I find that the gap in parent-child time between mothers and fathers has narrowed at every education level between 1985 and 2003.	Satvika	 Chalasani
2006	145	Demographic Impacts on Parental Time with Children	Quality versus Quantity of Care: Maternal Time, Parenting Behavior and Children's Cognitive Outcomes	Much as been written on the effect of maternal employment on children's well-being. Few have identified the pathways through which employment should exert its influence on children. This paper uses children's time diaries from the PSID-CDS to obtain direct measures of the quantity and intensity of maternal care, in addition to measures of the quality of parenting and maternal employment. I examine three questions: (1) Do children who receive more maternal care and/or more intense care during early childhood have higher later cognitive outcomes?; (2) Does the quality of early parenting influence later outcomes?; and (3) Does early maternal employment have an indirect effect? Preliminary results suggest that it is not the quantity of maternal care nor employment but the quality of early parenting that matters for children's development. Home environment and positive parenting (e.g., emotional support and cognitive stimulation) have the strongest and most consistent correlation with children's cognitive outcomes.	Amy	 Hsin
2006	145	Demographic Impacts on Parental Time with Children	Are Working Mothers in India Investing Less Time in the Next Generation?	The relationship between increased female work participation and mother’s time with children in developing countries remains inconclusive. This paper suggests that a more detailed disaggregated analysis of various childcare activities in terms of essential and non-essential activities can explain this ambiguity. Hence, this paper looks in detail at how mother’s time with children on essential and non-essential activities varies among poor women in India according to their work status, in the context of a decline in fertility and the number of extended families and a scenario where patriarchy remains prevalent. Women in the age group 15-49 who had at least one living child below 10 years in urban slums and in rural Scheduled Caste settlements were selected for this study. While regression analysis shows that working women spend significantly less time on childcare than non-working women, a disaggregated analysis of essential activities illustrates that working women spend as much time on childcare as non-working women.	Sivakami	 Muthusamy
2006	145	Demographic Impacts on Parental Time with Children	Birth Order and the Amount of Time Children Spend with their Parents	Recent research shows that the effects of birth order on an individual’s educational outcomes are very large. However, little work has been done to provide a mechanism to explain these effects. This paper examines one potential mechanism: the effect of birth order on the amount of time a child spends with his or her parents. Using the American Time Use Survey, I find that a first-born child receives 20-30 more minutes of active interaction each day with his or her parent than a second born child of the same age and from a similar family. I use the cross-sectional estimates to simulate the amount of time that a child spends with his or her parents over the first eighteen years of life. The results indicate that the first child in a two-child family will spend about 4,300 more hours interacting with his or her parents than the second born child.	Joseph	P Price
2006	147	Causal Effects of Schooling on Demographic and Health Outcomes	Education and the Timing of Births: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Italy	This paper assesses the causal effects of education on the timing of first order births, allowing for heterogeneity in the effects while controlling for self-selection of women into education. Identification relies on exogenous variation in schooling induced by a mandatory school reform rolled out nationwide in Italy in the early 1960s. Findings based on Census data (Italy, 1981) suggest that a large fraction of the women affected by the reform postpone the time of first birth but catch up with this fertility delay before turning 26. There is some evidence that the fertility behavior of the women whose educational level is affected by the reform is substantially different from the one of the average woman in the population.	Margherita	 Fort
2006	147	Causal Effects of Schooling on Demographic and Health Outcomes	Childlessness and Educational Attainment among Swedish Women Born in 1955-59	This paper explores how childlessness is associated with a woman’s field and level of education. We use register data containing childbearing and educational histories of all women in a Swedish cohort. The field of education indicates a woman’s potential reproductive behavior better than the mere level. Although in each field permanent childlessness increases (some) with the educational level attained, the field itself is more important. In general, at each educational level women educated for jobs in teaching and health care have much lower childlessness than women in any other major grouping. Women educated in arts and humanities have unusually high fractions childless. Characteristics of an educational system (its flexibility, its gender structure, and the manner in which education is connected to the labor market) influence the relationship between education and fertility. Our results cast doubt on the assumption that higher education per se results in higher childlessness.	Jan	 Hoem	Gerda	 Neyer	Gunnar	 Andersson
2006	147	Causal Effects of Schooling on Demographic and Health Outcomes	The Roles of High School Completion and GED Receipt in Smoking and Obesity	We analyze data from the NLSY79 to explore the relationships between high school completion, smoking, and obesity. We focus on three issues. First, we investigate whether GED recipients differ from traditional high school graduates. Second, we explore the extent to which the relationships between high school completion and these health-related behaviors are sensitive to controlling for family background measures and cognitive ability. Third, we estimate instrumental variables (IV) models of the impact of schooling on smoking and obesity. Although our IV estimates are imprecise, both the OLS and IV results tend to suggest that the returns to traditional high school completion include a reduction in smoking. We find little evidence that high school completion is associated with lower body mass for either men or women. The results also suggest that the health returns to GED receipt are much smaller than the possible returns to traditional high school completion.	Donald	 Kenkel	Dean	R. Lillard	Alan	 Mathios
2006	147	Causal Effects of Schooling on Demographic and Health Outcomes	Reciprocal Influences of Education on Values Concerning Family, Careers and Society	This paper examines the influence of college attendance and major on attitudes toward family, careers, and society. We also consider the possibility that attitudes and values influence college attendance and the choice of major. We analyze these issues using panel data across the young adult years. The analyses suggest that students majoring in the humanities and social sciences place less emphasis than others on marriage, children, and living close to parents, and also place more emphasis than others on correcting social inequalities, finding purpose in life, and making a contribution to society. At the same time, we found that placing strong emphasis on family matters does not appear to have any causal influence on staying in the humanities and social sciences. However, students who place strong importance on family matters and who switch majors are less likely to go into the humanities and social sciences.	Miles	 Kimball	Colter	 Mitchell	Linda	 Young-DeMarco
2006	148	Children's Impacts on Fathering Behaviors	The Effects of Child Health on Health Insurance Status	We examine why children and mothers in the Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWB) become uninsured, focusing on the effects of children’s severe health problems and their fathers’ responses to those problems. We use FFCWB data to examine the effects of exogenous “shocks” in infant health on children’s and mothers’ health insurance status. We estimate the probability of insurance loss after one and three years. We also investigate the channels by which health insurance loss may occur—through the father, through the mother’s employment, or through a loss in public insurance. The results indicate how children’s health affects an important type of father contribution—health insurance. More generally, they provide important information on characteristics associated with health insurance status in a vulnerable population and will add to the small but growing literature on the effects of children on families’ socioeconomic status.	Hope	 Corman	Kelly	 Noonan	Nancy	E. Reichman	Anne	 Carroll
2006	148	Children's Impacts on Fathering Behaviors	The Antecedents and Consequences of Adolescents' Relationships with Stepfathers and Nonresident Fathers	Using data from a sample of 1,149 adolescents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health who have both a resident stepfather and a nonresident biological father, this study examines the prevalence, antecedents, and consequences of adolescents’ closeness to their stepfathers and nonresident fathers. Findings demonstrate that adolescents vary greatly in their ability to forge close relationships with one or both of their fathers, but when they can, they appear to benefit. Close relationships with both fathers are associated with better adolescent outcomes, with ties to stepfathers being somewhat more influential than ties to nonresident fathers.	Valarie	 King
2006	148	Children's Impacts on Fathering Behaviors	Identifying the Association between Child Temperament and Father Involvement: Theoretical Considerations and Empirical Evidence	The main effects of child temperament on father involvement, as well as its moderating effect on the association between other predictor variables and father involvement, were measured using a sample of resident fathers, a sub-sample of the families surveyed in the Fragile Families and Child Well Being Study (N = 1,701). A two-equation model was estimated, using a two-stage least squares (2SLS) regression procedure. Findings suggest that fathers are less involved with temperamentally difficult children than with temperamentally easy children, and that temperament moderates the effect of the parental relationship quality on father involvement. Considering the importance of paternal involvement for the child’s well-being, results are discussed in terms of implications for intervention programs aiming at increasing levels of paternal involvement.	Selva	 Lewin-Bizan
2006	148	Children's Impacts on Fathering Behaviors	Youth Influencing Fathers and Fathers Influencing Youth: Adolescent Delinquency and Nonresident Father Involvement	Two central objectives within demographic research on nonresident fathers are to better understand the circumstances under which such fathers remain involved in their children’s lives, and to elucidate the consequences of such involvement. Using a representative sample of low-income, primarily minority early adolescents (N = 647, aged 10-14 years at wave 1), this study examines bidirectional longitudinal relations between nonresident father involvement and adolescent engagement in delinquent activities. Analyses employ a variety of longitudinal modeling techniques to help control for selection and unmeasured variable biases. Results indicate that higher nonresident father involvement predicts relative decreases over time in adolescent delinquency, whereas delinquency does not predict significant changes over time in father involvement. However, the two factors also positively co-vary over time: as adolescent delinquency increases, so too does father involvement, suggesting that nonresident fathers may increase their involvement in the face of adolescent problem behavior.	Bethany	 Medeiros
2006	149	Applications of Special Computational Methods	Constraining Arrays of Numbers in Demography	Demographic work often requires constraining arrays of numbers to controls in one or two dimensions. If the results are allowed to take on any nonnegative values, raking solves the problem in one dimension and two-way iterative raking solves it in two dimensions. The problem is more complicated in one dimension if the data can be of any sign, the so-called “plus-minus” problem, which is addressed by generalized raking, which preserves the structure of the data at the cost of a nonunique solution. Since demography is concerned with people, data often have to be rounded to integers. The Cox-Ernst algorithm accomplishes an optimal controlled rounding in two dimensions. The Greatest Mantissa algorithm is a simplified version of it in one dimension.  	This paper combines into one place all of the above-mentioned problems and techniques. It is written to provide practical guidance to demographers and other practitioners who work with these problems.	Charles	D. Coleman
2006	149	Applications of Special Computational Methods	An Iteration Technique for Estimating Survival Probabilities at Ages beyond Five	This study presents a method for estimating an appropriate set of survival probability (p-values) over various ages which is not only consistent with the given set of 5-year cumulative life table survival ratios (5-cum-LSRs), defined by the ratios T(x+5)/T(x), but also satisfies the usual properties and depicts the true trends of life table p-values over ages. Two approaches have been proposed in this paper for estimating survival probability at various quinquennial ages based on a given set of 5-cum-LSR values at various quinquennial ages -- one makes use of a chain relationship between two survival probabilities in the adjacent age-intervals for a given set of 5-cum-LSRs, and the other one is based on an iterative procedure under various assumptions of the l(x) curve. Empirical investigations of the approaches based on model life tables show that the estimated p-values beyond age five obtained by this method are almost identical to the true one.	Subrata	 Lahiri
2006	149	Applications of Special Computational Methods	Multivariate Decomposition for Nonlinear Models	This paper illustrates a decomposition method that can be applied in a wide variety of settings, and which is especially useful for nonlinear models, such as logit, probit, and hazard rate models. We draw on extensions of the well-known Oaxaca-Blinder multivariate decomposition to nonlinear regression settings. The proposed methodology has wide applicability in demographic research but has not received a great deal of exposure. Related methods that have been applied in recent work suffer from several shortcomings that are remedied with the proposed methodology. For example, detailed decompositions are free from problems of path dependency, and the technique is valid for predicted probabilities in the tails of a distribution (i.e., rare events). We apply this method to investigate compositional and coefficient components of the differential in infant mortality due to respiratory distress syndrome between 1991 and 1998 and racial/ethnic differentials in composition and return to risk.	Daniel	A. Powers	Thomas	W. Pullum
2006	149	Applications of Special Computational Methods	The Unexpected Results Produced by a Specific Design of a Probabilistic Population Projection Model	The progress from deterministic to probabilistic projection models was an important enhancement to capture forecast uncertainty for the future evolution of the vital rates. But most of these probabilistic or stochastic approaches still capture the forecast uncertainty with some restrictions. In this paper we discuss our findings using different types of one probabilistic population projection model (PPPM). But in spite of following various well-known stochastic projection approaches, we are going to introduce a novel PPPM. This new PPPM does not generate probability via generating assumptions with stochastic models using stochastic Leslie matrices or time series models. Rather, our PPPM focuses on the method of using probability in a complex projection model. Therefore, a different understanding of probability is implemented in our PPPM. The PPPM is a very flexible projection model that takes exogenous assumptions with an occurrence probability into the computation process.	Thomas	 Salzmann	Christina	 Bohk
2006	150	Community Effects on Health in the Developing World	Multilevel Analysis of Community Effects on Health Knowledge and Child Health in Coastal Ghana: Evidence from the 2002 Ghana Population and Environment Survey	There is a growing body of demographic research on the effects of community characteristics on human health (e.g., Browning and Cagney 2002, Leclere et al. 1998). Yet relatively little has yet been done regarding community effects on children’s health in developing countries (Parashar 2005; Sastry 1997, 1996; Steele et al. 1996), particularly sub-Saharan Africa (DeRose and Kulkarni 2005; Fotso and Kuate-Defo 2005). Most demographic analyses of child morbidity in African settings focus on individual- or household-level determinants; few go beyond demonstrating the disadvantages rural children face versus urban children. Infant and child morbidity and mortality remain relatively high in Ghana and most deaths are due to infectious illnesses like malaria, respiratory infections, and diarrheal diseases. Using primary data collected in 2002, this paper utilizes multilevel models to examine the effect of community characteristics on knowledge of etiology and prevention of child illnesses as well as health outcomes in coastal Ghana.	Catherine	S. Andrzejewski	Holly	E. Reed	Michael	J. White
2006	150	Community Effects on Health in the Developing World	Women’s Paid Labor Force Participation and Child Immunization: A Multilevel Model	Literature on the effect of women’s work on child health often explains variations in the effect of work by characteristics of employment that influence the income/time trade-off. Effects of women’s labor force participation at the community level have not been previously estimated, and we believe that some of the variation in outcomes associated with work may depend on how normative work is in women’s communities. Moreover, we suspect that the benefits from maternal work may be underestimated where community-level effects are ignored: women’s mobility and information passed through work-based social networks may contribute to good health practices for everyone in the community, not just children of the working. We estimate the effect of women’s cash work on child immunization in 30 countries across Africa, Asia and Latin America using a multi-level fixed-effects model to test these hypotheses.	Kali-Ahset	 Amen
2006	150	Community Effects on Health in the Developing World	Urban-Rural Differentials in Child Malnutrition: Trends and Socioeconomic Correlates in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper examines levels and trends of urban-rural differentials in child malnutrition, and investigates whether residual differences exist between urban and rural areas, given comparable measures of socioeconomic status (SES) of households and communities. Using data from Demographic and Health Surveys of 15 sub-Saharan African countries, and multilevel modeling, it shows that urban-rural differentials are considerable in all countries, that they have narrowed in most countries due primarily to an increase in urban malnutrition, and have widened in few countries as a result of sharp decline in urban malnutrition. These urban-rural gaps are abolished in almost all countries when SES is controlled. These results suggest that policies and programs contributing to the attainment of the MDGs should pay particular attention to the urban poor.	Jean-Christophe	 Fotso
2006	150	Community Effects on Health in the Developing World	Spatial Analysis of Child Mortality in Nigeria	Child mortality levels in developing countries continue to be high and exhibit wide geographical disparities. Motivated by the need to lower the inequality in child survival, this paper presents a spatial analysis of child mortality in Nigeria, with emphasis on the effect of various community level variables. Using data from the 2003 Nigerian Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS) and other contextual sources, exploratory spatial analysis tools - Moran’s I and LISA statistics were employed to test for spatial autocorrelation in mortality rates. Geoadditive survival models were also fitted to establish the effect of various individual, household and community variables and to explain the extent of clustering of mortality risk at different levels. Policy and program implications emerging from our findings are also discussed.	Sulaiman	 Salau	Jacky	 Galpin	Clifford	O. Odimegwu
2006	151	Fertility Differentials and Trends	Controlling Fertility through Broad Health Interventions: Evidence from Bangladesh	The family planning policies traditionally pursued in Bangladesh may have in certain respects reached the limits of their effectiveness as fertility reduction measures. Some argue that further reductions require broader approaches aimed at child health. We assess a program intended to reduce fertility in Bangladesh through interventions targeting the health of infants and small children. Our dataset provides information about fertility, family planning, reproductive health practices, health care utilization and child health for samples of households in communities where the program was implemented as well as those residing where it was not. It includes repeated cross sections from 1998 (the outset of the program) as well as 2003, permitting us to estimate difference-in-difference models for these outcomes. The program had a significant impact on demand for certain family planning and child health inputs and child morbidity as well as a small but significant immediate impact on child mortality and fertility.	Gustavo	 Angeles	Paul	 Hutchinson	Peter	M. Lance
2006	151	Fertility Differentials and Trends	Ten Years of Fertility Decline in Brazil: Where, Why and How Fast	Knowledge, innovations and behaviors that influence fertility decisions spread over space through teaching/learning processes and often occur through imitation between areas that are closer to each other. In this study, I adopt a spatially referenced approach to take into account this proximity and to analyze why, where and how fast fertility has declined in Brazil.    Using data based on the Brazilian Census I investigate the spatial and temporal patterns of fertility in Brazil between 1991 and 2000, identify the hot and cold spots in which fertility is clustered, and evaluate the importance of socio-demographic factors accounting for these patterns. I do this by estimating and comparing the efficiency of four spatial models: OLS, OLS with spatial lags, OLS considering the correlation of the errors and GWR. The results indicate that the last provides the best estimates and demonstrates that the effect of each variable is dependent on its spatial distribution.	Jeronimo	O. Muniz
2006	151	Fertility Differentials and Trends	Long-Term Consequences of a Family Planning, Child and Reproductive Health Program in Matlab Bangladesh: 1977-1996	The paper analyzes 141 villages in Matlab, Bangladesh from 1974 to 1996, in which half received from 1977 to 1996 an outreach family planning and maternal-child health program. Village and individual data confirm a decline in fertility of about 15 percent in the program villages compared with the control villages, as others have noted. The consequences of the program on a series of long run family welfare outcomes are then estimated in addition to fertility: women’s health, involvement in production other than childcare, household assets, participation in group activities outside of the family, use of preventive health inputs, and finally the inter-generational effects on the health and schooling of the woman’s children. Many of these indicators of the women’s welfare and that of their children improve significantly in conjunction with the program-induced decline in fertility, suggesting substantial social returns to this reproductive health program in rural South Asia.	T.	Paul  Schultz	Shareen	 Joshi
2006	151	Fertility Differentials and Trends	A New Look at the Recent Fertility of American Immigrants, Results for 21st Century	The fertility dynamics of foreign-born women impact overall population growth and the racial, ethnic, linguistic, and generational composition of the country. Here we consider the patterns of recent fertility among immigrant women along the dimensions of national origin, education, geographic settlement, and linguistic behavior using data from the 2000-2004 American Community Survey. We estimate a total fertility rate among foreign-born women that is nearly 30% higher than that of native-born women, but also observe a wide array of period fertility rates across national origins subgroups. The processes associated with the marital and non-marital fertility of immigrant women are distinct. Our results point to the value of adopting a more life-course oriented approach with greater attention to the context of pathways to marriage and motherhood alike.	Gray	 Swicegood	Michael	 Sobczak	Hiromi	 Ishizawa
2006	152	Cross-national Dimensions of Racial/Ethnic Issues	The Homeownership Hierarchies of Canada and the United States: the Housing Patterns of White and Non-White Immigrants of the Past Thirty Years	In this research, two gaps in North American immigrant homeownership research are addressed. The first concerns the lack of studies (especially in Canada) that identify changes in homeownership rates by skin color over time, and the second relates to the shortage of comparative research between Canada and the United States on this topic. Here the homeownership levels and attainment rates of Black, Chinese, Filipino, White, and South Asian immigrants are compared in Canada and the United States for 1970/1-2000/1. For the most part, greater similarities than differences are found between the two countries. Both Canadian and U.S. Chinese and White immigrants have the highest adjusted homeownership rates of all groups, at times even exceeding comparably-positioned native-born households. Black immigrants, on the other hand, tend to have the lowest ownership rates of all groups, particularly in United States, with Filipinos and South Asians situated between these extremes.	Michael	 Haan	Zhou	 Yu
2006	152	Cross-national Dimensions of Racial/Ethnic Issues	Racial Differences in Disability Using the 2003 Joint Canada/United States Survey of Health: A Cross-National Comparison	Racial disparity in disability is an increasing concern in the U.S., but not in Canada. Given the recent debates on the role of socioeconomic status in explaining racial/ethnic disparities in health outcome, our objective here is to use the 2002/2003 Joint Canada/US Survey of Health (JCUSH) to examine within each country the role of potential confounders such as socioeconomic status and other health-related factors in the relationship between race and disability, based on the Health Utilities Index, supplemented by the 2003 Canadian Community Health Survey. We use logistic regression to unpack the contribution of income, education, chronic disease, obesity and, for the U.S. only, health insurance status in the racial disparity. Preliminary analysis for the U.S. shows that after controlling for SES, the initial relationship between race and disability disappeared (the Black included) except for the Natives and those having multiple ethnicities. Similar analysis will also be conducted for Canada.	Edward	 Ng	Barbara	 Altman	Jean-Marie	 Berthelot
2006	152	Cross-national Dimensions of Racial/Ethnic Issues	Understanding High Levels of Sexually Transmitted Infections in the United States: A Comparative Analysis of Self-Reported STI Rates in Three Developed Countries	Despite having the world’s largest expenditures on health care, and “average” sexual behaviors resembling those in many European countries, sexually transmitted infection (STI) rates in the United States are higher than in most developed countries. To increase understanding of why this is the case, this study uses nationally representative data from the early 1990s to analyze differences in diagnosed STI rates among the US, Britain, and Finland. I focus on the factors most commonly argued to explain high STI rates in the US: differences in sexual culture and reduced access to health care. I additionally analyze the contribution of demographic factors, and in particular, race/ethnicity, given dramatically higher STI rates among blacks than non-blacks in the US. I find support for the importance of cultural factors but not health-care access in explaining high STI rates in the US. Differences in demographic factors--and especially, race/ethnicity--also are found to contribute to differentials.	Kirsten	P. Smith
2006	152	Cross-national Dimensions of Racial/Ethnic Issues	Social Capital in India: Caste, Tribe, and Religious Variation in Social Networks	Using original data from a newly collected nationwide survey for 40,000 households in India, we examine variation in social capital in India across caste, tribe, and religion. Our primary measure uses a positional generator of social networks, counting how many ties the household has to persons in medical, educational, and governmental institutions. We find the expected hierarchy of Brahmins, high caste Hindus, other backward castes (OBCs), dalits, and tribals in access to these networks. Muslims score especially low. We also assess the degree to which these group differences are explained by the socio-economic position of the household. After controls, the advantages of Brahmins and the disadvantages of Muslims remain substantial. However, the weak networks of dalits and, to a lesser extent, tribals, are a consequence of their poverty and low education. We interpret the better networks of dalits and tribals than Muslims to the consequences of India's reservation policies.	Reeve	 Vanneman	James	 Noon	Mitali	 Sen
2006	153	Health and Mortality in the U.S.	Job Insecurity and Health in the United States	Major labor market changes in the past several decades have resulted in increased job insecurity for many workers in the United States. There is some evidence that job insecurity has negative consequences for health, but previous research has failed to investigate possible reciprocal causal effects and has not examined potential alternate explanations for a relationship. Using nationally-representative longitudinal data with up to 15 years of follow-up, this analysis comprehensively examines the long-term effects of two dimensions of perceived job insecurity on subsequent health. We find that perceived job insecurity does have negative effects on subsequent self-rated health and depressive symptoms. However, health selection is an important part of the story. In some cases, actual involuntary job losses and acute health shocks act as predictors of job insecurity or as mediators of the relationship between job insecurity and subsequent health.	Sarah	A. Burgard	Jennie	E. Brand	James	S. House
2006	153	Health and Mortality in the U.S.	Looks That Kill: Predicting Adult Morbidity and Mortality from Adolescent Facial Characteristics in Yearbook Photographs	Although the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) offers valuable information for obesity research, it has been limited in this regard by the lack of a baseline measure of body mass. To address this limitation, we created the relative body mass (RBM) scale, which was used by a team of six coders to code the senior yearbook photographs of 3,027 WLS respondents. Results indicated that RBM measures were reliable, uncorrelated with height and moderately correlated with BMI after 36 years of follow-up. Additionally, RBM in 1957 was a good predictor of illness symptoms, chronic conditions and mortality in mid-life. Relative to respondents classified as normal weight on the RBM scale, respondents classified as overweight were two times more likely to die from non-accidental causes and four times more likely to die from heart disease. Promising results from this study suggest that novel measures of body mass may have utility in other contexts.	Eric	N. Reither	Robert	M. Hauser	Sheri	 Meland	Karen	 Swallen
2006	153	Health and Mortality in the U.S.	Women’s Reproductive Patterns and Adult Mortality: A Life Course Approach	Increasingly, researchers are applying a life course approach to the study of health, examining how early life and young adult circumstances set into motion a range of events with long-term implications for well-being throughout life. Among women, fertility is a central element of the life course that shapes opportunities, attitudes, decisions, behaviors, and health. As part of a larger project using the National Longitudinal Survey of Mature Women to investigate the relationship between reproductive patterns and later life health, this paper uses discrete time hazards models to (1) estimate the effects of parity and the timing of childbearing on the risk of mortality; and (2) understand how childhood and adult social, economic, health, and behavioral factors may work to influence the relationship between fertility and mortality risk. Past research implies the existence of a relationship. However, less is known about the mechanisms that link these two factors over the long-term.	Naomi	J. Spence
2006	153	Health and Mortality in the U.S.	Why Were the 1940s so Good and the 1960s so Bad? An Exploration of 20th Century Mortality Trends in the United States	Although the decline of rates of mortality in the United States is considered to be major evidence of progress, not much attention has been paid to the rate of decline of mortality in different decades. In this investigation, the long-term trend in mortality rate was extracted, and rates of long-term mortality decline were computed. The rates of long-term decline of mortality for different demographic groups reveal substantial similarities in the patterns of mortality reduction through time. The 1940s and the 1970s were periods of accelerating decline of mortality for all ages; contrarily, in the 1960s, mortality declined at diminishing rates in all age strata—and even increased substantially for working-age and nonwhite males. At the end of the century, age-adjusted mortality is declining at accelerating rates for males, while it is stagnating at an almost zero rate of decline for women. Possible causes of these phenomena are discussed.	José	A. Tapia
2006	154	Gender, Sexual Behavior and STDs	Gender Inequality and AIDS	Gender inequalities in, among other things, education, income, property ownership, and power, are often cited as factors that fuel the HIV/AIDS epidemic. One specific pathway through which inequalities can impact the spread of HIV/AIDS is transactional relationships where young/poor women receive gifts from older/wealthier boyfriends which imply concurrent relationships as opposed to serial monogamy. Such relationships, combined with the penetration of global consumer goods into poor countries, imply that income inequalities between genders might exacerbate the epidemic. While this has been hypothesized, testing it empirically requires data on both this specific inequality and HIV/AIDS. Using data for Thailand, this study examines the relationship between gender inequality and patterns of the AIDS epidemic (i) by constructing appropriate inequality measures that reflect economic inequalities between young women and older men, and (ii) by utilizing HIV and welfare data at the local level in a single country.	Kathleen	 Beegle	Berk	 Ozler
2006	154	Gender, Sexual Behavior and STDs	Economic Status, Transactional Sex, and Risk Behavior in Urban Kenya	Early in the HIV/AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa, economic status was positively associated with infection. A key explanation was that wealthier men could afford multiple sexual partners, particularly CSWs, and therefore faced greater risk of infection. At present, economic status is generally found to be negatively associated with HIV infection, particularly among women. It is believed that many women are motivated by poverty to engage in transactional sex for receipt of needed financial transfers. The relationship between wealth and HIV infection is less clear for men. On the one hand, wealth may continue to be a risk factor for those who can afford to engage in transactional sex. On the other hand, wealthy men may also have greater incentives to protect themselves from infection than poorer men. Using survey data from urban Kisumu, Kenya, we examine the relationship between men’s wealth, transactional sex, and risk behavior measured by condom use.	Nancy	 Luke
2006	154	Gender, Sexual Behavior and STDs	Population-Based Study of Genitourinary Symptoms in China: Prevalence and Predictors	The prevalence of genitourinary symptoms in China is substantial. Using a population-based probability survey, we found that risk factors for genitourinary symptoms among urban men aged 20 to 64 years were commercial sex (OR, 3.15; 95% CI, 1.36-7.26), having two or more noncommercial sex partners (OR, 2.85; 95% CI, 1.39-5.85), having a steady partner (OR, 0.38; 95% CI, 0.20-0.73), and living in a relatively poor locale (OR, 1.88; 95% CI, 1.06-3.33). Among urban women aged 20 to 64 years, risk factors for genitourinary symptoms were less education (especially for high school: OR, 1.61; 95% CI, 1.28-2.02), with partners having other concurrent partners (OR, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.23- 2.38), having unwanted sex before (OR, 1.48; 95% CI, 1.05-2.08), and living in a relatively poor locale (OR, 1.61; 95% CI, 1.25-2.09). The prevalence of genitourinary symptoms is influenced by both sociodemographic and behavioral risk factors, and this suggests potential avenues for intervention.	William	L. Parish	Yanni	 Hao	Edward	O. Laumann	John	 Schneider
2006	154	Gender, Sexual Behavior and STDs	New Trends in Sex in Sub-Saharan Africa	There is some superficial evidence that sexual activity, as measured by the proportion of women reporting sex in the past four weeks, has declined in parts of sub-Saharan Africa. This new trend, detected initially in Kenya, is concentrated in southern and eastern Africa where the prevalence of HIV-AIDS is highest. There is little evidence for such a trend in West Africa. The basis for these observations is the recent Demographic and Health Surveys in countries that have conducted more than one survey. The proposed paper will be based on some 20 countries in sub-Saharan Africa with its main focus on 8 - 10 countries in the southern and eastern regions. A special effort will be made to determine the effect on sexual activity of advances in women's education.	Charles	 Westoff
2006	155	The Spatial Scale of Residential Segregation	Residential Segregation and the Geography of Opportunities: Spatial Dependence and Spatial Heterogeneity of Education in the City of Santiago	This paper analyzes the consequences of socioeconomic residential segregation on children’s educational outcomes. The analysis focuses on the city of Santiago, Chile, using the Chilean Census of 2002 in combination with individual and school data from the national standardized test. Multilevel and spatial models are implemented with the aim of analyzing the problems of spatial heterogeneity and spatial dependence in education. Preliminary results demonstrate that spatial socioeconomic segregation negatively affects educational outcomes beyond and above household poverty. This negative effect remains after controlling for the type and quality of the school. In addition, the results change with the scale of analysis. The effect of segregation on educational outcomes tends to be more negative when segregation is measured at a small scale rather than a large one. Spatial models provide evidence that there are educational benefits that trickle down from a school to schools within its vicinity.	Carolina	 Flores
2006	155	The Spatial Scale of Residential Segregation	Patterns and Correlates of Racial Residential Segregation: A Spatially Refined Approach	Despite its presumably spatial emphasis, the literature on racial residential segregation tends to be aspatial in nature. We respond to this limitation by pursuing a new approach that incorporates GIS-based proximity calculations to estimate the extent of segregation across a range of scales (i.e., for local environments of varying radii). The measure featured in our approach is a spatially informed version of the information theory (H) index. Using 2000 census data for the 100 largest U.S. metropolitan areas, we: (1) report means and variances in black-white, Hispanic-white, Asian-white, and black-white-Hispanic-Asian segregation at different spatial scales; (2) supplement metropolitan structural characteristics drawn from Farley and Frey (1994) with an indicator of school district fragmentation to determine what predicts the scale of segregation; and (3) identify the metropolitan characteristics associated with changes in segregation as one moves from smaller to larger local environments.	Barrett	A. Lee	Glenn	 Firebaugh	Chad	R. Farrell	Sean	F. Reardon	David	 O'Sullivan
2006	155	The Spatial Scale of Residential Segregation	Racial Segregation in Small Towns: Municipal Underbounding and Racial Exclusion	This paper examines patterns of municipal “underbounding” and racial segregation in nonmetropolitan towns; that is, whether blacks and other racial minorities living in areas adjacent to small municipalities are systematically excluded from incorporation. Annexation – or the lack of annexation – can be a political tool used by municipal leaders to exclude disadvantaged or low-income populations, including minorities, from voting in local elections and from receiving access to public utilities and other community services. Our goals in this paper are: (1) to document the racial composition of the population annexed (and not annexed) in small towns over the 1990 to 2000 period; and (2) to identify various local demographic (e.g., racial composition), economic (e.g., family income), and legal factors associated with racial underbounding and racial exclusion. To accomplish our objectives, we use Tiger files, GIS, and other geographically-disaggregated data from the Summary Files of the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses.	Daniel	T. Lichter	Domenico	 Parisi	Steven	M Grice	Michael	 Taquino
2006	155	The Spatial Scale of Residential Segregation	Residential “Integration” and Racial Isolation in Northwest Philadelphia	Most studies of residential segregation compare levels of segregation across metropolitan areas or examine segregation of specific racial or ethnic groups within a larger metropolitan area. Few studies have focused specifically on the extent and effects of residential segregation within a specific neighborhood, although it is precisely in the crucible of the community that segregation is experienced. This paper will employ Census and land use data to examine levels of segregation within two Philadelphia communities (Mount Airy and Germantown) and employ GIS tools to examine patterns of racial clustering across blocks and block groups. Further, the paper will address the consequences of segregation in terms of the racial distribution of space and housing values. Preliminary findings suggest that the racial composition of these communities masks substantial variation in racial composition and levels of segregation, even in nominally integrated West Mount Airy.	Laryssa	 Mykyta
2006	156	Population Growth and Emerging and Re-Emerging Diseases	Anthropogenic Environmental Change and Emerging Infectious Disease: A Proximate-Determinants Approach	While there are innumerable pathways between human agency and disease emergence, all these paths must pass through a finite number of proximate determinants. Using the combined formalism of mathematical epidemiology and theoretical community ecology, we present an analysis  of these proximate determinants and discuss how both intrinsic population features (e.g., mortality and fertility, age-structure, population growth or decline) and behavioral features (e.g., consumer preferences, consumption patterns, environmental policy) contribute to disease emergence. Disease emergence is essentially a problem in  invasive-species ecology. Population growth (and the size of  populations) plays a role in community dynamics associated with successful invasion. However, other factors such as interaction strength in the community matrix, play roles at least as important as the population growth of any given species in the community. Two dimensions of proximate determinants are particularly salient: (1) the identity of the invading species (i.e., humans, pathogen, vector); and  (2) the evolutionary status of the pathogen.	James	H. Jones	William	H. Durham
2006	156	Population Growth and Emerging and Re-Emerging Diseases	A Spatial Analytic Approach to Examine Community-Wide Shigella Transmission	Diarrheal diseases are one of the leading causes of death worldwide among children under five. Among the enteric pathogens that cause diarrhea, shigella is particularly problematic due to its low infectious dose, potentially easing transmission. While person-to-person transmission is considered to occur through fecally contaminated hands, mechanical vectors -- predominantly houseflies -- are also considered a primary cause of transmission. This research draws upon a prospective longitudinal case-control surveillance study of children under five in the community of Santa Clara, Peru to examine factors associated with the transmission of shigella. Focusing on the hypothesis of fly-related shigella transmission, a model of fly density is developed using two-month time intervals over a three-year period, community-wide fly capture data, and daily rainfall data aggregated to the appropriate time interval. Spatial predictions are made to estimate fly densities throughout the community and a space-time model of shigella is developed to test the importance of fly density on shigella transmission.	William	 Pan	Margaret	 Kosek	Pablo	 Penataro Yori	Maribel	 Paredes Olortegui	Robert	 Gilman
2006	156	Population Growth and Emerging and Re-Emerging Diseases	Donor Funding Priorities for Communicable Disease Control in the Developing World	Studies have considered donor funding for developing world health by recipient and donor country but not by disease. Examining funding by disease is critical, since diseases may be in competition with one another for priority and donors may be making allocation decisions in ways that do not correspond to developing world need. I calculate funding from 42 major donors for 20 historically high-burden communicable diseases for the years 1996 to 2003 and examine factors that may explain variance in priority levels. Data show that funding does not correspond closely with burden. For instance, acute respiratory infections comprise more than a quarter of the burden among these diseases but receive less than three percent of direct aid. Neither developing world need nor industrialized world interests explain all funding patterns, and donors may be imitating one another in ways that do not take into account problems in the developing world.	Jeremy	 Shiffman
2006	156	Population Growth and Emerging and Re-Emerging Diseases	Growth and Distribution of Tribal Population in Jharkhand 1961-2001: A Census Analysis	The trend of tribal concentration in the state of Jharkhand (India) shows that over time, their share in the state’s population is declining, indicating that the tribal population is growing at a slower rate than that of non-tribals. Growth of the tribes, an economically backward social group, indicates their well-being. A distribution of persons having tribal languages as mother tongue gives an indication of tribal migration between Jharkhand and outside areas. Using data on age distribution, we can make rough estimates of vital rates using indirect methods of estimation. In view of the distortions in the age distribution due to errors of age reporting, three estimates of vital rates are obtained using three methods: Differencing, Stable Population Analysis C(35), and Rele’s Revised Method. We conclude that the birth rate, did not change much, but that the death rate has increased, resulting in a reduction in population growth.	Shubhangi	 Thatte
2006	157	HIV and Fertility	Higher Community HIV Prevalence Predicts Higher Recent Marital Fertility in Kenya	I estimate the effect of community prevalence of HIV on recent martial fertility in Kenya. The general consensus in the existing literature on the relationship between HIV and fertility is that the relationship is negative, but the evidence for a negative effect of own infection is far stronger than for a negative effect associated with living in communities heavily affected by the epidemic. Moreover, Kenya has experienced recent fertility increases that are not well understood. Among married women, I demonstrate a fertility-enhancing behavioral effect associated with living in areas of high HIV prevalence that outweighs the fertility-suppressing effects of own infection. Further analysis is designed to determine whether this reflects more rapid childbearing or an increase in completed fertility.	Laurie	 DeRose
2006	157	HIV and Fertility	Child-bearing Decisions among HIV-positive Women: Results from a Qualitative Study in Kampala, Uganda	Using 38 in-depth interviews with HIV-positive women and 15 in-depth interviews with health care providers (HCPs) of HIV-positive women, this paper explores women’s fertility experiences since being diagnosed HIV-positive. Over two-thirds of women reacted negatively to their last pregnancy while an equal proportion of the respondents’ partners reacted positively. Approximately half of the women considered abortion at their last pregnancy; almost half of them decided against it because of the health risks to the mother of obtaining an abortion in a country were abortion is illegal. Over-two thirds said that their HIV status had influenced them to revise their childbearing preferences downward or stop childbearing altogether with respondents more likely to say at the time of the interview that they had decided to stop childbearing altogether. While almost all HCPs had been asked about abortion by their HIV-positive patients, they overwhelmingly encouraged women to carry the pregnancy to term.	Ann	M. Moore	Clemencia	 Nakabiito	Florence	 Mirembe	Susheela	D. Singh	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Lindsay	 Dauphinee	Elena	 Prada
2006	157	HIV and Fertility	HIV Status, Fertility Intentions, and the Demand for Contraception: Assessing the Current Research to Improve the Integration of Reproductive Health and HIV Programs	In order to assess what information can currently be brought to bear on the question of demand for children and contraception among people living with HIV/AIDS, we reviewed 190 studies to identify (1) the strength and nature of the association between HIV and reproductive intentions; and (2) key confounders and conditioning factors. Preliminary results suggest a considerable amount of heterogeneity in the effect of HIV status on fertility intentions, contraceptive use and pregnancy. For example, developed country studies found an association between knowing HIV-positive status and decreased pregnancy rates prior to the introduction of highly effective antiretroviral therapy but not after, while no such dampening effect of HIV status on pregnancy rates was found in developing countries. Main outcomes of this analysis will be the identification of gaps and priorities for research as well as informing current discussions about how to integrate and effectively use both reproductive health and HIV program resources.	Naomi	 Rutenberg	Duff	G. Gillespie	Elizabeth	 Flanagan	Sabrina	 Karklins	Heather	M Bradley
2006	157	HIV and Fertility	Fertility and Desire for Children among HIV Infected Persons: With Special Reference to Mumbai	HIV transmission is likely to increase as more infected individuals choose to have children with their HIV-negative partners. Despite the growing importance of fertility issues for HIV-infected persons, little is known about their actual fertility desires and intentions. This paper gives a review of studies done to examine the effect of HIV on fertility, especially desire for children. An attempt has also been made to give empirical evidence of desire for children and contraceptive use among HIV-infected persons in Mumbai. It has been found that HIV affects fertility directly as well as indirectly. Almost all of the sample population wanted to have children but their HIV-status limited them from parenthood. However, a considerable percentage was intending to have at least one child in any case. Therefore, it generates the need for counseling to facilitate informed decision-making about childbearing and childrearing, and future demand for social services for children born to infected parents.	Dr.	Ranjana  Singh
2006	158	Consequences of Marriage	Selection vs. Specialization: The Impact of Legal Marriage on Adult Earnings in Sweden	A male marriage wage premium has been found in many studies. The source of the marriage premium is debated – does it come from selection or from specialization? We use data on the earnings in 1985 and 1990 of married or cohabiting parents of a random sample of 120,000 children born in 1974-87 in Sweden. Since identifying the causal effect of marriage on earnings is complicated by the selection problem we use a natural experiment, namely the marriage boom in Sweden in the last two months of 1989, created by the reform of the widow’s pension system from January 1990 to identify the effect. We find a large marriage premium for men (15%) and an equally large marriage penalty for women (15%) after controlling for fixed effects and the marriage natural experiment. We attribute these wage changes to differences in labor supply resulting from marriage.	Anders	 Björklund	Donna	K. Ginther	Marianne	 Sundström
2006	158	Consequences of Marriage	Depression and the Psychological Benefits of Entering Marriage	Past research has consistently documented the positive relationship between a transition to marriage and psychological well-being. In this study, we assess whether the psychological well-being benefits of marriage depend on a respondent’s or their spouse’s depression. We also examine whether the effect of marital quality in moderating the psychological consequences of marriage differs for the depressed and the non-depressed. Results indicate that men and women who are depressed prior to marrying report larger psychological gains from marriage than those who are not depressed. Moreover, those who marry depressed spouses do not benefit psychologically from marriage. These findings bring into question the assumption that marriage is always a good choice for all individuals. What appear to be strong average benefits of marriage are actually highly dependent on a range of individual, interpersonal, and structural characteristics.	Adrianne	 Frech	Kristi	 Williams
2006	158	Consequences of Marriage	Marriage versus Employment: Comparing Antipoverty Strategies for Mothers	In recent years, several studies have shown that married women are much less likely than are single women to live in poverty. Another body of research has shown that women’s employment, not surprisingly, is also negatively related to poverty. However, little is known about the role of marriage compared to the role of labor force participation in alleviating poverty among women. We use data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979-2002) to analyze the impact of transitions into and out of marriage and employment on short-term poverty and long-term poverty. Also, models are estimated separately by race because of important racial differences in the labor market and marriage market.	Mary	C. Noonan	Minglu	 Wang
2006	158	Consequences of Marriage	Is Adaptation to Marriage Rapid and Complete?	Do people revert to their previous level of well-being after they get married? The answer is no. An analysis of 20 waves of the German Socio Economic Panel indicates that, on average, marriage has a lasting impact on life satisfaction, equal in magnitude to the effect of cohabitation prior to marriage. In the year of marriage and that immediately following there is also an additional boost in life satisfaction, a “honeymoon period” effect. Contrary to the conclusion of an earlier analysis of the same panel by several psychologists, our findings are consistent with the “social support” interpretation of the benefits of marriage, and reject the “selection” hypothesis. The difference is because we use an expanded model, one taking account of cohabitation and special characteristics of the sample. Our results also contradict the strong “setpoint” model of psychology, which sees life circumstances as having a negligible impact on life satisfaction.	Anke	C Zimmermann	Richard	A Easterlin
2006	159	Chinese Inequality	Social Benefits in Urban China: Determinants and Impacts on Income Inequality in 1988 and 2002	This study provides the first set of empirical evidence on the determinants of social benefits received by urban Chinese families and their impacts on income inequality using the China Household Income Project (CHIP) 1988 and 2002 data. It finds that the urban total social benefits strongly targeted the bottom pre-tax pre-transfer income decile. Cash transfers were negatively associated with pre-tax pre-transfer income distribution in both years, while important in-kind benefits—namely health and food in 1988 and education in 2002—were positively related to pre-tax pre-transfer income levels. The presence of elder members and higher education levels were significantly related to more total social benefits. The urban social benefits played a significant role in income inequality reduction in both 1988 and 2002, but they were not able to close the rising income gap driven by growing market income inequality during the period. As a result, post-tax post-transfer income inequality level was still higher in 2002 than in 1988.	Qin	 Gao
2006	159	Chinese Inequality	Ethnic Inequalities in China?	Scholarly works on inequality in China have tended to focus on regional inequality, while studies of ethnic inequality have received far less attention. The few direct studies of ethnic inequality in China have failed to reach a consensus over whether ethnic inequality is largely the result of ethnicity, or a consequence of well-documented regional inequalities. This study attempts to analyze whether ethnic inequality is the result of ethnicity per se, or a combination of other factors, particularly region of residence. I examine the complex relationship between ethnicity and regional inequalities in China using data at the individual level. While at first glance there may be inequality between the Han and non-Han among several indicators of inequality: total family income, occupational categories, commodity ownership and attitudes, using national survey data from 1996 I show that such differences can better be explained through regional inequalities and socio-economic indicators.	Christopher	B. Sullivan
2006	159	Chinese Inequality	A Decade of Rising Poverty in Urban China: Who Are More Likely to Fall Under?	Rising inequality has been one of the most profound social consequences of China's post-socialist transitions. This paper examines the trend and patterns of rising inequality and poverty in China’s urban areas for the decade of the 1990s. Using data from China's Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey data, we examine evidence for three competing hypotheses interpreting the causes of poverty: individual ability, structural position, and household demographic composition. Our data come from three of China's provinces and for three time points: 1992, 1996, and 2001. Our multivariate analyses suggest that the household head's education and household demographic composition are the two most important factors throughout our study period, whereas unemployment and measures of structural factors (work organization ownership type, industry, and occupation) played a more prominent role near the end of the 1990s, when radical urban economic reform measures were put into place.	Feng	 Wang	Tsui-o	 Tai
2006	159	Chinese Inequality	Socialist Workers in Market Transition: Voluntary and Involuntary Job Mobility and Earnings Inequality in Urban China, 1993-2000	This paper develops a model of selective mobility of workers from the state to the market sectors to illustrate how the market transition has led to earnings inequality in former state socialist countries. Analysis of the sample data collected in 2000 from 10 Chinese cities reveals that recent entrants into the market are driven by two different institutional processes – some are self-selected for higher economic returns and some are pushed into the market in massive layoffs, resulting in a more heterogeneous body of workers in the market sector than before. Propensity score analyses show that an early market entry has no causal effect on earnings, whereas the effect of a later market entry on earnings is negatively associated with the propensity of making such transition. Those who would otherwise do well in the state sector and therefore have lower propensity of entering the market benefit more from the entry.	Xiaogang	 Wu
2006	160	Understanding the Impact of Population Aging on Future Health Care Cost	The Impact of Healthy Behavior on Future Health Status, Spending, and Retirement	Chronic illness imposes a substantial burden on the elderly.  This burden will likely intensify given alarming increases in   obesity and diabetes among the young, and rising disability rates among younger demographic groups.  So not only will the number of elderly 65 years of age or older double in the next 25 years, the constellation of disease and disability facing them could be much greater.    We forecast how these trends will affect health status, health spending and retirement for Americans aged 55 or older using the Health and Retirement Survey and microsimulation techniques.  We consider different scenarios for improvement in health status over time.  Healthier individuals may delay their retirement, reducing the burden on Social Security, but may also live longer, increasing the fiscal burden.  We quantify this trade-off and describe how this framework can be used to analyze a wide range of policy options.	Federico	 Girosi	Dana	 Goldman	Yuhui	 Zheng	Michael	 Hurd
2006	160	Understanding the Impact of Population Aging on Future Health Care Cost	The Effect of Childlessness on the Health Status of Elders	An increasing proportion of American adults are childless. If childless elders require greater health care than elders with children, and childlessness continues to increase, financial pressures on publicly financed health programs will expand faster than the rising dependency ratio would imply. The existence and size of any effects of childlessness on health have received little attention from researchers or policymakers. This study examines the relationship of childlessness to several indicators of elders’ health status. It presents descriptive data on differences between the childless elderly and those with children, and regression models to better establish the net association between childlessness and the outcomes. The Health and Retirement Survey provides the data.	Robert	D. Plotnick
2006	160	Understanding the Impact of Population Aging on Future Health Care Cost	Demographic Impact on Future Needs for Long-Term Care: The Case of Germany	Demographic aging and the growth of the oldest-old population will substantially influence the need for long-term care in developed countries. The paper discusses various estimates for Germany until 2030 and their implicit demographic assumptions. Germany's official population projection from the Federal Statistics Office has increased assumptions for future gains in life expectancy over the previous years, fuelling public fears of an upcoming crisis of old-age care. Yet the age-specific prevalences of health states leading to care are changing. Until now, Germany has been among the countries with relatively higher involvement of families in long-term care. This might not persist due to secular changes in family structures and living arrangements. The paper also deals also with Germany's care-insurance and existing proposals to reform it.	Ralf	E. Ulrich
2006	160	Understanding the Impact of Population Aging on Future Health Care Cost	Aging and Hospitalization Expenditure in Public Health: a Decomposition Analysis for Two Brazilian Metropolitan Areas	Changes in the population's age structure, due to population aging, lead to questions concerning health expenditures. Brazil is a country in the process of population aging due to rapid fertility decline and mortality rates now falling to the older groups. The goal of this paper is to characterize Brazilian public health expenditures for men by age group, decomposing total hospitalization expenditures into price, utilization rate and age composition effects in 2000. In order to verify the long-term potential effect of population aging, this same decomposition is carried out simulating the effect of the age structure projected for the year 2050. Hospitalization registries to the metropolitan cities of Curitiba and Belém are used. The choice of these cities is aimed at establishing a counterpoint between regions with very different levels of socio-economic development and morbidity profiles.	Simone	 Wajnman	Claudia	 Berenstein
2006	161	Racial Disparities in Health and Health Insurance	Race/Ethnic Differences in Infant Mortality for Leading Causes of Death That Had No Reduction in Rates	The research objective is to determine whether a substantial expansion of the race/ethnic gap that occurred for the three specific causes of infant death for which major reductions were achieved also occurred in the other two leading causes for which no (or very small) declines were observed in the 1990s. There were no notable advances in perinatal technology specific to the two causes on which we focus, short gestation and unspecified low birth weight and maternal complications, while the opposite was true for the other three leading causes.  An important question is how minorities fared, as compared to non-Hispanic whites, in regard to the two causes of infant death showing no improvement. Using linked birth/infant death for 1989-91 and 1995-98, we show that for non-Hispanic blacks and Mexican Americans, the mortality gap widened in both relative and absolute terms, while Mexican immigrants recorded  a higher degree of relative  survivorship. 	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song
2006	161	Racial Disparities in Health and Health Insurance	Why has the Black-White Life Expectancy Gap Declined?	We decomposed the change in the black-white life expectancy gap from 1990 to 2001 by age and cause of death using Arriaga’s method. The gap in life expectancy between black and white females decreased from 5.81 to 4.75 years, mostly due to relative mortality improvement among blacks aged 25-64 (51.0%). Most of the female decline was due to relative mortality improvement among blacks in cardiovascular diseases (23.9%), cancers (12.7%), and homicide (9.4%). The decline in the gap was larger among males, from 8.19 to 6.47 years by 2001. The decline among males was primarily due to mortality improvement among blacks ages 25-54 (71.9%). Chief among the causes for the decline were reductions in black mortality from homicide (22.2%), cancers (15.5%), cardiovascular diseases (8.6%), and HIV (7.9%). Unfavorable changes in other causes of death for blacks kept the gap from narrowing further, primarily nephritis, breast and prostate cancer, diabetes, and septicemia.	Sam	 Harper	John	 Lynch
2006	161	Racial Disparities in Health and Health Insurance	Race, Health, Health Insurance Coverage in the U.S.: A Multistate Life Table Approach	Wide racial disparities exist in health insurance coverage in the U.S. Available statistics on the number and proportion of uninsured Americans provide only a snapshot of the situation. This paper examines racial disparities in the lifetime burden of being uninsured. We construct multistate life tables that simultaneously classify health status and insurance status to estimate the expected years of life that Blacks and Whites live in different health-specific insurance states (e.g., healthy and insured, unhealthy and uninsured). We use data from the 2000 NCHS published period life tables and the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. While being uninsured is problematic under any circumstances, those who are not healthy and uninsured are at a particular risk for poor financial and health outcomes. Our preliminary results suggest that there are even greater racial disparities in insurance coverage when we consider the lifetime disparities and distinction between healthy and unhealthy years of life.	James	B. Kirby	Toshiko	 Kaneda
2006	162	Analysis of Genetic Data for Demographic Purposes	Genetic Associations with Regular Smoking among Adolescents: The Social Environment as a Fundamental Cause	This paper examines the interactive relationship between genetic characteristics and the social environment as a predictor of regular smoking among adolescents. Using a subset of the genetic sample of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (n = 1,599) in conjunction with information regarding adolescents’ friends, families, schoolmates, we find an association between the number of long alleles from the dopamine transporter gene DAT1 and the likelihood that adolescents will begin smoking regularly between Wave I and Wave II of the study. Our findings suggest that the effect of DAT1 on the risk of smoking is comparable in magnitude to the effects associated with three known risk factors: (1) smoke in the household; (2) smoking among friends; and (3) smoking prevalence at respondents' schools. Equally important, preliminary results suggest that the effects of DAT1 on regular smoking are the strongest among adolescents from non-smoking environments.	Jason	D. Boardman	Brett	 Haberstick	David	 Timberlake	Jeffrey	 Lessem	Marissa	 Ehringer	Andrew	 Smolen	Christian	 Hopfer	John	 Hewitt
2006	162	Analysis of Genetic Data for Demographic Purposes	Stress-Adaptive Survival and Longevity Effects of Tumor Suppressor Mutation: Population Modeling with lgl Gene in Drosophila	Human populations are polymorphic for risk factor mutations  predisposing to diseases and cancer. To address how this heterozygosity influences health status in changing environmental/stress conditions we used the model of lgl tumor suppressor (TS) gene in Drosophila. The lgl is the first case of monogenically controlled neoplasia found in animals. Lgl protein is conservative during evolution, mutations of human homologue Hugl discovered in 70% of solid carcinomas. Unexpectedly, our long-term studies showed omnipresence of lgl alleles in geographically distant Drosophila populations. To understand this paradox we compared the survival and longevity profiles of lgl/+ TS-carriers in normal and stress conditions (different omnient temperatures and infection virus susceptibility). TS-carriers had a disadvantage in optimal but appeared adaptive in stress conditions. The TS-dependent stress adaptiveness was maternally mediated. The data obtained are important for better understanding of population spreading of risk factor mutations and their effects on public health  in environmental/stress oscillations including climate variability and global catastrophes.	Michael	 Golubovsky	Nataly	 Weisman
2006	162	Analysis of Genetic Data for Demographic Purposes	Age at First Sexual Intercourse, Genes, and Social & Demographic Context: Evidence from Twins and the Dopamine D4 Receptor Gene	We carried out two distinct types of genetic analysis using data Add Health. The first was an exploratory non-DNA or biometrical analysis using MZ (305 pairs) and same-sex DZ (269 pairs) twins, which tells us whether there is an aggregate genetic contribution to age at first sex. Our second analysis investigated the association between age at first sex and the 48-bp repeat polymorphism in the dopamine receptor D4 gene (DRD4). Our biometrical analysis shows that MZ twins synchronize their timing of first sex to a much greater extent than the same-sex DZ twins. Our analysis of the polymorphisms in DRD4 indicates that those with an any-3R genotype experienced a risk of first sexual intercourse 23% (P=0.020), 240% (P      	Guang	 Guo	Yuying	 Tong
2006	162	Analysis of Genetic Data for Demographic Purposes	Rates of Aging, APOE Genotypes, and Cause-Specific Mortality in the Cache County Study	The purpose of this study is to assess the role of the Apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene in affecting all-cause and cause-specific mortality risks in a population-based cohort of elderly subjects. The study relies on 4701 subjects recruited into the Cache County Study on Memory and Aging. The Cache County Study has recently been enriched with the addition of several important variables obtained from the Utah Population Database. These variables include measures of familial excess longevity along with cause of death information obtained from death certificates of Cache County Study decedents. We show that the deleterious effects of APOE genotypes (e22, e34, e34) occur for several important cause-specific risks of mortality (cardiovascular, cancer, respiratory, nervous system (Parkinson's, Alzheimer's) and that their effects are attenuated when they occur to individuals with a family history of excess longevity.	Ken	R. Smith	Kathleen	 Hayden	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Richard	 Kerber
2006	163	Demography and Education Policy	Incorporating Nativity and Education into California Population Projections: Description and Comparison of the Inputs to and Results of Projections to the California Population, 2000-2050	California has experienced immense shifts in demographic composition in recent decades, stemming from patterns of international immigration. Increases in populations which have traditionally experienced less educational success account for much of the past and anticipated growth. Coupled with differing returns to education by ethnicity, these shifts have important implications for individual well-being, demand for state services and state revenues. Using a projection methodology which incorporates educational attainment and nativity in addition to the standard elements of age, race/ethnicity, and sex, we examine the trends in composition of cohorts in the ages attending secondary and post-secondary school. We then use these projections to model the effects of four different regimes of student progress in the educational pipeline on state investments in post-secondary education and subsequent financial returns to the state.	Henry	 Brady	Michael	 Hout	Jon	 Stiles	Shannon	 Gleeson
2006	163	Demography and Education Policy	Demographic Changes and Urban Education of Racial Minority Children in Idaho	This analysis provides a demographic profile of Idaho’s population changes between 1990 and 2004. Special attention is directed to the inter- and intra-racial/ethnic diversity, its impact and challenges on the education of immigrant children of racial/ethnic minorities. In addition, we address the importance of local communities in assisting and improving the educational attainment (e.g., reducing the high school dropout rate) of racial/ethnic minority children. Our analysis of the 1990 and 2000 Census and 2000-2004 American Community Survey data indicates that Idaho’s population growth rate ranks 4th in the U.S. since 1990, due to recent immigration. Thus, the racial and ethnic population composition has become more heterogeneous than in the past, generating numerous new challenges to the local population and social institutions in Idaho. Finally, some policy suggestions are discussed.	Maggie	 Chiang	Huei-Hsia	 Wu
2006	163	Demography and Education Policy	The Effects of Expanded Public Funding for Early Education and Child Care on Preschool Enrollment in the 1990s	Although the share of all 3- and 4-year old children enrolled in preschool has grown steadily in recent decades, gaps in enrollment have persisted between children from low- and high-income families. Steady growth in public funding for compensatory preschool education and means-tested child care assistance during this period had the potential to close these gaps by increasing the availability of free or low-cost arrangements. Merging repeated cross sectional data on preschool attendance from the October Current Population Survey with data on state-level funding, we find that increases in public funding explain as much as half of the rise in low-income young children’s preschool attendance during the 1990s, amounting to 8 to 11 percentage points. We conclude that in the absence of public investments, the gaps in preschool enrollment between low- and high-income families would have widened.	Katherine	  Magnuson	Marcia	K. Meyers	Jane	 Waldfogel
2006	164	Achievement and Attainment among Multiracials	Mixed-Race Youth, “Acting Out,” and the Test-Score Gap: Evidence from a National Survey of American Youth	Research has documented that blacks with high GPA’s are often taunted for “acting white.” However, we know very little about how “mixed race” youth fare in this regard. In this paper we offer a test of a variant of the “acting white” hypothesis that we label the “acting out” hypothesis by comparing the academic grade point averages and risky behaviors of non-Hispanic white, black, and black-white biracial youth. In order to test whether mixed race individuals “act out”, we use data from the National Survey of Adolescent Health. Our preliminary results show that mixed-race youth do “act out” in traditionally white, not black fashion. In terms of risky behaviors (smoking cigarettes, drinking), we find that these activities are more common among whites than blacks, and they are more common even among mixed-race youth than whites. We explore whether or not this “acting out” is related to GPA.	Susan	L. Averett	Howard	 Bodenhorn	Christopher	 Ruebeck
2006	164	Achievement and Attainment among Multiracials	Cross-Nativity Marriages and Human Capital Levels of Children	This paper compares the academic outcomes of children with two foreign born parents to those with one foreign born parent while controlling for parental education levels. Using NELS:88 data, I find that children with a foreign born father and a native born mother have worse grades in school than children with same-nativity parents. This relationship remains even after controlling for many characteristics correlated with intermarriage that are known to have negative consequences on children’s academic achievement. This suggests that the reason children with two foreign born parents do better than children with a foreign born father and native born mother lies in the benefits of ethnic networks as opposed to attributes of the  marriage itself. Interpreting an immigrant’s marriage to another immigrant as signal of his connection to his ethnic network, I then test various hypotheses regarding the usefulness of different networks for different types of people.	Delia	 Furtado
2006	164	Achievement and Attainment among Multiracials	Socioeconomic Differentials among Single-Racial and Multi-Racial Japanese Americans	In spite of their steady increasing presence in the U.S. population, persons with multi-racial identities have been an ignored topic in demography. We examine hourly wage differentials across different groups of Japanese-origin persons (Nikkei) to entertain the diversity of this population. Specifically, we assess wage differentials across single-racial (foreign-born and native-born) and multi-racial (Japanese ancestry with non-Hispanic white, Chinese, black, and white with Japanese ancestry) Japanese Americans by gender, with a native-born non-Hispanic white as the reference category. Data from the 2000 5% PUMS are used to conduct the analysis. The results from multiple linear regression analyses rather support the segmented assimilation than classical assimilation perspectives, in that the single-racial persons tend to attain higher wages than their multi-racial counterparts across gender, partly due to their higher levels of schooling. Especially for men, there is no net effect of ethnic group on wages after controlling for years of schooling.	Isao	 Takei	Arthur	 Sakamoto	Hyeyoung	 Woo
2006	164	Achievement and Attainment among Multiracials	The Black-White Test Score Gap: Lessons from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics	Based on two waves of panel data for three age cohorts of children from the PSID-Child Development Supplements, we find large black-white test score differences among children of all ages. Even before children start formal schooling, black children score .8 and .5 of a standard deviation lower than whites in Applied Problem and Letter-Word tests respectively. All achievement gaps before grade three can be accounted for when we control for the child’s characteristics, home environment (both structural and cultural factors), and mother’s cognitive skills. As children advance to higher grades, there is a diminishing role of these covariates in explaining the achievement gap. In high school years, the gaps remain a statistically significant .5 and .65 of a standard deviation for Applied Problem and Letter-Word scores respectively after all the covariates are controlled for (representing 63% and 88% of the raw test score gap).	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung	Kathryn	M.  Pfeiffer
2006	165	Families and the Dynamics of Child Care	The Impact of Minimum Quality Standards on Firm Entry, Exit, and Product Quality: The Case of the Child Care Market	We examine the impact of minimum quality standards on the supply side of the child care market, using a unique panel data set constructed from the U.S. Census of Services Industries, state regulation data, and administrative accreditation records from the National Association of Education for Young Children. We control for state- and time-specific fixed effects to mitigate the biases associated with policy endogeneity. We find that higher staff-child ratio requirements deter entry of child care centers into markets and reduce the number of operating centers. This entry barrier appears to select establishments of better quality into the market and alleviates competition among existing establishments. In contrast, higher staff-education requirements do not have entry-deterrence effects. However, they do have the unintended effects of discouraging accreditation, reducing owners’ profits, and driving firms out of businesses.	V.	Joseph  Hotz	Mo	 Xiao
2006	165	Families and the Dynamics of Child Care	The Demand for Quality Child Care: From a Hedonic Price Approach vs. from a Parent's Perspective	Studies have rated the quality of child care in the U.S., on average, as ‘mediocre’ (Helburn, 1995). However, it is not clear what is responsible for this mediocre quality. Is it due to the lemons market problem or due to the lack of demand for quality on the part of parents? To answer this question, we replicate Hagy (1998) and estimate the demand for quality using a more recent data set we have collected. We find that lowering the implicit price for child-to-teacher ratios would not affect parents’ demand for it. However, we also show that quality, as measured by parents, is the most significant factor in predicting parental desire to change child care arrangements. To reconcile these somewhat contradictory findings, we examine parental quality ratings against several sub-dimensions of quality measures. The empirical results suggest that parents and researchers define quality differently.	Youngok	 Lim	Elizabeth	 Peters
2006	165	Families and the Dynamics of Child Care	Family Policies in Europe: Fertility Policies at the Intersection of Gender Policies, Employment Policies, and Care Policies	In Europe, increasing concerns about the sustainability of welfare-state systems in the face of low fertility have revived debates about family policies as a remedy against fertility decline and its presumed consequences. Unfortunately, investigations of the effects of family policies on fertility have yielded ambiguous and often insignificant results. This paper argues that this is due to the nature of family policies, to the way in which they are intertwined with welfare-state systems, and to their impact on gender, employment, and care. As a consequence, similar family policies may exert different effects in different contexts, as illustrated by empirical examples. The examples also show that any assessment of family-policy effects on fertility needs to take into account the combined spectrum of gender relations, welfare-state structures, and labor-market development.	Gerda	 Neyer
2006	165	Families and the Dynamics of Child Care	Childcare Involvement of Italian Fathers	The aim of this paper is to show the degree of father participation in mundane child-tending tasks and to evaluate individual- and couple-characteristics favoring this involvement. Our analysis, based on data from the Multipurpose Italian surveys on Family and Social Actors, carried out by ISTAT on a national representative sample of private households, has confirmed that the childcare burden rests mainly on the woman’s shoulders. Only a small minority of fathers perform all the routine activities of childcare on a daily basis. However, father commitment increases substantially if the mother is employed and both partners are more educated. Factors such as professional condition and working hours, and their combination between partners, have a considerable impact in shaping gender roles with special regard to childcare. Our findings reveal that role reconciliation can be facilitated when–other things being equal–fathers are blue-collar or work a reduced number of hours.	Maria-Letizia	 Tanturri	Letizia	 Mencarini
2006	166	Neighborhoods, Social Connectedness, and Immigrant Group Incorporation	The Health Risk Behaviors and Social Connectedness of Adolescents in Immigrant Families: Evidence from Australia	Using Australian data, health behavior outcomes and the social connectedness of adolescents in immigrant families are contrasted with the outcomes of adolescents in non-immigrant families. Findings suggest that first and second generation adolescents are less likely to drink alcohol and lack social support than third generation adolescents, but more likely not to be physically active and not to have membership to a social club than third generation adolescents. Second generation adolescents are more likely to smoke than third generation adolescents. Findings suggest that immigrant adolescents appear protected from negative risks, yet, do not benefit from Australia’s cultural traditions for physical activity and social participation. Across generations, however, social participation and physical activity increase. As length of time increases, the protective effect of the immigrant family against some negative risks wanes. Overall, the adaption process leads adolescents in immigrant families to adopt Australia’s social customs of health and social behaviors.	Peter	D. Brandon
2006	166	Neighborhoods, Social Connectedness, and Immigrant Group Incorporation	Assimilation among Immigrant Adolescents: Neighborhood Context and Parental Control	Segmented assimilation theory argues that there are many possible pathways of assimilation for immigrants to follow. This paper explores determinants of assimilation trajectories among immigrant families. Segmented assimilation theory predicts that the consequences of assimilation should differ according to local context. This theoretical framework implicitly assumes that immigrant families are passive agents subject to the influence of their local environments. However, if immigrant families experience divergent outcomes depending on local context, they may anticipate these consequences and adjust their assimilation behavior accordingly. It therefore follows that the decision of whether and how to assimilate may also depend on local context. I investigate the hypothesis that neighborhood socioeconomic status affects how immigrant parents guide their children’s assimilation processes, and that therefore immigrant children’s degree of assimilation varies systematically according to neighborhood SES. I operationalize assimilation as the degree of similarity between immigrant and non-immigrant youth with respect to peer-influenced at-risk behaviors.	Emily	 Greenman
2006	166	Neighborhoods, Social Connectedness, and Immigrant Group Incorporation	Neighborhood Attachment in the Multiethnic Metropolis: The Intersection of Race, Nativity, and Racial Composition	This study examines interracial differences in neighborhood attachment (i.e., expression of local sentiment and satisfaction, as well as behavioral engagement via neighboring and organizational participation). The rapid growth of the Asian and Hispanic populations due to immigration requires that attachment researchers expand their focus from blacks and whites to include these groups. I consider the possibility that Asians and Hispanics experience their neighborhoods differently than blacks or whites, and highlight several variables unique to the immigrant experience that are particularly relevant to Asians and Hispanics, including shorter U.S. residence, illegal citizenship status, lingering homeland ties, and enclave residence. My findings demonstrate that Asians and Hispanics deviate from whites and blacks in their attitudes towards, and involvement in, their neighborhoods, due in part on intergroup disparities in individual- and neighborhood-level predictors of neighborhood attachment. Despite controlling for such characteristics, however, the impact of race on neighborhood attachment remains robust.	Meredith	 Greif
2006	166	Neighborhoods, Social Connectedness, and Immigrant Group Incorporation	Immigrant and Native Asset Accumulation in Housing	Questions about immigrant asset accumulation have remained nearly unasked in the face of hundreds of articles about immigrant assimilation. Do immigrants acquire assets at the same rate and by the same determinants as do natives? In this paper I focus on asset differences between immigrants and natives by examining the acquisition of a single asset—one’s home. The findings in this paper indicate that immigrant and citizenship status are, themselves, not associated with the probability of homeownership, home value, and home equity, but work through critical age and income effects . These results have important economic as well as policy implications. Given that the distribution of wealth is much more unequal than that of income, homeownership is a particularly important vehicle for reducing wealth gaps and for considering immigrant assimilation.	Sherrie	 Kossoudji
2006	167	The Effects of Poverty on Health and Disability	Effects of Income Inequality during Early Childhood on Disability in Older Adulthood	This paper applies a life course perspective to the literature on income inequality and health. Previous work in the area has tended to compare inequality levels and health outcomes within a jurisdiction at the same point in time, or with crude lags that fail to reflect expected latency periods during an individual’s lifetime. Given the growing literature demonstrating the impact of early-life conditions on later health outcomes, I examine how income inequality at time of birth affects the disability rates of older adults. Using disability data from the 2000 Census, and Census income data from both 1940 and 2000, I find that state-level inequality at time of birth is positively associated with disability outcomes at age 60. This association is both stronger than and independent of the effect of inequality measured contemporaneously with the disability outcome. Issues of interpretation and implications for future research are also discussed.	Andrew	 Clarkwest
2006	167	The Effects of Poverty on Health and Disability	Does the Supplemental Security Income Program Reduce Disability among the Elderly?	Given increasing evidence that medical care cannot fully explain variation in population health and increasing research on the relationship between socioeconomic factors and health, might non-health policies affect health? This research examines whether Supplemental Security Income (SSI) affects disability among the elderly. We use the 1990 and 2000 censuses, employing state and year fixed effect models to test whether within state changes in maximum SSI benefits over time, which are plausibly exogenous to health, lead to changes in disability. The findings from this study support the hypothesis that both within-state changes in the maximum state SSI benefit and changes in SSI income received by individuals lead to changes in disability among single elderly individuals. Higher SSI benefits are linked to lower disability rates.	Pamela	 Herd	Robert	 Schoeni	James	S. House
2006	167	The Effects of Poverty on Health and Disability	Being Poor and Coping With Stress: Health Behaviors and Cumulative Disadvantage	We have two aims: first, to clarify whether health behaviors modify the relationship between stress and the risk of death, and second, to clarify whether (and if so, which) health behaviors are more important for modifying stress among high or low socioeconomic status individuals. We use the 1990 Health Promotion and Disease Prevention supplement to the National Health Interview Survey, linked to the National Death Index, to examine the relationships among stress, health behaviors, socioeconomic status, and overall mortality, for U.S. adults.	Patrick	 Krueger
2006	167	The Effects of Poverty on Health and Disability	Health, Wealth & Workforce Exit: Disability Insurance & Individual Accounts	Retirement historically stemmed from a disability to continue work, motivating an integrated approach to the  social insurance programs within OASDI. Current debate on the long-term finance of OASDI benefits includes proposals for private investment via Individual Accounts. This paper investigates what implications disability might have for account balances, simulating returns for cohorts retiring over the period of 1929 - 2003. Next, a behavioral model explores incentives to exit the workforce ahead of retirement age when either of two variants of the current Disability Insurance program continues to be available. Under either program, incentives are found to increase public Disability Insurance liabilities.	Jason	S Seligman
2006	168	Gender Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	The Gender Gap Reloaded: Is School Quality Linked to Labor Market Performance?	This study examines gender differences in hourly wages of young adults in the late 1970s, mid 1980s, and 2000. We investigate the gender gap in the middle, and the tails of the wages distribution using quantile regression. We also examine the importance of school quality in predicting labor market performance. We conducted analyses for three major groups: Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics. We employ data from two rich longitudinal studies: the National Longitudinal Study of high school seniors in 1972 and the National Education Longitudinal Study of Eighth Graders in 1988. Our results indicate that the gender gap favoring men is more pronounced for Whites, and less pronounced for Blacks and Hispanics. Across all groups the gender gap in hourly wages is more pronounced in higher paid jobs. Finally, school quality seems to be an important predictor of future hourly wages for Whites mainly, but not for the two minority groups.	Spyros	 Konstantopoulos	Amelie	 Constant
2006	168	Gender Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	Female Labor Force Participation in Kerala: Problems and Prospects	Women are vital and productive agents in Indian economy, but the labor force is largely masculine. The state of Kerala boasts greater status of women and low gender bias in society. It is paradoxical that, in a society that is conducive towards women, female labor force participation has been consistently on a decline. This paper aims to examine the issues and understand the linkages to identify the possible determinants of the observed paradox. We have mainly used Census of India 1991 and 2001 as our data source. Bivariate correlation analysis and multivariate regression were done to understand the association between and relative contributions of significant predictor variables of female work force participation. The paper takes a closer look at the existing bottlenecks hindering women’s economic activity in the state of Kerala and suggests possible policy actions, aiming at enhanced empowerment of women, in a favorable social setting.	Sumit	 Mazumdar	M.	 Guruswamy
2006	168	Gender Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	Sex Differences in the Utilization of Educational Capital among College-Educated Workers	This paper examines sex differences in the labor force utilization of college education in an attempt to understand the persistence of occupational segregation among college-educated workers. The focal concept of this analysis, the utilization of educational capital, is conceptualized and various operationalizations discussed. I then examine the extent, character and correlates of sex differences in the utilization of educational capital using data from the 1993 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG-93). The multivariate analysis assesses the extent to which observed sex differences are attributable to individual- and family-level characteristics.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2006	168	Gender Differentials in Schooling and Occupations	Gender Gaps in Schooling in Rural Guatemala	The completion of schooling enhances personal earnings, health and nutrition, labor productivity, and child-care practices. Still, nearly two thirds of the roughly 130 million children in poor countries who do not receive primary schooling are girls. Although gender gaps in schooling have diminished or reversed in most of Latin America, Guatemala is a notable exception. In this paper, we make use of repeated village censuses (n = 5,306) in four rural Guatemalan villages to describe trends in the schooling achievements of young males and females between 1975 and 2002. We then examine the individual, family, and especially village-level determinants of schooling achievements by children in these villages during 1975–2002, and assess whether these determinants vary for boys and girls. Finally, we assess whether the effects of these determinants change over time, and whether they offer a satisfactory explanation for the size and trends in gender gaps in schooling.	Kathryn	M. Yount	John	 Hoddinott	John	A. Maluccio	Alexis	 Murphy	Usha	 Ramakrishnan
2006	169	Migrant Networks: Operation and Effects	Who Slips Through? Unauthorized Immigration into the United States	While a variety of policies have been implemented to reduce unauthorized immigration, the consensus is that these policies have not succeeded in diminishing illegal crossings into the United States. We use the Encuesta sobre Migración en la Frontera Norte de México – with approximately 65,000 unauthorized Mexican immigrants – to help us understand the persistence of unauthorized immigration. Roughly 14,000 of these unauthorized immigrants were never apprehended, whereas the remaining 51,000 were. We address the following questions: Which unauthorized immigrants are successful at eluding deportation? Does the use of coyotes or the price paid for their services raise the likelihood of a successful crossing? What is the apprehension probability after successfully crossing into the United States? If detained, where is seizure more likely to take place? To what degree do migrant networks reduce the risks of deportation? Finally, how has the implementation of immigration policies changed the profile of “successful” unauthorized immigrants?	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Susan	 Pozo
2006	169	Migrant Networks: Operation and Effects	Sanctions for Whom? The Immigration Reform and Control Act's Employer Sanctions Provisions and the Wages of Mexican Immigrants	Past research has found that wage differences between authorized and unauthorized immigrants could be entirely explained by human capital factors prior to the 1986 passage of employer sanctions. However, a significant post-1986 wage differential has been broadly understood as employers passing along expected costs of sanctions through lower wages for unauthorized immigrants. In this paper, I use administrative data on employer sanctions enforcement combined with survey data from the Mexican Migration Project to test this explanation. I find employer sanctions enforcement levels do affect Mexican immigrants' wages, reducing them about 21% for each dollar in fines collected per employee from non-compliant firms in the same industry, state, and year. However, levels of employer sanctions enforcement have no statistically significant differential effect based on legal status. That is, while sanctions may cause national-origin wage discrimination against Mexican immigrants, they do not explain the wage gap between authorized and unauthorized Mexicans.	Peter	 Brownell
2006	169	Migrant Networks: Operation and Effects	Community or Connections? A Social Networks Approach to Chain Migration	This paper introduces a social networks approach to the process of chain migration. Using a unique combination of survey and vital registration data for the Matlab Subdistrict of Bangladesh, I construct measures of past migrant stock that are specific to household lineage and residential compound groups, and to social networks that share historical links to those groups. Regression models predict the hazard of subsequent urban-rural and international migration in terms of migrant stock for these newly specified networks alongside effects for the village and household. Migrant stock for residential compound and social networks are strong predictors of the hazard of migration, particularly of rural-urban migration, explaining away about 50% of the village migrant stock effect. This demonstrates the potential value of social network-based measures of social capital, the extraordinary benefits of using Demographic Surveillance System data for migration research, and concerns regarding a village-based specification of migration-specific social capital.	Randall	 Kuhn
2006	169	Migrant Networks: Operation and Effects	Immigration Multiplier: A Method of Measuring the Immigration Process	There have been numerous studies on chain migration, but there have been few studies on the Immigration Multiplier since Jasso and Rosenzweig’s research on this subject in 1986 and 1989. In this research, I developed a relatively simple method for the calculation of the immigration multiplier to measure chain migration using the PUMS data and the INS data. In addition to the introduction of the Immigration Multiplier (IM), I have also introduced the Immigration Unification Multiplier (IUM) for measuring the family unification component of chain migration and the Immigration Reproduction Multiplier (IRM) for measuring the immigrant fertility/reproduction component of the chain migration. This research has presented the IM as the product of the IUM and the IRM, or the combined total number of the first- and second-generation individuals contributed respectively by the original principal immigrants. Using this new IM, this research has illustrated different immigration patterns among different racial/ethnic immigrant groups.	Bin	 Yu
2006	170	Inequality in Post-Secondary Education	The Negative Effect of Living in a Stepparent Family on College Graduation: Searching for an Explanation	This paper uses data from NELS to consider the effect of living in a stepparent family on the log-odds of college graduation. Our analysis finds that children who lived with mother/stepfather in eighth grade not only have a lower log-odds of college graduation than children who lived with two biological parents but, once family income and parental education are controlled, also do worse than children who lived with mother only. A significant part of the difference in college graduation between those who lived with mother/stepfather and those who lived with two biological parents is explained by the control variables in the analysis but a large part remains even after fifteen control variables are considered. Our analysis was not able to explain any of the difference in college graduation, once family income and parental education were controlled, between those who lived with mother/stepfather and those who lived with mother only.	Roger	A. Wojtkiewicz	Mellisa	 Holtzman
2006	170	Inequality in Post-Secondary Education	Household Allocations for Children's College Education: Evidence for the Snow White Effect	Educational expenditures are a substantial component of the investment parents make in their children, with important implications for the wealth accumulation of parents and the career trajectory of offspring. Differential human capital investment by parents also may have implications for which child assists the parent as they age. We know relatively little, however, about how parents allocate these expenditures among their children. In 2001, the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) collected data on college expenditures for individual children of sampled parents. Using these data we examine how family structure affects the allocation of human capital investments among children. Results indicate that while stepchildren are just as likely to attend college as biologic offspring, they receive relatively less financial support for college tuition. Results are particularly strong for children with a stepmother. We also find that later born children have a larger share of their tuition paid for by parents.	John	C. Henretta	Beth	J. Soldo	Matthew	F. Van Voorhis
2006	170	Inequality in Post-Secondary Education	The Role of Family Characteristics in Shaping Educational Mobility: Mediators or Moderators of Class and Race?	This study examines the relationship between ascribed characteristics such as socioeconomic status, race, and gender; family structure; family practices; and educational mobility. I analyze data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth to investigate the relationship between a child’s exposure to cultural and human capital, parent-child interaction styles, time spent in family activities, and whether a youth whose parents never attended college enrolls in college and, if so, which type and selectivity of postsecondary institution. In this analysis, I investigate whether family practices mitigate the relative influence of income, parent’s education, race, and family structure on college choice or whether these family practices interact with socioeconomic status and race/ethnicity to produce differential outcomes. I show that family practices and socioeconomic status are related to college enrollment and selectivity of postsecondary institution. Additionally, I find that family context moderates the relative power of social and cultural capital in providing access to colleges.	Jessica	 Hardie
2006	170	Inequality in Post-Secondary Education	Changes in the Process of College Attendence and Completion for Men and Women in the United States	Rising average levels of educational attainment, a shift from the predominance of men to the predominance of women among college students, and the growing importance of two-year colleges are important sources of change in the process of college attendance and graduation over the past 30 years. This paper extends Manski and Wise's model of college choice by (1) examining changes in selection into college on both measured and unmeasured determinants of attendance and graduation over the high school classes of 1972, 1982, and 1992; (2) documenting how patterns and trends in selection into college differ between men and women; and (3) incorporating two-year college attendance and transfers between two and four year college into the model. It investigates the hypothesis that selection into college changed largely through changes in the prevalence of two year colleges and other non-traditional routes to college completion. Investigating these alternative paths illuminates gender differences in the process of college choice.	Jennifer	 Flashman
2006	171	Heterogeneity in Contraceptive Behavior	Contraceptive Efficacy, Ambivalence and the Role of Contraceptive Service Providers in Helping Women Avoid Unintended Pregnancy	Many women and couples have difficulty using their contraceptive methods consistently and correctly every time they have sex. As a result, unintended pregnancies continue to occur far too often. In order to identify strategies for improving contraceptive efficacy, we investigated factors associated with imperfect method use. We use data from a 2004 nationally representative telephone survey of 2,000 women that was specifically designed to measure contraceptive efficacy—a construct that has been poorly documented in prior research. The survey also identified difficulties faced by women and their partners around contraceptive use and explored a variety of socio-economic, personal, relationship and service provision factors hypothesized to be associated with imperfect use. In this analysis, we focus on the relative importance of women’s own attitudes toward avoiding pregnancy and their past experiences with methods and contraceptive service providers in predicting contraceptive efficacy, controlling for key socio-economic and background characteristics.	Jennifer	J. Frost	Susheela	D. Singh	Lawrence	B. Finer
2006	171	Heterogeneity in Contraceptive Behavior	Condom and Other Contraception Use in Contemporary Russia: Effects of Individual Characteristics, Locality Type, and Sex Event Context	Condom and other contraception use are especially important yet under-researched topics for understanding recent dramatic demographic and epidemiological trends in Russia. We estimate statistical models showing how individual traits, locality, and “sex event context” – characteristics of the relationship, setting, and terms involved in the sex event – are associated with contraceptive behavior. We use data from the 2001 and 2003 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, a panel survey on a representative probability sample of Russian households, which included special batteries on sexual behavior and contraception use for respondents aged 14-49. 3994 respondents completed the battery once and 3964 completed it twice, yielding 11922 observation records, reports on 11431 sex events, and multiple events for 3532 respondents. The data offer a uniquely rich set of measures and sufficient statistical power to estimate models with person-level fixed effects to permit stronger conclusions regarding the effects of sex event context.	Theodore	P. Gerber	Danielle	 Berman
2006	171	Heterogeneity in Contraceptive Behavior	Contraceptive Frailty: An Analysis of Prospective Contraceptive Histories, France, 2000-2004	Using detailed prospective contraceptive history data collected in a longitudinal French contraceptive use survey (2000-2004, n=2863 women in 2000), we will determine whether times of contraceptive change (adoption, switching, discontinuation) are (temporarily) characterized by greater risks of unintended pregnancies, even when women adopt or switch to more effective methods. Three types of individual-level variables will help us grasp which factors are associated with such transitions to greater “contraceptive frailty”. Some will characterize the status of the relationship and the distance between both partners’ socio-economic status; others will indicate the quality of the contraceptive care received; still others will measure the cultural distance experienced by women with their milieu of origin. This choice of variables is driven by a sociological theory of contraceptive failure, where unplanned pregnancies are seen as resulting from normative tensions arising between partners, between clients and health staff, and between one’s current and past social milieu.	Jean-Marie	 Le Goff
2006	171	Heterogeneity in Contraceptive Behavior	Differences in Contraceptive Use between Abused and Non-Abused Women	In the US in 1994, 49.2% of pregnancies were unintended; in 2002, 7.4% of women were sexually active and were not trying to get pregnant but were not currently using any form of contraception. Domestic violence has been hypothesized as a factor that may be associated with contraceptive noncompliance. This paper explores differences in contraceptive use between abused and non-abused women, specifically whether abused women utilize different forms of birth control than non-abused women and whether they report more discrepancy between preferred and actual contractive method. In preliminary analyses, abused women were less likely to report having used birth control pills and were more likely to have used condoms in the last 12 months. Women experiencing physical and emotional abuse were also more likely to report not using their preferred method of contraception in the past 12 months compared to non-abused women (OR:2.1, 95%CI:1.0-4.4).	Corrine	 Williams	Laura	 McCloskey
2006	172	Shifts in Gendered Power and Fertility Consequences	Women's Schooling and Men's Dominance: Competing Influences on Female Bodies	Despite widespread agreement that championing women's education will lower fertility, little is known about the extent to which men's dominance over reproductive decisions persists even when women's education is on the rise. Using data spanning the onset of fertility transition in Ghana, we show that men's relative influence among couples with discordant reproductive goals increased significantly, while the effect of women's education on contraceptive use decreased significantly. Overall, improvements in women's schooling do not seem to have enhanced their reproductive autonomy. Instead, fertility decline has been propelled relatively more by reductions in men's reproductive goals.	Laurie	 DeRose	F.	Nii-Amoo  Dodoo
2006	172	Shifts in Gendered Power and Fertility Consequences	Gender Equality and Fertility in Sweden: A Study on the Impact of the Father’s Uptake of Parental Leave on Continued Childbearing	In Sweden, the birth of a child induces the right to more than one year of paid parental leave that can be shared between the parents. This paper examines the relationship between the father’s and the mother’s respective use of such leave and the continued childbearing of a couple. Our investigation is based on an event-history analysis of the longitudinal information on registered parental-leave use and childbearing of all intact unions in Sweden during 1988-99. We expect an extended paternal involvement in childrearing to be positively associated with continued childbearing since it makes family building more compatible with the mother’s labor-force participation. In addition, it is likely to signal a higher interest of the father for continued family building. Around 85 percent of fathers take some leave but in most cases episodes are brief. We find a positive effect of a father’s moderately long leave on a couple’s childbearing propensity.	Ann-Zofie	 Duvander	Gunnar	 Andersson
2006	172	Shifts in Gendered Power and Fertility Consequences	Inconsistencies in Qualitative and Quantitative Reports of Fertility Preferences among Couples in Rural Bangladesh	Fertility preferences are essential to the development of key demographic measures, such as unmet need for contraception and unintended pregnancy. This study compares fertility preferences from a 1998 survey with pregnancy surveillance data (1998-2004) for 20 Bangladeshi couples. Qualitative fieldwork was conducted in 2005 to explore the high level of discrepancies between stated preferences and subsequent fertility. These data reveal a range of circumstances that prompted shifts in fertility preferences, including child sickness or death, sex composition, ineffective contraceptive use, and covert actions by spouses. This study confirms the importance of collecting data from both spouses and emphasizes the need for family planning programs to work in combination with larger-scale development projects aimed at the improvement of women’s status. Due to their highly dynamic nature, future research should consider new ways to assess fertility preferences and improve upon current estimates of unintended pregnancy.	Jessica	D. Gipson	Michelle	J. Hindin
2006	172	Shifts in Gendered Power and Fertility Consequences	Prenatal Health Investments: What's Gender Got To Do With It?	Gender preference has been shown to impact many facets of parental decision-making, including fertility, marriage and investments in child health and education. In this paper we examine whether parents display gender preference in prenatal health investments, an outcome which to date has not been studied in this context. Data from the 1989-2001 U.S. Natality Detail Files are used to compare the prenatal investment decisions of mothers who have an ultrasound and eventually have a girl versus a boy. We pay particular attention to first generation immigrant mothers who were born in countries with a history of son preference. Using a difference-in-differences method we find that knowing fetal gender is female reduces the probability of quitting smoking while pregnant, and has a detrimental effect on birth weight and Apgar scores. However, there is no evidence of son preference among first generation immigrants who were born in India and China.	Aparna	 Lhila	Kosali	I. Simon
2006	173	Reproductive Health and Mortality in the Developing World	Decline in Adult Female Mortality over Three Successive Surveys in Indonesia	This paper exploits the wealth of data now available on adult female mortality in Indonesia from three successive DHS surveys. Using sibling histories from a combined sample of 193,643 sisters, mortality rates for women aged between 15 and 49 are calculated. Over the last decade female mortality has declined by 19%, maternal mortality has dropped by 40% and the percentage of adult female deaths due to maternal causes has fallen from 20% to 15%.         Despite these improvements, there are concerns that health gains for women are occurring only among the rich. Adult female mortality rates were calculated by wealth quintile, using an elaboration of the familial technique by fitting a Poisson regression. Clearly the wealth divide in Indonesia, already reported to be widening, has remained unchanged, the most recent survey showing that those in the lowest wealth quintile are now experiencing a maternal mortality rate double that of the highest.	Mohamed	M. Ali	Zoe	 Matthews
2006	173	Reproductive Health and Mortality in the Developing World	On Reducing Maternal Mortality in Mexico: From Access to Care to Quality of Care	In spite of steady reductions in the level of mortality in Mexico, maternal deaths continue to be a major cause of concern in women's health. Using information from vital statistics and verbal autopsies, our study shows that lack of access to health services is not necessarily the main reason for the persistence of maternal deaths. Drawing from fieldwork in the states of Chiapas and Oaxaca, we also argue that it is important to understand regional differences in order to ascertain why women die of maternal causes in specific regions and states of the country. In particular in the case of Chiapas, we conclude that the most important issue is the reorganization of health services and the restructuring of medical training. It is necessary to implement an effective referral system between primary care clinics and hospitals as well as to establish a working relationship between medical personnel and traditional birth attendants.	Rosario	 Cardenas	Graciela	 Freyermuth	Paola	 Sesia
2006	173	Reproductive Health and Mortality in the Developing World	The Impact of Pesticide Exposure on Breast Cancer Incidence: Evidence from Costa Rica, 1996-2000	The low percentage of breast cancer (BC) cases related to reproductive history risk factors and to genetics suggests that the environment may play a role in BC etiology. Pesticide exposure has been hypothesized to have an important effect. This ecological study tests whether BC incidence in Costa Rica is related to pesticide exposure, after controlling for parity, socioeconomic status, age at first full-term pregnancy, and access to health care. Spatial analysis techniques were used to test for spatial autocorrelation and to rule out the heterogeneity of a possible relationship between BC and pesticides. Because of the time-lag between exposure and incidence, migration bias was also mitigated. Results suggest that there is a heterogeneous association between pesticides and BC, which is significant only in some rural agricultural areas of the country. Conclusions about causality can not be drawn from an ecologic approach, like the one taken in this study.	Carolina	 Santamaria
2006	173	Reproductive Health and Mortality in the Developing World	Political Dimensions of Maternal Mortality Reduction in India and Nigeria: Implications for Achieving the Health MDGs	The maternal health goals of the MDGs are not likely to be achieved if India and Nigeria do not experience dramatic declines in maternal mortality, as these two countries together contribute nearly one-third of the global total. This paper studies the political dynamics of safe motherhood in India and Nigeria. It is based on more than fifty in-depth interviews with safe motherhood stakeholders in these two countries, including key individuals in the Ministries of Health, donors and NGO officials. Preliminary results indicate that policy windows for safe motherhood have opened up but that the state of political priority for safe motherhood in these countries is embryonic at best. The study highlights the point that the achievement of the health goals of the MDGs is as much a matter of national and sub-national politics of developing country nation-states, as it is an international issue or a technical or medical concern.	Jeremy	 Shiffman
2006	174	Familial Influences on Children's Educational Outcomes	Does Family Structure Matter in the Educational Attainment Process?	This paper focuses on the linkage between the experience of family structure in childhood and key educational outcomes linked to the educational attainment process. Using data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study we examine the effects of family structure on high school test scores, school success (high school rank and curriculum placement), and years of schooling completed. We address these issues using structural equation methods that correct for unreliability of measurement and that employ multiple-group modeling strategies, which lend themselves to detecting the effects of family intactness on these outcomes. Results from the WLS show that being from a non-intact family has significant detrimental effects on test scores and high school rank for both males and females, but similar effects on high school curriculum placement and years of schooling completed are remarkably absent, once socioeconomic background factors and their measurement unreliabilities are taken into account.	Duane	 Alwin	Ryan	 McCammon	Rachel	E. Durham
2006	174	Familial Influences on Children's Educational Outcomes	The Complexity of Family Structure and Children’s School Performance: Family Composition, Stability and Parental Involvement	There is dramatic diversity hidden in simple typologies of family structure that may mask the extent to which children’s well-being varies by the stability and parental involvement implied by family structure itself. This paper employs longitudinal data on a large, nationally representative cohort of children to examine the effects of family structure, change in family structure, and both residential and nonresidential parental involvement on two measures of child well-being: standardized math test scores and externalizing problem behaviors. Preliminary results demonstrate that the effects of family structure on test scores are reduced when we control for economic resources but the effect of family composition persists when we examine externalizing problem behaviors. However, both outcomes are negatively affected by instability when a parent leaves the household. Parental involvement is associated with positive outcomes although preliminary results do not find significant results for non-residential parent involvement.	Jeanne	L. Blackburn	Jennifer	E. Glick
2006	174	Familial Influences on Children's Educational Outcomes	The Relationships of Time-Varying Family Structure and Poverty Status to Child Trajectories of Mathematical Achievement	Previous research shows a substantial relationship between family structure and children’s mathematics achievement, but there is still much debate about the way that families’ socioeconomic resources influence this association, especially during different periods of children’s life course. Additionally, because cohabitation has become more prevalent than ever before, it is important to separate the effects of cohabiting parent and cohabiting stepfamily structures from the more commonly studied categories of married biological parents, single-parents, and married stepfamilies. Therefore, this study will use growth curve modeling of CNLSY data to investigate how the time-varying covariates of poverty status and five possible family structures each relate to math achievement test score gains throughout childhood.	Kristin	 Burnett
2006	174	Familial Influences on Children's Educational Outcomes	Childhood Family Structure and Schooling Outcomes: Evidence for Germany	We analyze the impact of growing up in a family headed by a lone mother on schooling outcomes using data from the German Socio-Economic Panel. According to estimates from models that do not control for the possibility that family structure and educational performance share common unobserved determinants, growing up in a non-intact family is associated with worse outcomes. But once endogeneity is accounted for – whether by using estimators comparing siblings, or comparing children who experienced parental loss through death rather than divorce, or comparing children by whether their parents were exposed to a reform that made divorce easier – the evidence that family structure affects children’s schooling outcomes is much less conclusive. One exception concerns the probability of Gymnasium attendance at age 14 which is some 40 percent lower for West Germans who experienced life in a non-intact family during childhood. This result however is sensitive to the method used to account for family structure endogeneity.	Marco	 Francesconi	Stephen	P.  Jenkins	Thomas	 Siedler
2006	175	Attitudes toward Union Formation	The Influence of Parents’ Marital Quality on Adult Children’s Attitudes toward Marriage and its Alternatives: Main and Moderating Effects	Drawing on a panel study of parents and children, we investigate linkages between parents’ marital quality and adult children’s attitudes toward a range of family issues including premarital sex, cohabitation, lifelong singlehood, and divorce. We hypothesize that parents’ marital quality will influence children’s support for these behaviors in adulthood, and also that parents’ marital quality will condition the intergenerational transmission of these attitudes. We find some evidence that parents’ marital quality is negatively associated with children’s support for divorce and premarital sex. More importantly, our analyses show that parents’ marital quality facilitates the intergenerational transmission of attitudes. Parents’ attitudes toward premarital sex, cohabitation, and being single are more strongly linked to those same attitudes among their adult children when parents’ marital quality is high than when it is low.	Mick	 Cunningham
2006	175	Attitudes toward Union Formation	The Development of Marriage Expectations, Attitudes, and Desires from Adolescence into Young Adulthood	We contribute to research on understanding changes in marital behavior by examining marriage attitudes among young people during the time when they first begin to formulate their expectations and desires for union formation during adolescence and the transition to adulthood. We use national data from Add Health and document how marriage attitudes vary by social groups defined by race, ethnicity, immigrant generation, socioeconomic status, family background, and parenthood status. We model theoretical-derived factors that play a role in the development of marital attitudes, focusing on sociocultural effects associated with socialization processes in the social contexts of adolescent life, such as family structure role models among friends, in school and the neighborhood, as well as experiences with abuse in childhood and in adolescent romantic relationships. Models also include economic opportunities that bear on marriage decisions. Preliminary findings indicate clear socioeconomic differences in attitudes regarding affective dimensions of marriage compared to economic dimensions.	Kathleen	Mullan  Harris	Hedwig	 Lee
2006	175	Attitudes toward Union Formation	Singing a Different Tune: Attitudes toward Marriage at Older Ages	Understanding attitudes toward marriage at older ages is increasingly important as young adults delay marriage and large numbers of people return to the marriage market after divorce. This study examines age differences in the desire to marry among single people 18-69 years old, taking into account selection into marriage. Using multinomial regressions on data drawn from the General Social Survey (GSS), we find that single men and women age 55 - 69 have less desire to marry than younger single men and women. This age difference in single people's desire to marry is not explained by demographic characteristics, personal attributes, or marital history. The expected gain from marriage, as measured by education, increases the overall desire to marry, but it too does not account for the age difference in the desire to marry.	Jenna	 Mahay	Alisa	C. Lewin
2006	175	Attitudes toward Union Formation	Attitudes toward Marriage in the Philippines	Using the 2002 YAFS and data from 16 urban and rural focus group interviews, this paper examines attitudes toward marriage in the Philippines. Over the course of the twentieth century considerable diversity in marriage patterns has been discernable, not only within Asia as a whole, but also within Southeast Asia. While some notable shifts have been observed in marriage patterns in the Philippines, non-marriage has been more accepted there than in many other countries in the region, a number of whom are now “catching up.” Both the YAFS and the focus group transcripts have information on attitudes toward sex roles, marriage, and cohabitation that provide new insights into the contexts in which unions are formed (or not) in the Philippines. We are able to compare attitudes across cohorts using the focus group data and to assess the views of younger women and men at the national level using the YAFS.	Lindy	 Williams	Maria	Midea M. Kabamalan	Nimfa	B. Ogena
2006	176	Multi-partnered Fertility	Multiple-Father Families and Welfare	The biological relationships between children and the adults they live with is a perspective of emerging importance. In this study, we explore the connection between welfare benefit levels and multiple-partner fertility. In contrast to past studies of welfare and family structure, most of which focus on a mother’s marital status or the absence of a male partner, we focus on the biological relationship between child and adult. Pooling 9 years of data from the SIPP (the U.S. Census Bureau’s Survey of Income and Program Participation), we obtain observations on roughly 50,000 households with children. We exploit the information in SIPP’s rarely-used “household relationship matrix” to ascertain the biological relationships between children and each adult they live with. This lets us determine the number of fathers represented among a mother’s children.	Eirik	 Evenhouse	Siobhan	 Reilly
2006	176	Multi-partnered Fertility	Multi-Partnered Fertility among American Men	Nearly all we know about multi-partnered fertility has come from the Fragile Families dataset. While this data has been a rich source of information, its representativeness, especially for men, is less than ideal. Using the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), which interviewed men for the first time, we document the prevalence and correlates of multi-partnered fertility among a representative sample of American men. Nearly 8% of American men aged 15-44 have children with more than one partner, with sharp differences by age, race/ethnicity, and income - over one-third of poor black men aged 35-44 have children with 2 or more mothers, and 16% have children with 3 or more mothers. Multi-partnered fertility is strongly related to the circumstances of births - it is more common among men with unmarried births, teenage births, and who never lived with at least one of their children.	Karen	B. Guzzo	Frank	F Furstenberg, Jr.
2006	176	Multi-partnered Fertility	More Kin, Less Support: Multipartnered Fertility and Perceived Support among Mothers	Recent research has documented the high prevalence of having children with more than one partner, termed “multipartnered fertility.” Because childbearing is an important mechanism for building kin networks, we theorize that multipartnered fertility will influence the availability of social support for mothers. Analyzing three waves of data from the Fragile Families study (N = 12,132), we find that multipartnered fertility is negatively associated with the availability of instrumental support, particularly financial support. Our longitudinal evidence suggests a bidirectional relationship in which multipartnered fertility reduces the availability of support, and the availability of support inhibits multipartnered fertility. We conclude that smaller and denser kin networks seem to be superior to broader but weaker kin ties in terms of perceived instrumental support.	Kristen	 Harknett	Jean	T. Knab
2006	176	Multi-partnered Fertility	Stepfamilies in Denmark and France: Does the Number of Previous Children from Both Partners and Whether the Previous Children Reside with the Couple Influence Fertility?	Based on large data sets, we compare stepfamilies' fertility in Denmark and France related to which partner brought the stepchildren, being co-resident or not, interactions with shared children, and non-monotonous variations with the number of previous stepchildren, assuming that the main results should be similar in the two countries.     Stepfamilies are increasing in both countries, but are most common in Denmark. Almost all co-resident stepfamilies involve a stepfather. If the woman has one child born before the union in France, fertility is much lower at shared parity 0 and, especially, at shared parity 1, but not if the couple already has 2+ shared children. If the woman has 2 children born before the union, fertility is higher than if she only has one previous child, at shared parities 0 and 1. These strange results are also found in Denmark, and will be further studied.	Laurent	 Toulemon	Lisbeth	B.  Knudsen
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Relating Activity Involvements to Child Weight Status: Do Normal and Overweight Children Differ in How They Spend Their Time?	The prevalence of obesity in American youth has reached alarming levels. The proportion of overweight children, defined as Body-Mass-Index (BMI) exceeding the 95th percentile for age- and sex- based norms, has tripled in the past three decades (Troiano & Flegal, 1998). It is assumed that obese and non-obese children spend their time in different ways. Yet, few studies have examined how normal weight and overweight children differ (or do not differ) in the ways they spend their time. In this paper, we draw upon the Child Development Supplement (CDS) to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) which collects 24h time diaries from children to examine similarities and differences in the ways normal weight and overweight children spend their time. Results indicate that overweight children and adolescents spend less time participating in organized sports and outdoor play, sleeping, and playing with friends and more time playing video games, reading and being alone.	Silvia	 Bartolic	Sook-Jung	 Lee	Elizabeth	 Vandewater
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Overweight Children: Assessing the Contribution of the Neighborhood Environment	Using the 2002/2003 wave of Child Development Supplement (CDS) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), this paper examines the effect of the neighborhood environment on the prevalence of overweight and at risk of overweight status in children. We consider a variety of neighborhood environment features, such as anonymity, informal social control, safety, and the physical environment. Preliminary results suggest that neither neighborhood anonymity nor informal social control in the neighborhood nor neighborhood safety affect the risk of being overweight for children of either gender. However, living in a low or medium physical condition neighborhood is associated with a 69-92 percent increase in the odds of being overweight relative to living in a high physical condition neighborhood. Moreover, physical condition of the neighborhood has greater effect on girls. The results of this study emphasize a particular importance of the built environment of the neighborhood for weight status of children.	Irina	 Grafova
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Using Cumulative Risk Models to Link Social Disadvantage to Obesity Risk in the Transition to Young Adulthood	I assess the relationship between social disadvantage in childhood and adolescence and obesity trajectories from adolescence into young adulthood using cumulative risk models and nationally representative data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. The cumulative risk model assumes that it is the accumulation of risk factors across a variety of domains, rather than a single risk factor that is important in adversely impacting child developmental and health outcomes. I utilize multiple measures of health/obesity risk and multinomial logistic regression models to investigate what factors place individuals at risk for obesity, which populations (defined by sex, race/ethnicity, and poverty) face greater levels of cumulative risk, whether risk factors operate in a cumulative manner (where higher levels of risk are associated with higher levels of obesity risk) and whether cumulative risk measures mediate the relationships between poverty status and obesity and ethnic minority status and obesity.	Hedwig	 Lee
2007	2	Causes and Consequences of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Youth	Predicting Young Adult’s Obesity: The Role of Body Image during Adolescence and Race/Ethnicity	Obesity among adolescents and young adults has become a national health concern. Using the first and third waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth), we examine the effects of adolescents’ body image and weight management behaviors on their chances of being overweight or obese as young adults. Being overweight at Wave I increases the chances of being overweight or obese at Wave III. Controlling for actual Wave I weight, we find that adolescents who think they are overweight and are trying to lose weight at Wave I are more likely to be overweight or obese at Wave III. These effects are particularly strong for Blacks and Hispanics. This suggests that Blacks and Hispanics may be particularly likely to engage in unsuccessful weight control behaviors. Our results suggest that social programs that are geared toward decreasing the prevalence of adolescent obesity should be more culturally specific.	Linda	M. Manning	Mary	H. Benin	Verna	 Keith
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Childbearing Trends and Policies in Europe	This paper will present selected findings and conclusions of an international comparative project of 18 countries, which is coordinated by the Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. A book of country and summary chapters is to be published in 2007. The central topics include: effects of political systems on childbearing behavior; fertility during the transition from autocratic to democratic systems in central and Eastern Europe; principal determinants of fertility decline at younger ages; childbearing postponement; changing parity distributions and family size norms; changing family and changing living arrangements; migration and fertility; effectiveness of family-related policies; convergence or diversity in childbearing behavior; possible emergence of a new demographic disequilibrium.	Tomas	 Frejka	Jan	 Hoem	Laurent	 Toulemon
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Globalization, Policy Intervention, and Reproduction: Below Replacement Fertility in China	This paper presents preliminary results from a field survey on fertility preference and behavior among six counties in one of the most dynamic regions of China (Jiangsu province) with one of the lowest fertility levels (TFR at 1.0). The survey, to be completed in January 2007, will be the first of a longitudinal study planned for this research site. This paper will be the first to report on a new study designed to understand below-replacement fertility in the context of economic and social globalization and political intervention. Some results from the study will have special relevance for China, given its unique government intervention and control in reproduction, but many of the results should have broad implications for understanding global low fertility, with China being one of the most dynamic players in the new wave of globalization.	Baochang	 Gu	Zhenzhen	 Zheng	Feng	 Wang	Yong	 Cai
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Birth Replacement Ratios in Europe: A New Look at Period Replacement	European reproduction trends are traced using a new period replacement indicator: the Birth Replacement Ratio (BRR). The BRR is a replacement ratio that compares the period number of births to the mean size of the mothers’ generation at birth. In contrast with the Net Reproduction Ratio, differences between the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) and the BRR are not due only to period mortality. They also incorporate the effect of mothers’ emigration and immigration. The application to a number of European countries between 1800 and 2004 (depending on data) shows interesting contrasts between the TFR and the BRR, which trace the demographic history of the respective countries.   The BRR makes it possible to track the impact of emigration and immigration on population replacement over the demographic transition and compare the differences between sending and receiving countries, tracing the European emigration of the early 20th century or the current immigration processes.	José	Antonio  Ortega	Luis	Alberto  Del Rey Poveda
2007	3	Low Fertility in Comparative Perspective	Preference Theory and Low Fertility: A Comparative Perspective	The discussion on the causes of the most recent fertility decline in Europe, and in particular on the emergence of “lowest low” fertility, emphasizes the relevance of cultural factors. The heterogeneity of preferences concerning the “career vs. family” dichotomy has been systematized in Hakim’s Preference Theory. This paper makes use of new comparative data from the 2004/05 round of the European Social Survey to test the links between individual-level preferences and fertility outcomes and intentions in a variety of societal settings. Results confirm an association between work-family lifestyle preferences and actual fertility in a variety of European countries, while they do not support the relevance of lifestyle preferences on 3-year fertility intentions.	Agnese	 Vitali	Francesco	C. Billari	Maria	Rita  Testa
2007	4	Family and Work	Allocating Time	The household production model remains the lens through which many social scientists view time allocation within households. Becker claims that the household production model implies that in efficient married couple households, husbands will specialize in the market sector and wives in the household sector. In this paper I argue that Becker's specialization conclusion rests on auxiliary assumptions to which neither economic theory in general, nor the household production model in particular, have any commitment. These include assumptions about household preferences (e.g., the absence of process benefits), household technology (e.g., spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes), and the number of household commodities (e.g., one household commodity). I conclude by examining the relationship between household technology and the technologies of individual members of the household. This relationship is especially interesting at three crucial transition points: (i) household formation, (ii) divorce, (iii) widowhood.	Robert	A. Pollak
2007	4	Family and Work	Market versus Non-Market Time Allocation in a Family Setting	Using the American Time Use Survey, this paper focuses on how time use decisions are related within the household. Because the ATUS provides time diaries for only one adult per household, it is not possible to model joint choices directly. Instead we implement a statistical matching approach in which we will “marry” husbands with wives across households to form synthetic couples. This methodology allows us to construct measures of household production, child caregiving, active leisure, and work time for each “husband” and “wife”, which are then used to construct relative time measures, e.g. the proportion of childcare done by the mother. Using these relative measures as dependent variables, we estimate a four equation simultaneous tobit model for mothers' and fathers' time use. The goal is to examine the role that spouses' time use, gender wage gaps, and demographic factors play in fundamental time allocation decisions between market and non-market time.	Rachel	 Connelly	Jean	 Kimmel
2007	4	Family and Work	Order amidst Change: Work and Family Trajectories in Japan	Substantial family and work change has been occurring in Japan. Examples include a decline in the availability of jobs that afford lifetime protection against unemployment, an increase in jobs that do not carry benefits such as a pension, an increase in age at marriage and at first birth, and an increase in marital dissolution. Using life history data from the 2000 National Survey on Family and Economic Conditions, young Japanese appear to have responded in a fairly orderly manner. Marriage and childbearing have been postponed, but marriage still precedes childbearing. Education is completed prior to starting work. For men, once work commences they continue working. For women, the classic conflict between work and family roles is evident. Beneath this apparent order amidst change lies the possibility of a long-term realignment of family and work roles. The timing of events is described both across as well as within life domains.	Ronald	R. Rindfuss	Minja	K. Choe	Maria	Midea M. Kabamalan	Noriko	 Tsuya
2007	4	Family and Work	Intergenerational Health Implications in the Labor Market: Exploring Parents' Health and Child's Subsequent Labor Outcome in Russia	Understanding behavioral response to parental health provides valuable insight for predicting a labor market situation, especially in a developing and transitional economy. This paper provides an economic framework incorporating labor supply, family economic linkage, and health dynamics. Using the Russia Longitudinal Monitoring Study, empirical analysis shows that having an unhealthy father substantially reduces a daughter’s future working probability in the labor market: the daughter tends to demand time-intensive consumption relatively more than earning-intensive with unhealthy father. In the process of reallocating resources in response to a family member’s poor health, women tend to be more specialized to non-market labor and men to market labor when relative return on market labor is significantly lower for women. This paper also highlights that where family members are linked economically to each other, it is plausible that those members’ health conditions can play an even more significant role in determining one’s future economic behavior.	HwaJung	 Choi
2007	4	Family and Work	Multiple Demands or Multiple Opportunities? Work, Family, and Spousal Health in the U.S.	Men and women who have multiple roles (e.g. spouse, employee, parent) generally have better health than those who have fewer roles. But prior research has not examined how living in a household that makes many care-taking demands and having a spouse who works long hours impacts health among husbands and wives. This is an important oversight given the growing labor force participation among women in recent decades and evidence that spousal factors can influence personal health. We examine the relationship between spousal employment and households that have high demands for care-work, and personal risks of death among men and women, with data from the 1990-1994 Family Resources Supplements to the National Health Interview Survey, linked to the National Death Index through 1997. Our results will illuminate whether, and in what circumstances, men and women benefit from having spouses who have multiple roles (and multiple demands on their time).	Patrick	M. Krueger	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith	Xuemin	 Gu
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Decomposing Trends in Non-Marital Fertility among Hispanic Women	The National Center for Health Statistics recently reported that U.S. non-marital births reached a record high in 2004, when 36 percent of all births occurred to unmarried women. Significantly, 46 percent of Hispanic births occurred outside of marriage, and teenage childbearing rates were exceptionally high. We use data from the 1990-2004 NCHS’s Natality Detail File to decompose trends in non-marital fertility ratios into three proximate components: marital status, marital fertility, and non-marital fertility. Specifically, we partition 1990-2004 changes in the fertility ratio into rate and n composition components. Our paper also evaluates whether the “mix” of components varies across Hispanic subpopulations distinguished by economic and cultural assimilation into American society. The empirical results suggest whether public policies are best targeted on (1) reducing non-marital fertility rates, (2) increasing marriage (and, and by extension, marital fertility), or (3) both.	Felicia	Yang DeLeone
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Racial/Ethnic Differences in Cancers of the Liver and Stomach in Texas, 1999-2003	This project examines racial/ethnic- and sex-based differences in incidence, mortality, and survival rates of cancers of the liver and stomach in Texas for the period 1999-2003. Population-based cancer registry data are used to calculate age-adjusted incidence and mortality rates for two cancers that occur more frequently among Hispanics and blacks in Texas, and are characterized by infectious etiological factors. Further, employing linkage software specifically designed for use with cancer data, incidence and mortality data are linked in order to analyze survival, especially among Hispanics. Preliminary findings illustrate the high liver cancer incidence and mortality rates among Texas Hispanics, as well as the high rates of stomach cancer among both Hispanics and blacks. While the cancer literature in the U.S. consistently highlights relatively low overall cancer incidence and mortality rates among U.S. Hispanics, these morbidities and causes of death do not evidence any Hispanic Mortality Paradox, and warrant further study.	George	J. Lara
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Understanding Socioeconomic Gradients in Health in the U.S. Latino Population	Health differentials between U.S. Latinos and other racial/ethnic groups are frequently characterized by the advantages or disadvantages that remain after controlling for socioeconomic indicators. This literature has given less attention to formal comparison of the significance and magnitude of health gradients between racial/ethnic groups. Recent research has found weak relationships between education and health for individuals of Mexican origin in comparison to non-Latino whites. This study investigates one potential explanation for this disparity: social gradients in health in Mexico may differ from those in the United States. The study uses data from the National Health Interview Survey to compare gradients for health behaviors for Mexican-origin individuals by age at immigration and duration of stay in the U.S. Weaker gradients among those who immigrated at older ages and those with shorter durations of stay in the U.S. would offer evidence of the influence of Mexican gradients on the health behaviors of Mexican Americans.	Pamela	J. Stoddard
2007	5	Demography of the U.S. Latino Population	Gateway State, Not Gateway City: New Immigrants in the Hudson Valley	Much research on new immigrants outside the gateway states has been on new destinations in the Midwest and South, not on new destinations within the gateway states, but outside the gateway metropolitan areas within them. In this paper we examine Spanish-speaking immigrants to two small cities that have not received many immigrants since the early decades of the twentieth century, Newburgh and Poughkeepsie, in the Hudson Valley of New York State. Data come primarily from in-depth interviews with 50 Latin American immigrants (25 in each city), supplemented with data from Census 2000 and the 2005 ACS. New immigrants tend to come directly from their home country, know only a few relatives or friends upon arrival, and have been here a short time. They settle in poor neighborhoods close to African Americans, with whom relations are not always cordial, and in both cities, are actively forming organizations to help them adapt.	Jacqueline	 Villarrubia	Nancy	A. Denton
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	The Impact of School Meals on School Participation: Evidence from Rural India	This paper assesses the effect of a nationally mandated free school meal program in India on school enrollment and attendance using survey data. School panel data allow a difference-in-differences estimation strategy, comparing the difference in the participation rates before and after the introduction of the program between treatment and control schools. The results show that the average monthly attendance rate of girls in grade 1 jumped up by more than 10 percentage points with the introduction of the program. Analysis of cross-sectional household data suggests that the program did not lead to a significant increase in overall enrollment levels although there was a small positive effect on the enrollment rates of girls from disadvantaged socio-economic groups. Overall the findings indicate that the program has been more successful in improving participation rates of girls, thereby reducing gender disparity in schooling.	Farzana	 Afridi
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	Matching the Gold Standard: Evidence from a Social Experiment in Nicaragua	We compare nonexperimental impact estimates using propensity score matching with those from a social experiment to determine whether this nonexperimental approach can ‘match’ the gold standard. The social experiment we use was carried out to evaluate a conditional cash transfer program implemented in Nicaragua in 2000. The outcomes we assess include total and food expenditure and a variety of children’s health outcomes including vaccinations, morbidity, and breast feeding. We find that PSM does better at replicating the benchmark for individual outcomes, but does poorly for expenditure outcomes. Judicious choice of samples and more stringent common support requirements improve the performance of PSM for all outcomes. The PSM technique seems most promising for evaluating individual and easily measured outcomes such as those related to child schooling and health, but less so for more complex outcomes such as expenditures.	John	A. Maluccio	Sudhanshu	 Handa
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	Family Planning and Fertility: Estimating Program Effects Using Cross-Sectional Data	This paper uses a novel method of identifying the effects of a family planning program, when there is endogenous program placement and only cross-sectional data are available. It focuses on the differential effects of health facilities, standard family planning and community-based reproductive health programs. Access to family planning reduces the age-specific fertility by about 0.5 children for women younger than 30, while the effect is less for older women. This is in line with what other studies have found. This reduction is not overly large considering the high total fertility rate in Ethiopia. There are, however, other positive effects of access. Women are generally older when they have their first child in areas with family planning service, which may have a beneficial effect on child health and maternal health.  It appears that access reduces the risk of  unwanted pregnancy, especially for older women.	Claus	C. Pörtner	Kathleen	 Beegle	Luc	 Christiaensen
2007	6	Evaluating Social Development Programs in Low-Income Countries: New Initiatives	The Impact of Conditional Cash Transfers on Household Composition, Fertility, and Migration in Central America	Providing conditional cash transfers (CCTs) to households has the potential to influence the composition of households by altering the economic incentives faced by households. Altering the composition of households may in turn alter the manner in which the transfers are used. We explore this possibility using experimental evaluation data collected from the PRAF program in Honduras and the RPS program in Nicaragua. Our results indicate that the programs have had an impact on household structure and composition, but that this impact varies by country. Our analysis clearly indicates that CCT program design and context can influence the structure and composition of households. Therefore, CCT programs must be designed carefully to ensure that unintended and possibly undesirable outcomes do not occur.	Paul	C. Winters	Guy	 Stecklov	Jessica	 Todd
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	Couples’ Retirement Coordination and Well-Being: A Multi-Method Approach	Our project investigates the coordination of retirements among married couples age 56 to 62. Specifically, we show how financial, emotional, and health-related considerations impact coordination of the transition to retirement among couples. We draw on data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study and use multinomial logistic regression models and two-stage latent life path models to address three specific issues: 1) the conditions under which husbands and wives coordinate their transitions to retirement; 2) the effects of health, socioeconomic status, and coordination on post-retirement marital satisfaction and well-being; and 3) how the onset of major health conditions affects the timing and coordination of retirement.	Gina	 Allen	Carolyn	A. Liebler	Sarah	 Flood
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	The Effect of Subjective Survival Probabilities on Retirement and Wealth	We explore the proposition that expected longevity affects retirement decisions and wealth using micro data drawn from the Health and Retirement Survey for the United States, the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing, and the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. We use data on individuals' subjective probability of survival to age 75 as a proxy for their prospective lifespan. Our estimates for the U.S. and U.K. indicate that increased subjective probabilities of survival result in increased household wealth among couples, with no effect on the length of the working life. These findings are consistent with the view that retirement decisions are driven by institutional constraints and incentives and that a longer expected lifespan leads to increased wealth. The SHARE results are less informative, mainly due to small sample sizes.	David	E. Bloom	Michael	 Moore	Younghwan	 Song
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	How Well Prepared Are People Age 55-64 for Retirement? Selected Indicators of Well-Being in a Comparison of Three Cohorts	Dramatic changes in life expectancy, women’s roles, the structure of the workforce, and pension systems have occurred in recent history all influencing the well-being of future retirees.  This paper uses U.S. data to focus on the retirement resources of persons aged 55-64. By comparing these resources for near retirees in 2004 to their counterparts in 1994 and 1984, this paper provides some indication of the preparedness of future aged relative to those who retired before them.  Preliminary results indicate that there are marked differences in potential retirement outcomes by educational attainment and race.  Notable changes have occurred with women’s pathways into retirement due to changes in patterns of market work.  Though few near retirees have purchased long-term care insurance, most near retirees could receive care from family members, so the extent of their exposure to risk is unclear.	Howard	 Iams	John	W. R. Phillips	Irena	 Dushi	Lionel	 Deang
2007	7	Determinants of Retirement in the U.S.	Retirement in America: Working Life Table Estimates for the Population over Age 50, by Sex and Race	Population-level analyses are sorely needed to document trends in labor force participation and gauge the increased demand for public and private pensions that will accompany population aging. Using data from the 1992-2002 Health and Retirement Study, we estimate a series of sex- and race- specific multistate working life tables for the population over age 50. We find that at age 50 men can expect to spend 46% of their remaining years working for pay and women can expect to spend just one-third. More than half of all men and women have left the labor force before ages 63 and 60, respectively, although about one-fifth of retirements are reversed. The non-working years are experienced differently across sex and race groups as well. Blacks overall spend proportionately more years disabled, and the rate of reentry from retirement is lowest for Black males. We discuss our findings with an eye toward the pension policy debate.	David	F. Warner	Mark	D. Hayward	Melissa	 Hardy
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	The Effects of Local and Extra-Local Neighborhood Conditions on White Mobility Decisions	We utilize data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, neighborhood data from four censuses, and rapidly developing techniques for spatial data analysis to provide a first exploration of the ways in which the racial composition of extra-local areas – areas surrounding the neighborhood of residence – affects mobility decisions of individual white householders. Results indicate that, net of the influence of other predictors of mobility, changes in the relative size of the non-anglo minority population in extra-local areas affects mobility decisions for homeowners and some other specific groups of white householders, but these additive effects are fairly modest. However, the effect of local minority populations on out-mobility among white householders does appear to be more pronounced if the neighborhood is surrounded by areas containing large and growing minority populations. These results provide unique evidence on previously untested aspects of theories of neighborhood change and individual behaviors that affect segregation.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Scott	J. South
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Black-White Segregation in Multiethnic Metropolis: How Does Multigroup Context Alter the Effect of Black-White Segregation for Blacks?	How do the residential dynamics change the nature and impact of racial residential segregation when the American residential landscape becomes increasingly diverse? Although the multigroup segregation method has been developed, its utility in substantive interpretation and hypothesis testing are underdeveloped. This paper first explores the interpretive meaning of multigroup measures of segregation, constructed using the 2000 census. The decomposed components of the multigroup segregation are compared with traditional pairwise measures. By examining three types of cities, we bring life to the abstract measures. We then examine the impact of black-white residential segregation on the income of blacks while controlling for measures of diversity and multigroup segregation of individuals' resident metropolitan areas. We test the hypothesis that the detrimental effect of black-white segregation on African Americans' income becomes weaker as the local population becomes more diverse using the quantile regression technique and the 5% PUMS 2000 data.	Lingxin	 Hao	Amy	 Lutz
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Disaggregating Trends in Racial Residential Segregation: Metropolitan, Micropolitan, and Non-Core Counties Compared	Previous research has focused on patterns of segregation in metropolitan cities and suburbs. In this paper, we examine sources of change in residential segregation between and within places in U.S. metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas, including micropolitan and non-core counties. We focus on black-white, Hispanic-white, and Hispanic-black trends in segregation using block data from the 1990 and 2000 Census Summary Files. By decomposing segregation into its spatial components, we can determine whether minority populations cluster within places, between places, or across higher-order spatial systems (e.g., metropolitan, nonmetropolitan, micropolitan, or rural areas). Place segregation is measured using the Theil index. Our analysis addresses whether the optimism implied by recent declines in neighborhood segregation in cities must be balanced by increases in segregation at other spatial scales.	Domenico	 Parisi	Daniel	T. Lichter	Steven	M. Grice
2007	8	Racial/Ethnic Segregation	Patterns and Trends in the Spatial Scale and Magnitude of Racial Residential Segregation, 1980-2000	In this paper, we use newly developed methods of measuring spatial segregation to investigate how racial residential segregation patterns in U.S. metropolitan areas have changed from 1980 to 2000 (Reardon et al., 2006; Reardon & O'Sullivan, 2004). In particular, we examine the relationships among the spatial scale of segregation and trends in segregation levels. By ‘scale’, we mean the granularity of residential patterns. We find that black-white segregation has declined, on average, only at the local level; macro-scale patterns of black-white segregation within metropolitan areas have changed little. We find that Hispanic-white and Asian-white segregation levels, in contrast, have increased at both micro- and macro-scales, suggesting patterns of localized immigration settlement and enclave formation.	Sean	F. Reardon	Barrett	A. Lee	Chad	R. Farrell	Stephen	 Matthews	David	 O'Sullivan	Glenn	 Firebaugh	Kendra	 Bischoff
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Reshaping the Post-Soviet Periphery: The Impact of Men’s Labor Migration on Women’s Lives and Aspirations in Rural Armenia	In this paper we use recent survey and qualitative data to examine the impact of men’s labor migration from rural Armenia to Russia on their wives’ economic conditions and activities, social networks, and proclivity to migrate. We find that households with labor migrants have considerably higher incomes than households without migrants and that this gap is wider in the poorer province. However, we find no difference in women’s own employment status and incomes. Households’ agricultural and consumer assets reflect the value of these assets in rural society and the presence/absence of adult males. Women with migrant husbands are found to have more interactions with other villagers, yet, at the same time, less financial dependence on them. While women with migrant husbands are significantly more optimistic about the material future of their households, they are, ceteris paribus, also more inclined to migrating out of their villages than women with non-migrant husbands.	Victor	 Agadjanian	Arusyak	 Sevoyan	Cecilia	 Menjivar
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Remittances and Changing Gender Power Relations in Recipient Households	This paper analyzes household expenditures strategies of male and female beneficiaries of remittances in the metropolitan area of Pereira, located in the coffee region of Colombia. The objective of the analysis is to study the role of migrants in redefining gender roles in their communities of origin through remittances. I compare expenditures profiles in six types of households, defined by their status as remittance beneficiaries, gender of the remitter, and gender of the household head. The differential patterns of expenditure are considered proxies for women’s empowerment at the household level. I argue that female beneficiaries expend more on human capital and living expenses than male beneficiaries. In the analysis I control for the presence of children, civil status, and the beneficiaries’ life cycle stage, among other variables.	Maria	 Aysa
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Migrant Social Capital: Effects of Thailand’s 1997 Economic Crisis and Post-Crisis Recovery	Employing longitudinal data from Thailand, we extend current knowledge of internal migration processes by analyzing changes in migration frequencies before, during, and after Thailand’s economic crisis of 1997. We replicate recent studies of cumulative causation by measuring frequency of trips, duration of time away, and level of network aggregation (village or household), to estimate a model of migration among men and women in Thailand during recent periods of national economic growth and recession. Building on our earlier work showing that migrant social capital differently affects men’s and women’s migration, this study evaluates year and occupational sex segregation effects. Expected findings are that return migration of men and women to villages of origin increased during the economic crisis. Although rural-urban migration decreased for both male and female migrants, within two years, it began to increase again, first affecting female migrants in the manufacturing industry and then male migrants in all occupations.	Sara	 Curran	Karen	 Brooks	Anita	 Rocha
2007	9	Gender and Migration	Who Arrives First? The Timing of Arrival among Immigrants in the Same Household	This paper focuses on differences in the timing of arrival among immigrants in the same household because earlier arriving immigrants may be able to accelerate the adaptation of later arrivals through the sharing of knowledge or scouting out of opportunities. Although U.S. immigration policy encourages family members, especially spouses, to immigrate together, it also allows closely related immigrants to enter the country at separate times. Using U.S. 2000 census data, we describe patterns of timing of arrivals among immigrants in the same household. Results show that over a third of husbands and wives arrive in different years and that the sequence is gendered, with men more often arriving before the women. These patterns differ by country of origin, and years of separation differ by family composition.	Hiromi	 Ishizawa	Gillian	 Stevens
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Family Size, Birth Order, and IQ	It is clear that birth order affects children’s outcomes along a number of dimensions, including education and earnings, although recent psychology literature provides mixed evidence of the effects of birth order on IQ. The evidence on the effect of family size in the economics literature is even more mixed, with inconclusive results on all outcomes. This paper uses a large dataset on the population of Norway and focuses on the effect of birth order and family size on IQ, an outcome not previously available in datasets of this magnitude. Because of the endogeneity of family size, we instrument for family size using twin births. We find a strong and significant effect of both birth order and family size on IQ.	Sandra	 Black	Paul	 Devereux	Kjell	 Salvanes
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Demographic Transitions and Children's Resources: Bonus or Divergence?	How do fertility transitions affect children’s resources? Existing perspectives provide two seemingly different answers: “Dilution” arguments focusing on family size predict a resource bonus, while “divergence” arguments focusing on family structure predict increased inequality. We argue that these two perspectives are complementary and reconcilable within an integrated framework. The proposed integration shows how changes in family size and structure jointly shape children’s resource levels and inequality. Failure to integrate these two perspectives can bias understanding of the magnitude or direction of the influences of fertility transitions. In particular, the resource bonus accruing to children depends not only on the quantum of fertility decline, but also on its locus and on accompanying changes in family structure. We illustrate with empirical data from Cameroon.	Parfait	 Eloundou-Enyegue	C.	Shannon  Stokes
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Is Gender Bias in Education Mediated by Sibling Configuration? Evidence from Egypt	In this paper, the Resource Dilution model of parental investments in children is tested using nationally representative survey data on Egyptian adolescents. I investigate the statistical associations between adolescent educational attainment and three characteristics of the sibling group (size, ordinal position, and gender composition), and their interactions with the respondent’s gender. Findings show that sibship size has a net negative association with educational attainment. Contrary to Resource Dilution evidence from Western settings, first-born children in Egypt are disadvantaged relative to their later-born peers. The presence of older sisters in one’s sibling group has a particularly strong positive effect on schooling, indicating that girls may be withheld from school to free up or generate resources for their younger siblings’ education. While gender remains among the strongest determinants of education, sibling configuration plays a large role in mediating its impact. Revisions to the Resource Dilution mechanisms linking family structure to adolescents’ gendered outcomes are offered in conclusion.	Rania	 Salem
2007	10	Family Size and Human Capital	Family Size, Children’s Cognitive Test Scores and Familial Interaction: U.S., 1997-2002	This research evaluates hypotheses derived from two prominent explanatory frameworks related to the well- known negative association between family size and children’s outcomes: the resource dilution and confluence models. Central to both models is the distribution of interpersonal resources, especially time children spend in interaction with parents and siblings. This research tests for potential resource dilution effects in larger families associated with differential time spent with parents and confluence effects associated with time spent with siblings on children’s scores on the Woodcock-Johnson Revised Letter-Word Identification test. Models are estimated using both cross-sectional and longitudinal fixed effects designs. Results from the cross-sectional analysis suggest important resource dilution effects associated with time parents are accessible to but not directly engaged with children.	John	 Sandberg	Patrick	 Rafail
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Who Cares for the Elderly? Intrafamily Resource Allocation and Migration in Mexico	This paper investigates the determinants of individual contributions from children to parents in terms of both physical and financial care and explores how the distribution of responsibility for the elderly parent across siblings affects international migration. I address these questions by estimating best response functions for individual time and financial contributions as well as migration as functions of total siblings' contributions of time and money to their elderly parents. I find that (1) individuals reduce their time and financial contributions in response to an increase in their siblings' contributions and (2) a decrease in siblings' total financial contribution and an increase in their total time contribution results in an increase in the probability that the individual will migrate to the U.S. These results suggest that siblings' contributions toward their parents are substitutes,  and individuals who feel more financially and less physically responsible for their parents are more likely to migrate.	Francisca	M. Antman
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Continuity in Intergenerational Support across Three Generations	Changes in the demography of U.S. families – increasing longevity, smaller families, and higher rates of women’s employment – raise new questions about who will care for older family members. This paper examines social support and transfers between parents and adult children. It poses three questions: How do the needs and resources of both generations affect the level of help that the younger generation provides parents? How and why do sisters and brothers differ in the help they provide to their parents? Is there continuity across generations in intergenerational care giving? We use data from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey (WLS), a fifty-year panel study of high school graduates of the class of 1957 and their siblings, the latter being a more socioeconomically diverse group. We consider socialization or “demonstration effects” and take account of both actual and potential exchange and reciprocity in family relationships.	Esther	M. Friedman	Judith	A. Seltzer
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Differences over Time in the Relationship between Family Disruptions and Support at Older Ages in Britain	Despite long-standing concerns that changes in family behaviour (such as divorce) may have had a detrimental effect on support at older ages, there is little research on this topic. Employing comparable data from the 1988 British Retirement and Retirement Plans Survey (RS) and the 2001/2 British Household Panel Study (BHPS) we examined variations over time in the relationship between family disruption (due to divorce, separation, and death) and support (e.g. co-residence, help to and from, and contact with, children) in early old age in Britain. We explored whether changes in support were due to differences in the mix of individual attributes associated with the propensity to give and receive support (e.g. the percentage experiencing divorce) or to changes in the strength of relationship between explanatory variables and support outcomes (e.g. the effects of divorce). Our findings suggest that the negative effect of family disruption on support appears to be weakening over time.	Karen	F. Glaser	Cecilia	 Tomassini	Rachel	 Stuchbury
2007	11	Intergenerational Transfers to the Elderly	Buying Out of Familial Obligation: The Tradeoff between Living with versus Financially Supporting Elderly Parents in Urban China	For Chinese families, co-residence with elderly parents is both a form of support and a moderator of financial support. Previous literature on the intergenerational support in Chinese societies has studied either co-residence or financial support, but not the joint nature of the two forms of support. Using a recent dataset (Study of Family Life in Urban China) collected in 1999 in three cities, Shanghai, Wuhan, and Xi’an, we examine whether or not children (especially sons) with high socioeconomic status buy out of fulfilling the obligation of living with parents by providing more financial support. We first perform the analyses by estimating between-family and within-family models. To account for the potential selection bias associated with co-residence, we further treat co-residence and financial transfer as joint outcomes by using endogenous switching regression models.	Haiyan	 Zhu
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	On the Momentum of Marriage Decline	Over the last several decades, first-marriage rates declined remarkably in the more developed regions, raising the proportion never-marrying at ages 45-49 to 8.5% on average. We analyze the future trends in the proportions never-marrying for 96 countries, of which 32 are in the more developed regions, 42 are in the less developed regions, and 22 are the least developed countries. In a way similar to the approach of population momentum, we assume that first-marriage rates stop declining instantaneously and remain constant over the next 35 years. Even under such an optimistic assumption, however, we find that on average the proportion never-marrying at ages 45-49 would still increase by more than threefold for countries in the more developed regions. Few countries and areas in the less developed regions would follow the trends in the more developed regions. And there is yet no sign of marriage decline in the least developed countries.	Nan	 Li	Vasantha	K. Kandiah
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	The Intrinsic Total Fertility Rate: A New Approach to Tempo-Adjusted Fertility	Various parameterised approaches have been developed to adjust the Period Total Fertility Rate (PTFR) for birth timing distortions. These tempo-adjusted Total Fertility Rates have been criticized and their interpretation is unclear. The PTFR can be considered as the product of a matrix of birth probabilities by age, parity and interval since last birth applied to a population composition matrix with the same characteristics. Our contention is that past impacts of changes in the timing of births are reflected in the current population composition matrix and it is this that distorts the PTFR. This distortion gradually disappears if a constant matrix of birth probabilities is applied across time. After about 25 years, the population composition matrix and the PTFR become constant. We refer to the final PTFR emerging from this process as the Intrinsic Total Fertility Rate. Using Australian data, we illustrate the benefits of this measure in interpreting fertility trends.	Peter	 McDonald	Rebecca	 Kippen
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	The Evolution of the Mortality Curve: Changes in the Age of Minimum Mortality	The shape of the age-specific mortality curve has long been viewed as constant: with very high mortality at both ends of the age range and with lower levels of mortality after childhood and before the beginning of old age. Demographers have tended to focus their analysis on the ages of high mortality and paid little attention to the age at minimum mortality; biologists, on the other hand see the age at minimum mortality as the point in the lifespan when the organism has successfully passed through development and becomes subject to the forces of mortality that eventually result in senescence. The age at minimum mortality has been dropping in recent decades in many countries of the world. We hypothesize that this earlier age of lowest mortality is connected to an earlier age of physical development or maturity that accompanies the epidemiological and nutritional revolutions that have resulted in longer life.	Eileen	 Crimmins	Greg	L. Drevenstedt	Caleb	E. Finch
2007	12	New Approaches in Formal Demography	Forecasting U.S. Mortality Using Cohort Smoking Index	In this paper, we introduce a recently established relationship between cohort smoking patterns and adult mortality into mortality projections for the United States. In particular, we incorporate a variable representing the intensity of smoking within a cohort into the original Lee-Carter model. By accounting for the striking variability in sex differentials in mortality, this variable enables us to introduce a common temporal trend of mortality change, rather than a separate trend for each sex. We project age-specific mortality rates for men and women in age group 40-85 between year 2003 and 2075 in the U.S. and demonstrate how the introduction of cohort influences affects mortality projections.	Haidong	 Wang	Sam	 Preston
2007	13	European Family Migration	Family Migration and Women's Labour Market Status in  Britain: The Effect of State Dependence and Geography	Numerous studies have shown that women’s labour market status is influenced by family migration. Thus, it has been shown that women who move long distances with their partners have lower wages, work shorter hours and are less likely to be employed in the labour market than otherwise equivalent women. Using longitudinal data from the British Household Panel Study (BHPS) we investigate two issues that have received relatively little attention in this literature. First, we explore the role of women’s employment status prior to moving, using random-effects dynamic probit models that allow us to model state dependence issues explicitly. Second, we also include variables relating to the geographical location of the movers. In particular, we test whether moving into urban destinations increases women’s subsequent employment rates and whether women working in geographically ubiquitous jobs are less likely to be out of work following family migration.	Paul	J. Boyle	Zhiqiang	 Feng	Vernon	 Gayle
2007	13	European Family Migration	The Dynamics of Working Couples' Activity Spaces	In Europe, most couples in their reproductive lives are faced with residential choices, which are influenced in part  by their family and occupational choices. Whether one or both couple members work outside their home, whether they have children or not, the territory defined by their place(s) of residence and place(s) of work results from an equation in terms of gender roles, distances, career strategy, etc.  Having collected the work and residential histories of both members of more than 1,500 couples born between 1930 and 1950, we present a paper that focuses both on applied research into the strategies of couples who relocate either their workplace or their home, and on methodological aspects of the modelling of territory dynamics. This paper forms part of a larger research program that aims to encompass a wider range of locations to which individuals are linked in the analysis of residential mobility.	Eva	 Lelièvre	Nicolas	 Robette
2007	13	European Family Migration	Distance to Parents and Geographical Mobility	We address the influence of parental proximity on residential mobility and migration of young and middle-aged adults. We investigate whether current proximity to the parents discourages geographical mobility, particularly in situations where the need for support or contact is greater; and which factors influence the probability of a move that either decreases or increases the distance to the parents. We use data from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study (NKPS) and Dutch register data. We estimate binary logistic regression models of the probability of moving, and multinomial logistic regression models to distinguish whether the move increased, decreased or left unchanged the distance between generations. Preliminary results from analyses of NKPS data show that parental proximity strongly decreases the likelihood of moving. Divorce and having an additional child enhance the probability of moves without a change in distance and of moves in the direction of parental home.	Francesca	 Michielin	Clara	H. Mulder
2007	13	European Family Migration	Professional Consequences of Couple Internal Migration: Evidence from France	Studies on the professional consequences of spatial mobility are largely individual-centered. Their implicit hypothesis is that the mobility decision is taken by the breadwinner partner. With increasing women labor force participation, such assumptions are less valid. It seems obvious that moving is a couple decision. This paper aims to analyze the professional consequences of this joint decision in terms of activity, job type, earnings and job satisfaction. We first estimate the probability that the couple moves outside the current area (“French department”) with a probit model on panel data, according to both partners’ characteristics. Secondly, we analyze the consequences of the couple migration. We find that migration is generally profitable for the couple, but not necessary for both partners. In particular, the woman may reduce her professional investment and activity, and the wage increase is greater for men.	Ariane	 Pailhe	Anne	 Solaz
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	The Role of Attitudes toward Risk in the Decision to Migrate	Geographic mobility plays a key role in the process of development in most low-income countries. This is especially true in Mexico, whose border with the U.S. has the largest flow of migrants in the contemporary world. Developing a good understanding of the socio-economic determinants of migration decisions has proved to be extremely difficult. This paper examines the role that attitudes toward risk play in the decision to migrate. It utilizes unprecedented longitudinal data on social, economic, and demographic outcomes from the Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS), which also includes migration histories and direct measures of people’s preferences—risk aversion among them. With these data, the paper tests directly whether people’s attitudes toward risk influence the decision to migrate and finds a (perhaps surprisingly) positive relation between financial risk aversion and willingness to migrate: The most financially risk averse seem to be the most willing to migrate.	Hector	 Conroy
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Remittances in the Context of HIV/AIDS in Africa: New Theory and Evidence from Western Kenya	Numerous studies focus on social ties that migrants maintain with their origin households and communities as determinants of remittance behavior. Absent are investigations of new, non-familial ties that migrants form in urban destinations and how these compete for migrants’ resources. In sub-Saharan Africa, male migrants often enter into nonmarital sexual partnerships that involve the financial exchange of money and gifts. Using both quantitative and qualitative data from urban Kenya, we find that financial transfers to sexual partners reduce remittances to rural households. We present additional evidence that serious nonmarital partners serve as substitutes for familial emotional support in the city, explaining much of the negative relationship between transfers and remittances. Financial transfers have been linked to risky sexual behavior. Thus, non-familial ties in urban Kenya may have short-term repercussions for rural families who are dependent on migrant remittances, as well as longer-term consequences for families whose migrant sons contract HIV.	Nancy	 Luke
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Longitudinal Analysis of the Impact of Migration on Household Wealth in Kanchanaburi Province, Thailand	The objective of this study is to examine the impact of migration and remittances on household wealth using data from a longitudinal study conducted in the Kanchanaburi province of Thailand. The Kanchanaburi province is of interest due to its varied economy that allows us to examine these relationships over time in five different types of communities. These communities include urban or semi-urban, rice growing, plantation, uplands, and mixed areas. The Kanchanaburi DSS is operated by the Institute for Population and Social Research (IPSR) in the Kanchanaburi province of Thailand. Panel data were collected from households, individuals and communities each year from 2000 to 2004. In each round, about 42,000 individuals were interviewed in about 12,000 households. Both multiple regression and random effects models are used to estimate the impact of migration and remittances on household wealth over a four-year period.	Kathy	 Ford	Aree	 Jampaklay	Aphichat	 Chamratrithirong
2007	14	Remittances and Risk in Internal Migration	Internal Migration, Remittances, and Community Development	This study seeks to evaluate the developmental consequences of internal migration and remittance flows for 22 migrant sending communities in Thailand. The paper first establishes a theoretical link between migration-remittance motivations and expected changes in the level and distribution of economic resources in sending communities. Emerging hypotheses are then tested on a multi-level, longitudinal, and prospective data set from 22 Thai communities. Quantitative analyses are supplemented with insights from fieldwork to evaluate how economic changes caused by migration and remittances alter the social structure of the community. The paper also attempts to determine how the changes caused by migration-remittance flows in a community affect future migration flows. Utilizing a computational modeling approach, long-term changes in the distribution of resources in a community due to migration-remittance flows, and the subsequent changes in the dynamics of migration are simulated.	Filiz	 Garip
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Gendered Migrants Networks and the Health of the Left Behind: Evidence from Indonesia	Recent research has begun to analyze the consequences of migration not merely on the health of migrants, but on the health and well-being of family members left behind in the migrant’s origin household or village. This paper addresses concerns over reverse causation between migration and health outcomes and endogenous selection into migration by employing a longitudinal, counterfactual framework. Preliminary findings suggest that internal migrant children reduce the likelihood of being in poor health in later years for elderly parents among the entire sample. In contrast, international migrant children appear to benefit only those elders in households with high migration propensity. These findings support three key assertions of an emerging theoretical framework on migration-health relationships: that migration benefits the left-behind, that these benefits may reflect selection based on preexisting family traits, and that the international migration process may be more subject to this sort of selection.	Bethany	 Everett	Randall	 Kuhn	Rachel	 Silvey
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Male Migration, Old-Age Support, and Marriage Outcomes of Women in Rural Bangladesh	This paper examines the effect of brother’s migration on the marriage patterns of sisters in a rural area of Bangladesh. It has been proposed that when sons are migrants, especially when accompanied by their spouses, parents become more willing to marry their daughters nearby to secure care for old-age. Such willingness arises because of a missing market for care. Using a rich dataset from a Demographic Surveillance System in Bangladesh, which contains 20 years of marriage and migration records, we find strong evidence that women with migrant brothers are more likely to marry someone from the same village and are also more likely to marry someone with lower education. While village endogamy is a rational response for providing increased care support to parents, marrying someone with lower human capital ensures that a woman with migrant brothers marries a man who is less likely to migrate himself.	Ali	E. Protik
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	Intergenerational Transfers between Older People and Their Migrant Children in Rural China: Strategic Investments, Strategic Returns	This investigation studied how older parents and their adult children in rural China strategically engaged in reciprocal transfers with each other. We asked whether downstream investments by parents enhance the ability of children to migrate and accumulate resources that could then be used to make upstream transfers to parents. Data derived from 1,180 parents aged 60+ who participated in 2001 and 2003 surveys of older people in rural Anhui Province, China. Parents reported about time and money transfers with 4,652 adult children. Random effects models revealed that older parents enabled their children to migrate by offering them childcare and financial support. Migrant children--particularly sons--reciprocated for their parents’ earlier economic contributions by providing them with greater upstream financial transfers and farm labor. Migrants and non-migrants reciprocated childcare equally. Results support a mutual-aid model of the rural Chinese family in which intergenerational transfers are reciprocal and multiple family needs are met.	Merril	 Silverstein	Zhen	 Cong	Shuzhuo	 Li
2007	15	Adult Children's Migration and the Wellbeing of Older Parents in International Perspective	A Comparative Study of Migrant Interactions with Elderly Parents in Rural Cambodia and Thailand	Internal migration in Southeast Asia raises questions about strains upon traditional systems of support for elders. While remittances to origin households can play a role in rural household economies, uncertainty remains regarding whether and under which circumstances children remit or maintain contact with aging parents. This paper examines  remittances and visits by adult children of rural elderly in two countries using data from 2004 SEC (Cambodia) and 1995 SWET (Thailand). Analyses considers what spatially dispersed children do to support parents; whether traits of parents; migrants; or households from which they originate enhance or detract from these expressions of intergenerational exchange; and how remittance, visits, and determinants vary across countries. Comparisons of conditions and characteristics of remittance and contact across Thai and Cambodian families allows for insights for refining notions of how social, economic, and cultural forces motivate provision of support to aging parents.	Zachary	 Zimmer	Kim	 Korinek	John	 Knodel	Napaporn	 Chayovan
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	The Changing Influence of China’s Family Planning Programme on Women’s Contraceptive Choices: Evidence from a Multilevel Analysis of the Recent UNFPA Reproductive Health Surveys	Historically, the family planning programme in China has been driven administratively with a strong emphasis on post partum IUD use after first birth and sterilization after any subsequent births. Following the ICPD recommendations, China began implementing a client-friendly informed choices approach to the delivery of family planning services, encouraging women or couples to be the prime decision makers of their methods of choice rather than service providers. Using data from the UNFPA reproductive health and family planning surveys conducted during September 2003 and November 2005, this paper applies multilevel modelling techniques to demonstrate the effect of changes in the family planning programme on women’s contraceptive decisions and behaviour in 30 selected counties covering eastern, central and western regions of China. The preliminary results show clear evidence of county-level effects, underscoring the influence of family planning workers in determining women’s choices to use IUD at parity one and sterilization at parity two.	James	 Brown	Bohua	 Li	Sabu	S.  Padmadas
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Does Policy Relaxation Increase Contraceptive Flexibility? Short-Acting Contraceptive Use in China	Contraceptive composition in China is characterized by dominant user of long-acting contraceptives, such as IUD and sterilization. Less than 10 percent of people use short-acting contraceptives. An important reason behind the composition is the state regulation on birth contraception and contraceptive use. In the mid-1990s, the Chinese government initiated a pilot program on quality of care, which now spreads over one third of the country. The core of the program is informed choice of contraception. The main research question of this paper is whether the policy relaxation increased the flexibility of contraceptive use. Specifically, it examines whether the policy change increased the use of short-acting contraceptives. Using data from 1997 and 2001 China Demographic and Family Planning Survey, we compared short-acting contraceptive users before and after the policy change. The results indicate that the policy change did not increase contraceptive flexibility, particularly in the rural areas.	Xingshan	 Cao
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Changing Family Planning Scenario in India: A Trend Analysis of Major States	Over the decades, there has been a substantial increase in contraceptive use in India. The direction, emphasis and strategies of the Family Welfare Programme have changed over time. However, meeting the contraceptive needs of considerable proportions of women and men and improving the quality of family planning services continue to be a challenge. The 1990s witnessed a growing recognition of this, and several innovative policy and programme initiatives have been launched to address these issues. This paper reviews and synthesises evidence from surveys and service statistics of the 1990s and thereafter on contraceptive use dynamics and tries to quantify the trends in accepting contraceptive method mix over the last decade. From the policy perspective viewpoint, this paper makes suggestions for areas that need further programme and research attention.	Saurav	 Dey
2007	16	Changing Family Planning Programs in Asia	Twenty Years of Field Worker Visits by FP Workers in Bangladesh: Do We Really Need Them?	In Bangladesh the National Family Planning Programme  introduced female workers in 1978 to provide doorstep services. A total of 24,000 female workers continued this service until 1998, when new policies were enacted, static clinics were set up and home visits were drastically curtailed. This analysis uses the national level data from the BDHS 2004 to investigate the effect of the new policies and evaluate the importance of female field workers after their  visits were reduced. Results show that for various methods of modern contraception, the home visits still remain a strong predictor of use of the method, even when other related covariates are controlled. We also find that in the newly defined administrative regions, Barisal and Sylhet, the performance in contraceptive use is significantly poor. This indicates that Bangladeshi women of reproductive age still benefit from doorstep services, and complete withdrawal of these services should be delayed.	Nashid	 Kamal	Masuda	 Mohsena
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Population, Land Use Change, and the Changing Fortunes of Migrant Settler Households in the Ecuadorian Amazon	The Northern Ecuadorian Amazon, the principal region of migrant colonization in Ecuador since the 1970s, has experienced major changes in population and land use. The closing of the frontier (as major areas become protected and off limits and large areas are titled to indigenous populations) and continuing population growth have led to fragmentation of plots.  This paper uses panel survey data on farm households for 1990-1999 to examine the implications for land use, increasing off-farm employment, and farm household incomes. We examine farm and off-farm incomes by size of plot, and estimate Gini coefficients for total household income as well as farm and off-farm incomes and land distribution. Decreasing household size from falling fertility and out-migration is found to be a major explanation for the lack of overall decline in household incomes despite plot fragmentation and falling market prices of major farm outputs.	Richard	 Bilsborrow	Alisson	F. Barbieri	Bolier	 Torres-Navarrete
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Population Growth and Agricultural Land Use in Two Agro-Ecological Zones of Ghana, 1960-2010	Multiplicative and mediating variables are combined with a demographic variable, in non-linear multiple regression models to assess the effect of population growth on agricultural land use in two agro-ecological zones of Ghana. The paper uses data from a retrospective household survey (conducted among 1,568 farmers in 504 households in 24 communities), population census reports of Ghana for 1960, 1970, 1984 and 2000, agricultural census data for 1992 and 2000 and a land suitability map. Predictions of cropped area required to meet anticipated population growth are computed for 2010, based on multiple regression models and projected populations. Required cropped area is matched with actual arable area that would be available, based on a land suitability analysis. Predictions show that three and two districts in the dry and derived savannah zones, respectively, would experience agricultural land shortfall. The rest of the districts would have agricultural land available to support future population growth.	Samuel	N.A. Codjoe
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Spatial Modeling of the Amazon Deforestation	The greatest challenge in establishing a function of socioeconomic development for an environmental degradation potential, as in the specific case of  deforestation, is in obtaining measures for a group of variables that give some indication of the dependent variable behavior in a the future. This paper aims to explore, in a spatial context, the variables that better explain the Amazon deforestation. We reach a parsimonious model, capable of showing the environmental degradation behavior of that area in the future. Based on the statistical exploration of the variables that are directly or indirectly involved in the process of Amazon deforestation, the main objective of this paper is to elaborate classic and spatial lineal models that establish functional relationships between the variables and the percentage of the deforested areas. The estimated models are intended for subsidizing the simulation of future scenerios, integrating socioeconomic variations and deforestation impact levels.	Ricardo	A. Garcia	Britaldo	 Soares-Filho
2007	19	Modeling Population and Environment	Demographic Effects of Major Hurricanes: An Analysis of Long-Term Neighborhood Change Following Big Storms of the 1990s	Much research has examined the social, psychological, and economic impacts of major natural disasters, but few have considered their demographic effects and fewer still have moved beyond specific case studies to consider how places, in general, recover demographically after catastrophe. In this study, we contribute to social understanding of natural disasters by investigating their demographic futures as well as their pasts and by doing so for multiple disasters. We focus on U.S. places hit by the costliest hurricanes of the early 1990s, specifically on areas receiving over a billion dollars worth of property damage. For these areas we merge localized storm data from the national HAZUS database with demographic data on individual census tracts to test and refine general propositions about how neighborhoods change after a major coastal disaster, paying particular attention to patterns and processes of power and vulnerability following the event, as communities struggle to rebuild.	Jeremy	 Pais	James	R. Elliott
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Partner Violence in Cambodia: Examining Tolerance and Incidence	This paper examines the relationship between experience of and tolerance for partner violence in Cambodia among ever-married women age 15-49. Controlling for socio-demographic variables, we compare the risk factors that  make women more likely to (1) report experience(s) of partner violence and (2) report high tolerance for partner violence. Current research on domestic violence discusses measures of tolerance as an indication of the social environment and a potential risk factor for incidence of domestic violence. Using data from the 2000 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS), we employ logistic regression to compare individual- and community-level risk factors for tolerance and experience of partner violence. Comparison of these two models illuminates the links between tolerance and incidence. We find that tolerance is not significantly related to experience of violence. Tolerance is generally predicted by women’s social capital, and incidence is more clearly related to socio-demographic and economic variables.	Maryann	 Bylander	Tricia	S. Ryan
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Contextual Explanations for Variations in the Effects of Women’s Status on Domestic Violence in Rural Uttar Pradesh, India	This work-in-progress examines the effect of women’s status on domestic violence in rural Uttar Pradesh, India, using merged village- and individual-level DHS datasets. I address two main questions: does higher status protect women from experiencing marital violence? And how might village-level social organization, such as collective efficacy, socioeconomic status, and norms of tolerance toward violence, contribute to variation in domestic abuse across villages and variation in the relationship between women's status and violence? Preliminary results suggest that the effects of status depend on the dimension measured: individual-level women’s status related to the domestic sphere (decision-making autonomy and freedom of movement) is protective against violence while status related to the outside world (working and exposure to media) puts women at greater risk of abuse. Part two will apply multi-level modeling to analyze how village-level factors may condition the impact of these individual-level effects.	Elizabeth	A. Mogford
2007	20	Determinants of Domestic Violence	Women’s Acceptance of Intimate Partner Violence within Marriage: Qualitative Perspectives from Rural Bangladesh	While violence against women by husbands and male partners occurs throughout the world, the proportions of women who report experiencing such violence, and the proportions of men and women who say it is sometimes justified, vary substantially among societies and subpopulations—or, more precisely, the proportions who say so in surveys vary. This paper uses data from 110 in-depth interviews and 16 small group discussions to explore the psycho-social underpinnings of a 2002 survey finding that an extremely high proportion of women believe it is acceptable for husbands to use violence against their wives. The qualitative findings suggest that women may view intimate partner violence as a violation of their human rights even though they have resigned themselves to accept it. The authors conclude by raising questions regarding the meaning of responses to commonly used questions intended to measure women’s attitudes regarding intimate partner violence, and discussing policy implications.	Sidney	Ruth  Schuler	Farzana	 Islam
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	School Characteristics, Family Background, and Variation in the Gender Gap in College Graduation among African Americans	African Americans experience large and growing gender differences in educational attainment. In this paper I examine variation in the gender gap by characteristics of schools that students attend and their family background. Qualitative work provides reason to expect gender gaps across the socioeconomic spectrum, but possibly larger ones among more disadvantaged students. Using data from the National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS:88), I find that differences in college graduation between males and female students are more sensitive to school context than to family background. The gaps tend to be larger in more segregated schools and those in urban areas. In addition, male students report relatively worse teacher treatment of students in urban areas, while the grade point averages of male students at the top of the distribution are especially low in more segregated schools. I discuss potential explanations for those patterns and implications for future research into educational gender gaps.	Andrew	 Clarkwest
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Social Segregation and Academic Achievement in State-Run Elementary Schools in the Municipality of Campinas, Brazil	Space is not solely a reflection of social inequality; the neighborhoods also work to reinforce the advantages or disadvantages associated with one’s social class. However, the study of how neighborhoods affect their residents has only recently entered the debate on urban poverty in Latin America. We use 2000 data from the Brazilian population census, school census, and the state of São Paulo’s educational evaluation system to analyze the relationship between school infrastructure, school academic achievement, and the neighborhoods in which these schools are located. Our analyses indicate that state-run elementary schools located in areas of concentrated poverty have lower academic achievement in Math and Portuguese than those in non-segregated and affluent areas of the city, even though these schools are all administered by the same government body. We end with a discussion of the relationship between Brazilian education policy and its influence on the spatial differences in São Paulo State.	José	Marcos  Cunha	José	Roberto  Rus Perez	Maren	Andrea  Jimenez	Cibele	 Yahn de Andrade
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Effects of Socioeconomic Status of School Population on Student Math Achievement Growth	This study examines the effects of socioeconomic status of student population on student math achievement gains between 10th and 12th grades. Focusing on some methodological and conceptual issues raised in previous studies, this study addresses the following research questions: (1) does the socioeconomic composition of schools affect student gains in standardized math test scores above and beyond the family- and individual-level effects? (2) If so, what are the underlying mechanisms through which the social composition of schools affects student achievement? (3) Are students from specific backgrounds more affected than others by the composition of student population in a school? Using data drawn from ELS:2002 and employing the HLM, this study reveals the importance of compositional context of student population in a school not only in determining how much a student improves in math tests between 10th and 12th grades, but also in shaping racial gaps in math achievement growth.	Gyehoon	 Oh
2007	21	Segregation and School Outcomes	Does Segregation Create Winners and Losers? Education and Spatial Segregation on the Basis of Income and Race	This study examines the relationship between spatial segregation on the basis of income and race groups and educational attainment. Data are drawn from 1990 Census Microdata, the October Current Population Survey, and tract-level data from the 1990 Census summary tape files. The results from multilevel modeling indicate that black and poor respondents who resided in more black/white and poor/nonpoor segregated metropolitan areas, respectively, were more likely to drop out of high school and less likely to then continue on into college. But white and nonpoor respondents in more segregated areas were not more likely to graduate from high school or go on to college. Results are unchanged by the use of spatial-based segregation measures or instrumental variable estimation.	Lincoln	 Quillian
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Border Enforcement as a Deterrent of Illegal Immigration: Evidence from Return Mexican Migrants	Over the past several decades, border enforcement has intensified with the intent to reduce unauthorized Mexican immigration into the United States. While previous studies, e.g. Kossoudji (1992), document the persistence of undocumented Mexican immigrants trying to cross the border, past research has been restricted to small return migrant samples pre-IRCA. In this study, we examine how border enforcement deters repeated crossing attempts. However, unlike earlier studies, we are able to use a large representative sample of undocumented Mexican migrants interviewed upon their return to Mexico over the 1993-2003 decade – a period of time during which a variety of border enforcement operations were implemented. We first estimate the probability of crossing based upon previous apprehensions or changes in border enforcement intensity. Subsequently, using sample selection and count models, we examine how border enforcement, along with wage gains and migration costs, influence the number of crossing attempts.	Catalina	 Amuedo-Dorantes	Cynthia	 Bansak
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Temporary Guestworker Programs and the Displacement of Undocumented Migrant Workers in Spanish Agriculture	Following its transition from a labor-exporting to a labor-importing country, Spain has enacted bi-national agreements with a number of countries in an effort to secure labor for key industries. In addition to meeting labor market needs, these programs have been part of the ongoing effort to control undocumented migration into the region. Advocates assert that guestworkers are simple substitutes for undocumented workers; however, the case of Spain’s fruit, vegetable, and horticultural (FVH) sector shows that the answer is not so simple. Demographic analysis evidences that in developing these programs Spanish growers have preferenced Eastern European women over the North African men who have characterized the undocumented and regularized agricultural workers upon which the industry has depended. Although guestworker programs have helped stabilize the FVH sector and reduce Spain’s significant underground economy, undocumented workers are not necessarily deterred by guestworkers but often displaced by them—creating new problems while solving old ones.	Jennifer	 Blakeslee
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Immigration in Italy: The Great Emergency	Like most South European countries, Italy has experienced  a strong immigration pressure for several years, coming from the South and from the East. A great part of these flows is illegal immigration from North Africa, Tunisia, Morocco and Libya. These countries are becoming meeting points of huge masses of people who escape from sub-Saharan Africa, because of wars, epidemics, persecutions, etc. Because of the intensification of such flows, Italy has become a country with a net migration rate of 5 x 1000. At the present rate, in ten years’ time, Italy will have 7-8-million immigrants out of about 58 million inhabitants. These facts are examined in this paper, as well as the problems connected to immigrants’ integration, and possible strategies of cooperation with the countries of origin of the illegal flows.	Giuseppe	G. De Bartolo
2007	22	Undocumented Migrants	Day Labor and the Search for Work--Findings from the National Day Labor Survey	The day labor population is growing not only in size, but also in prominence in media and policy circles. Yet little is known about this population aside from metro-area studies or from field interviews. This study utilizes the first nationally representative survey of day laborers, the National Day Labor Study, to consider several questions. This study examines what are the most important factors affecting weekly earnings: hourly wages, hours worked per day, or number of days worked? Next this study compares day laborer earnings by undocumented status to consider how undocumented day laborers would fare in the formal labor market if they had the legal right to do so. The results suggest that number of days worked is the most important variable affecting weekly earnings, and that undocumented status is not associated with differences in earnings between legal and undocumented day laborers.	Arturo	 Gonzalez	Abel	 Valenzuala
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	“Bad Jobs” and Health: Do Negative Work Exposures Work Together?	Employment is central to most adults’ lives, providing economic sustenance as well as self-esteem and identity, but some aspects of jobs are harmful. Researchers have explored long-standing and emerging hazards at work, but have focused on the health consequences of one negative aspect of work at a time. Attached to any job are a bundle of exposures, negative and positive, that may act together to influence health. In addition, bad jobs may cluster over the career for some people, particularly those with lower education or fewer skills, while more socioeconomically advantaged individuals may have limited or no exposure. Accumulation of work exposures may help explain the SEP, work and health connection but has received relatively little attention. This study will begin to explore the connections by comparing two large cohort samples and using a variety of methods to examine career exposures and health outcomes over the life course.	Sarah	A. Burgard
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	A Dynamic Approach of SES Mortality Differentials: Recent Evidences on the Link between Mortality and Occupational Careers in France	This new study goes beyond the well-established correlation between mortality differentials and occupational status, to focus on the impact of occupational careers on mortality risks. It shows heterogeneity in the mortality risks in the early 2000s within occupational classes, strongly related to the type of occupational moves experienced between 1990 and 1999.    For men, the mortality risks of movers are between the risks in the class they left and in the class they joined. For women, downward occupational moves, or becoming inactive, are associated with mortality risks higher than in the class they left and often higher than in the class they join; upward mobility is not correlated with mortality, and becoming active reduces risks. Mortality heterogeneity within occupational classes is often linked to past professional mobility and this correlation has been reinforced with time. The study confirms that a dynamic approach helps explain social differences.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Caroline	 Laborde
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	Does the Effect of Income on Health Still Increase with Child Age?	Previous research suggests that income becomes a more important determinant of child health as children age, but it is not known whether this is due to more frequent health insults or inferior access to care. Using data from the NHIS, this paper investigates the effect of expansions of public health insurance on the relationship between income, health, and child age, in order to assess the importance of access to care. Federally mandated expansions of public health insurance were phased in gradually over the past 20 years and covered progressively older children. State-to-state variation in the timing of the expansions is used to identify their effects. We show that these mandates reduced the overall relationship between income and child health, and the extent to which the relationship strengthens with child age. In 2001-2005, the relationship between income and health is the same for the youngest and oldest children.	Janet	 Currie	Wanchuan	 Lin
2007	23	Explaining the SES-Health Gradient	The Evolution of the Schooling-Smoking Gradient	We explore how the schooling-smoking gradient has evolved over time. Using data from 11 Gallup Surveys conducted between 1954 and 1999, we find that the schooling-smoking gradient first emerged in tandem with a schooling-information gradient. As early as 1957, a schooling-information gradient developed, with 62 percent of college graduates agreeing that smoking was a cause of lung cancer, compared to only 46 percent of those with less than a college degree. After the mid-1970s, the schooling-information gradient began to flatten but the schooling-smoking gradient did not. To further explore patterns of smoking behavior, we next econometrically analyze data on individual life-course smoking histories from retrospective information available in six cycles of the Tobacco Use Supplements to the Current Population Survey (TUS-CPS). With these data we estimate discrete-time hazard models of smoking initiation and cessation as functions of schooling, measures of the health information environment, and other control variables.	Donald	 Kenkel	Alan	 Mathios
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	The Declining Multiple Race Population of the United States: The American Community Survey, 2000 to 2005	The biggest change in the federal measurement of race occurred in 2000. The Office of Management and Budget ruled that the Census must allow persons to identify simultaneously with more than one of five major races: white, black, American Indian, Asian or Hawaiian. In 2000, one American in 40 identified with two or more races: 2.5 percent.  Demographers predicted the multiple-race population would grow rapidly because of increasing racial diversity, more interracial marriage and the prominence of multiple-race persons.  The American Community Survey annually asks the racial questions used in 2000. Surprisingly, there has been a consistent decline in multiple race identification. In 2005, one American in 53 identified with multiple races: 1.9 percent. This paper describes changes in racial identification and emphasizes that the driving force behind changes in the reporting of race is the sharp increase in the percentage of Hispanics who use a Spanish term for their race.	Ren	 Farley
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	A Practical Approach to Using Multiple-Race Response Data: A Bridging Method for Public-Use Microdata	Revised federal policies require that multiple-race responses be allowed in all federal data collection efforts, but many researchers find the multitude of race categories and variables very difficult to use. Important comparability issues also interfere with using multiple-race data in analyses of multiple datasets and/or multiple points in time. These difficulties have, in effect, discouraged the use of the more nuanced new data on race. We present a practical method for incorporating multiple-race respondents into analyses that use public-use Microdata. We extend prior work by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) in which they use multiple-race respondents’ preferred single race and other characteristics to develop a model predicting preferred single race (if forced to choose). In this paper, we apply the NCHS-generated regression coefficients to public-use Microdata with limited geographic information. We include documentation and dissemination tools for this practical and preferable method of including multiple-race respondents in analyses.	Carolyn	A. Liebler	Andrew	 Halpern-Manners
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	Estimating the Effects of Parental Characteristics on the Identities of Multiracial Children	This paper estimates the effects of education and other parental characteristics on the relative likelihood that  children will be assigned a multiracial identity. The analysis uses two sources of data. One is the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey and the other is the public use version of the 2000 decennial microdata file. These two files were selected because they offer complementary strengths and off setting weaknesses. The PUMS census data is a very large file from a questionnaire-based survey with little control over who completes the instrument. The ECLS data is a much smaller data base personal interviews and ostensibly it is more accurate than the PUMS data. While these two sources of information display roughly comparable results, the analyses of these data also show a striking pattern of divergent, even contradictory results.	C.	Matthew  Snipp	Candy	M. Ku
2007	24	Challenges of Multiracial Measurement	Will “Multiracial” Survive to the Next Generation? The Racial Classification of Children of Multiracial Parents	This paper explores how likely multiple-race classification, and thus multiracial identity, will be transmitted from parents to children. Using 5% PUMS file of the 2000 U.S. Census, I examine the likelihood of a multiracial identity for children in “traditional” interracial families (two single-race parents) compared to families where at least one parent is multiracial. The pooled analyses show that multiracial classification is most likely when two multiple-race parents are present. I then stratified the sample among households where one parent is White, Black, or Asian. In general, presence of a multiracial parent increases the likelihood of multiracial classification when the multiracial parent does  not “share” a race with their single-race spouse, but this tendency varies depending on the racial composition of the household. Overall, the results suggest that multiracial identity may be passed on to the next generation but mostly in contexts of heightened racial difference.	Jenifer	 Bratter
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Economic Incentives and Foster Child Adoption	In 1998, over 286,000 children entered the foster care system. Many of these children were reunited with biological parents, or quickly adopted. However, a significant number faced long-term foster care, some of whom were eventually adopted by their long-term foster parents. A foster parent’s decision to adopt a foster child carries significant economic consequences—forfeiting foster care subsidies and assuming responsibility for medical and educational expenses, to name a few. Since 1980, states began offering adoption subsidies to offset some of these expenses, effectively lowering the cost of adoption. This paper  presents empirical evidence on the role of economic incentives in a foster parent’s decision about when, or if, to adopt a foster child. We find that lowering the cost of adoption increases adoptions overall, particularly among children with the lowest adoption rates. These children tend to be older, have behavioral problems, and live with single foster parents or with relatives.	Laura	M. Argys	Brian	 Duncan
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	When Children Have Two Mothers: The Antecedents and Consequences of Adolescents' Relationships with Nonresident Mothers, Stepmothers, and Resident Fathers	Using data from a sample of 294 adolescents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health who live with a biological father and have both a resident stepmother and a nonresident biological mother, this study examines the prevalence, antecedents, and consequences of adolescents’ closeness to each of their parents. Findings demonstrate that adolescents vary in their likelihood of having close relationships to resident fathers, resident stepmothers, and nonresident biological mothers, but when they can do so, they appear to benefit. Close relationships with both resident fathers and nonresident mothers are associated with fewer adolescent internalizing and externalizing problems, with ties to resident fathers being particularly consequential. Closeness to resident stepmothers, however, is unrelated to these two outcomes.	Valarie	 King
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Stepchildren Adopted by Their Stepparents: Where Do They Fit?	Stepchild adoption is the most common form of adoption in the United States. Very little is known about the circumstances under which stepchildren are adopted by their stepparents and how they fare relative to other children. This study draws upon the 2002 National Survey of America’s Families and investigates the sociodemographic characteristics and well-being of adopted stepchildren. Adopted stepchildren in married parent households are compared to children with two married biological parents, two married adoptive parents, and children with one married biological parent and one (non-adoptive) stepparent. Preliminary results indicate that adopted stepchildren have an increased risk of negative outcomes in the area of behavior and emotional problems. Results indicating that adopted stepchildren are most similar to children with two adoptive parents as opposed to one biological parent and one stepparent suggest that researchers need to be cautious about treating adopted stepchildren as stepchildren.	Susan	D. Stewart
2007	25	Child Wellbeing in Nontraditional Households	Mortality, Mobility and Schooling Outcomes among Orphans: Evidence from Malawi	This study investigates the impacts of parental death on children’s survival risks and migration behaviors, as well as schooling outcomes, by using panel data from Malawi, which has the eighth-highest HIV infection rate in the world. A number of studies have analyzed the association between parental death and children’s school enrollment, but very few have considered mortality and mobility of orphans. Empirical results show that maternal orphans, as well as double orphans, tend to face higher survival risks and lower schooling outcomes than paternal and non-orphans. This is especially so for boys. Similarly, maternal and double orphans tend to move to other households more frequently. Compared to adolescent orphans, the impact on younger orphans is more muted, suggesting the possibility that free primary education policies may have mitigated shocks of parental death. These empirical results are robust to sample  attrition due to mortality and mobility.	Mika	 Ueyama
2007	26	Union Formation	The Role of Religion in the Family Formation Processes of Young Adults	This paper examines the role of religious beliefs and behavior in adolescence in shaping subsequent family formation choices. Data are drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. We explore the role of three dimensions of religious life—affiliation, attendance, and religious fervor, both singly and in combination for the transition to either marriage or cohabitation. We find that while each dimension of religiosity strongly predicts subsequent union formation, it is the particular combination of these dimensions that is especially important for understanding the likelihood of cohabiting. Given that over a third of religiously inclined adolescents end up cohabiting, we explore whether religion affects patterns of subsequent cohabitation. Modest evidence exists that religious adolescents are likely to have shorter cohabitation spells that end up in marriage.	David	 Eggebeen	Jeff	 Dew
2007	26	Union Formation	Kin Connection: The Association between Parental Kin Involvement while Growing Up and Union Formation in Adulthood	Substantial research has explored race-ethnic variation in union formation focusing on the availability of marriageable men, earnings, and the stability of employment. Although the findings from this body of work clearly demonstrate the importance of these factors, they also suggest that other factors must contribute to this variation. Drawing on a diverse body of ethnographic and quantitative research we investigate a new, non-economic factor that might help to explain race-ethnic variation in the formation of stable unions: the kinship group. To explore this possible connection, we examine the influence of parental kin involvement experienced during childhood and adolescence on adult union formation using the first and third waves of the National Survey of Families and Households. We find that kin involvement in the family of origin is associated with marriage patterns later in the life course and that this association varies by race.	Kelly	 Raley	Charles	E. Stokes
2007	26	Union Formation	Children and the Union Formation Process: Using the NLSY79 to Examine Relationship Status for Men and Women over the Life Course	Marriage and parenthood in the U.S. have become increasingly decoupled during the 20th century, making children an active part of adult lives not only after marriage but also throughout the union formation process. However, the effect of children may differ significantly for men and women, largely due to the residential status of children. This paper investigates the role of children in union formation processes, focusing on the gender differences associated with the effect of children on the types of unions formed over the life course.     Data from NLSY 1979 (1979-2004) are used to estimate a series of multinomial logit approximations of event history models to determine the odds of entering a specific relationship type for each year of a respondent’s life. Results show the effect of children is similar in direction for both men and women, but is stronger for men even when child’s residential status is taken into account.	Carrie	E. Spearin
2007	26	Union Formation	Desperation or Desire? The Role of Risk Aversion in Marriage	The effect of an individual’s risk aversion on time to marriage is examined using survival analysis. The financial risk aversion measure is based on a series of hypothetical gambles over family income that were offered to respondents of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. A search model predicts that the more risk averse the individual, the shorter the time to first marriage. The estimates support the theory, indicating that risk aversion significantly affects time to marriage, with more risk averse respondents marrying sooner than their more risk loving counterparts. Within-family analyses using sibling data reveal a similar pattern. In addition, the effect of risk aversion on time to marriage is larger in magnitude and more statistically significant for men. One possible explanation for the different results between the sexes is that women value risk aversion as a desirable trait in potential mates.	Christy	 Spivey
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Is Cohabitation Bad for Children? Assessing the Causal Impact of Legal Marriage on Child Outcomes Using a Siblings Analysis	This paper examines children who live with both biological parents and analyzes whether parental marriage confers educational advantages to children relative to cohabitation. Cohabitation is more common in Sweden, and few studies have analyzed whether outcomes differ by parents' marital status. We control for the self-selection of marriage by estimating family fixed effects. Since siblings differ in age and over half of Swedish children are born to cohabiting parents who may or may not eventually marry, siblings will differ in the fraction of childhood lived with cohabiting and married parents. We use Swedish register data on over 100,000 full siblings born 1972 – 1980 and measure children’s educational outcomes by grade point averages (GPA) at age 16. Preliminary results indicate that children born to cohabiting unions have lower educational outcomes without controlling for family fixed effects. Future empirical results will determine whether legal marriage confers educational advantage.	Donna	K. Ginther	Marianne	 Sundström
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Mothers, Fathers, and the Link between Adolescent Family Experiences and the Transition to Adulthood	Using new data from the National Survey of Families and Households, we examine the influence of family life on children’s academic achievement, substance use, and early family formation and dissolution. We focus on the role of mothers’ and fathers’ parenting and relationships with children to assess the link between family structure and parental conflict in adolescence and subsequent transitions to adulthood. We investigate the independent influences of mothers and fathers, as well as inconsistencies in parenting. Our preliminary analysis indicates that adolescents who are exposed to conflict experience weaker relationships with parents and more harsh discipline. We investigate contrasts between behaviors and bonds of mothers and fathers and the conditioning effect of conflict on parents’ influence over children. While past work shows the importance of families, identifying the ways in which adolescent experiences in families are linked to young adult outcomes provides insight into how family influences extend into adulthood.	Ann	 Meier	Kelly	 Musick	Larry	 Bumpass
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Effects of Early Life Nutrition and Poverty on School Attendance and Completed Schooling of the Vietnamese Adolescents	The most controversial conclusions focus on the causation that poor nutrition in childhood, especially in the first two yeas of life leads to delay in primary school enrollment,  repeated grades, impaired cognitive development, and negative school outcomes (Glewwe et al. 2001, Daniels and Adair 2004).   This paper discusses the effects of middle childhood nutrition status and level of household poverty on school attendance and completed schooling using an individual-based subsample of 1,517 children aged 15 to 17 in 1998 from the VNLSS of 1992-93 and 1997-98. Results from multivariate analysis reconfirm that parental education still remains the most important determinant of school attendance and educational attainment. The level of household poverty and stunting at middle childhood have significant effects on probability of school attendance and educational achievement. However, these effects lose statistical significance when the household poverty level is controlled in the model.	Phuong	L. Nguyen
2007	27	Events in Early Childhood and the Transition to Adulthood	Childhood Family Structure History: Links to Relationship Turbulence and Early Union Formation in the Transition to Young Adulthood	This project examines the intergenerational link between childhood family structure history and relationship turbulence and early union formation during the transition to adulthood. The study contributes to the existing research base by taking a longitudinal, intergenerational approach to understand how parents’ union formation and dissolution behaviors ultimately affect their children’s own early union formation behaviors. The proposed study investigates: 1) which dimensions of family structure turbulence are most predictive of children’s later relationship patterns; 2) how childhood family structure turbulence influences young adults’ own relationship turbulence and early union formation; and 3) how the association between family turbulence and young adulthood relationship turbulence and union formation may differ by subgroups. The project uses data from three waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, which includes detailed information on the respondents’ parents’ relationship histories as well as relationships the respondents themselves formed in their adolescent and young adult years.	Suzanne	 Ryan	Kerry	 Franzetta	Erin	 Schelar
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	The Path to Replacement Fertility in Egypt: Acceptance, Preference and Achievement	This paper uses data from the 2004 Stalled Fertility Transition survey, a follow-up to the 2003 Egypt Interim DHS, to investigate obstacles to achieving replacement fertility. The analysis adopts a framework with the acronym APA: Acceptance of a two-child ideal, Preference for that ideal, and Achievement of preference, positing a hierarchy among the three and hypothesizing that each depends on a set of factors, including gender stratification, economic expectations, perception of children’s costs and benefits, and the costs of fertility regulation. The results indicate that son preference, gender attitudes, and optimistic economic expectations are major obstacles to the acceptance of the two-child family. Given acceptance, son preference, perception of many benefits for children, and fear of contraceptive side effects are associated with low preference for two children. Given preference, women from better socioeconomic strata and women with weaker son preference are more likely to achieve the ideal of two children.	Laila	 El-Zeini
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Risk Preferences and the Timing of Marriage and Childbearing	In this paper, I examine the role that risk aversion plays in women’s choices regarding marriage timing and fertility timing. I use survey questions in the PSID designed to measure risk aversion to address the following questions: (1) Do women who are highly risk averse marry earlier in life to control for the risk of not finding an acceptable mate? (2) What effect do risk preferences have on fertility timing? I find evidence that measured risk preferences significantly affect women’s marriage timing. In addition, risk preferences have an independent effect on fertility timing, and that this effect varies by age, marital status, and education. These findings may have broader implications. Early first marriages are more likely to lead to divorce. Early first births are often associated with negative child outcomes, while excessive delay of first births could lead to permanent infertility. Risk preferences may therefore have real effects on well-being.	Lucie	 Schmidt
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Stage of Change Theory and the Practice of Female Genital Cutting: Research Findings from Senegal and the Gambia	Female genital cutting (FGC) involves the partial or complete removal of the external genitalia, and affects an estimated 132 million women worldwide. Despite decades of intervention efforts, scholarly consensus finds that there has been greater success at raising awareness of adverse health consequences than in eliminating the practice, motivating interest in theoretical models of behavior change. Drawing on extensive qualitative data collected in Senegambia, the research reported here explores whether and how the “Stage of Change” model (aka Transtheoretical Model) can be applied to FGC. Our findings suggest that individual readiness to change is a complex construct, simultaneously capturing behavior, motivation, and features of the environment in which the decision is being made. Consequently stages identified in this research reflect the multidimensional nature of readiness to change the practice of FGC. Limitations of this model as applied to FGC and its utility in quantitative population research will be discussed.	Bettina	 Shell-Duncan	Ylva	 Hernlund
2007	28	Intention and Behavior in Fertility and Reproductive Health	Fertility in Times of Crisis: The Case of the AIDS Epidemic	Despite the extent of the AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa, one of the remaining regions with high actual and desired fertility, little is known about how it influences fertility preferences. However, as the epidemic matures, earlier infections are felt, and HIV testing spreads, there is reason to believe that fertility intentions might change considerably. This paper uses mixed methods to explore this relationship. Specifically, I draw on longitudinal data and in-depth interviews from rural Malawi to investigate how learning one’s HIV status alters childbearing intentions. Particular attention is paid to how AIDS-related changes in fertility preferences differ by sex and across the reproductive life course and how such changes are mitigated by local knowledge about antiretroviral medicines. Identifying the size and nature of these changes will be critical for anticipating the demographic and epidemiological future of the region as well as the specific reproductive health requirements created by the disease.	Sara	 Yeatman
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	The Quantum and Tempo of Life-Cycle Events	This study develops and applies a general framework for the analysis of the period quantum and tempo of life-cycle events, extending methods developed previously by the authors. The existence of tempo distortions is demonstrated in selected period quantum measures such as the total fertility rate and in period tempo measures such as life expectancy. A tempo distortion is defined as an inflation or deflation of a period quantum or tempo indicator of a life-cycle event, such as birth, marriage, or death, that results from a rise or fall in the mean age at which the event occurs. Period measures derived from life tables are also found to be subject to tempo distortions. Methods to remove these tempo distortions are then developed and applied.	John	 Bongaarts	Griffith	 Feeney
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	A “Lineage” Matrix Population Model of the Rendille of Northern Kenya	The Rendille tribe of Northern Kenya is an “age-group society” in which cohorts of similarly aged males known as “age sets” are organized along periodic lines of descent. This paper develops a matrix population model that reveals the genealogical dynamics inherent in the Rendille social organization. The rules governing marriage as they relate to lineage considerations substantially reduce the size and the growth rate of the population; they also induce periodicity in the demographics and dramatically favour one of the age-set lines. More generally, the analysis suggests that matrix population modeling is a powerful tool for analyzing the social dynamics of age-group societies.	Merwan	H. Engineer	Ming	 Kang
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	Health, Survival and Consumption over the Life Cycle: An Optimal Control Approach	In recent years most industrialized countries have allocated increasing shares of their GDP to health, while at the same time, life expectancy has continued to increase. The ongoing debate in health economics is on whether too much is spend on health care. In this paper we offer a framework that allows us to determine how a social planner as opposed to an individual allocates resources to consumption versus health investment over the life cycle, assuming that health investment positively affects longevity. By introducing age as a second dynamic variable in addition to time, we are able to study the age patterns of the optimal health investment and consumption paths as endogenously determined by the population structure and age-specific productivity. Applying the concept of the willingness to pay for mortality reductions, we derive the social versus private value of life.	Michael	 Kuhn	Alexia	 Fuernkranz-Prskawetz	Stefan	 Wrzaczek	Gustav	 Feichtinger
2007	29	Mathematical Demography	On Fisher’s Reproductive Value and Lotka’s Stable Population	As Caswell (2001) states, Reproductive Value (RV) as presented in Fisher’s (1930) book is an obscure concept. Fortunately, Crow (2002) found the paper in which Fisher (1927) originally introduced RV, and he noted one important clarification: the assumption of ascribing the value of unity to newborns is not intended to be an absolute definition. Crow’s disclosure is of importance because it implies that RV, stable equivalent, and population momentum are only different faces of the same demographic tool. (I prove this statement in this paper). Furthermore, one letter from Lotka (1927) to Fisher’s editor explains that all points made in Fisher's paper were already present in his stable population theory. I revisit the original assumptions stated by Lotka, how they were present in Fisher’s work, and how can they help us to avoid confusions and misinterpretations of RV, stable equivalent, and population momentum.	Carlos	 Galindo
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Determinants of Support among Older People: A Comparative Study of Costa Rica, Spain and England	Global population ageing has led to considerable disquiet about future support for frail older people; however, the determinants are poorly understood. Our study compares Costa Rica, Spain and England because they provide an opportunity to compare family support across cultures that have all experienced similar changes in family behaviour (e.g. fertility declines and rises in divorce) yet differ in terms of the degree of familism and the prevalence of informal unions. Using data from the 2005/6 Costa Rican Estudio de Longevidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CRELES), the 2005 Spanish Procesos de Vulnerabilidad en la Vejez (PVV), and the 2002/3 English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), we investigate the relationship between family structure (e.g. number and types of kin), union type, other key socio-demographic determinants (e.g. health) and support (i.e. coresidence, contact, and receipt of help) in later life. Preliminary results show considerable variation across countries in support received and its determinants.	Karen	F. Glaser	Luis	 Rosero-Bixby	Maria	Dolores  Puga	Emily	M. Agree	Teresa	 Castro Martin
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Demographic Change and the Living Arrangements of the Elderly: The Case of Brazil	The demographic transition Brazil has been through in the 1960s and 1970s resulted in unprecedented increases of cohorts of older adults and smaller family sizes. As population ages and family size declines, it becomes crucial to understand how families adjust to their changing social and demographic environment. In particular, the well-being of older persons is a growing policy concern worldwide. Yet, the consequences of these demographic shifts for the elderly often are not well understood, especially in developing countries. This study uses unique nationally representative data collected yearly over a period of three decades to employ a cohort analysis in which the living arrangements of several cohorts of elderly are traced. This study’s cohorts were of childbearing ages prior to, during, and after Brazil’s rapid fertility decline. Smaller families mean fewer children for support and exchange later in life, which may result in fewer intergenerational households.	Leticia	J. Marteleto
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Reciprocity and the Provision of Personal Care by Adult Children to Their Elderly Parents in Mexico	I use data from the Mexican Health and Aging Study to consider the role of reciprocity in the provision of care by adult children to their frail elderly parents in Mexico. This paper a) explores the effects of prior parental transfers of money and time on a child’s probability of providing personal care and b) considers the possibility that frail elderly parents may themselves be reciprocating the care they have received by providing time or money to children who previously assisted them. Results show that receipt of prior parental financial assistance is associated with an increased probability of care-giving by an adult child. Adult children were also found to reciprocate for the prior receipt of time from a parent, although the magnitude of this latter effect was smaller. However, parents were not found to be more likely to transfer time or money to children having previously provided care for them.	Claire	M. Noel-Miller
2007	30	Family Support, Social Welfare and Population Aging in Latin America	Old-Age Wealth in Mexico: The Role of Early-Life Reproductive and Human Capital Decisions	This paper examines the effects of early-life decisions regarding human capital, family formation and work activities on wealth of the elderly in Mexico, using the 2001 Mexican Health and Aging Study. We examine correlates of wealth across three cohorts: 50-59, 60-69, and 70+. These cohorts have experienced enormous changes in social, economic and institutional context, such that behaviors at certain points in the life course may translate differently into effects on later-life wealth. The paper describes this changing context, and provides a theoretical foundation for our research, an overview of the options for wealth accumulation for older adults in Mexico, a description of the net worth patterns across groups, and presents the results of multivariate models. We draw conclusions regarding whether the economic wellbeing of older adults in Mexico varies significantly across age cohorts and gender, and how early-life decisions impact old-age economic wellbeing as measured by wealth.	Rebeca	 Wong	Deborah	S. DeGraff
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Older Persons in Urban Areas of Latin America and the Caribbean: Active Life Expectancy and Multidimensional Disability Profiles from Sabe	We estimate active life expectancies for older persons in 6 urban areas in Latin America and the Caribbean, incorporating cognitive, emotional and physical domains of health of these individuals. Data come from the Health, Well-Being and Ageing in Latin America and the Caribbean (SABE) survey, a cross-sectional survey conducted in Buenos Aires (Argentina), Bridgetown (Barbados), Sao Paulo (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Havana (Cuba), Mexico City (Mexico) and Montevideo (Uruguay) in 2000. Grade of membership model is used to identify multidimensional disability profiles and to get the prevalence of these profiles in population. The analyses show that although life expectancies at age 60 are similar in the selected urban areas, active life expectancy varies significantly. The analyses also show that although women have higher life expectancy than men, they present lower active life expectancy, as well as lower proportion of remaining life time without disabilities.	Dulce	 Baptista
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Social Institutions and Health Inequalities: A Cross-National Perspective	This paper uses nationally representative samples of adults over 50 from the United States, United Kingdom, and ten European countries to address two objectives: (1) assessing the association of national social and health policy (e.g., measures of income replacement for unemployment, healthcare access and quality, and Esping-Anderson typology) with health inequalities and (2) assessing whether these associations support derived hypotheses about the causal relationship between SES and health. Our approach takes advantage of the substantial variation in country-level social welfare policies and benefits, using data from the Health and Retirement Survey, English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA), and the 2004 Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). Preliminary results suggest that the extent of heath inequalities by income is more strongly related to broader social policy, such as income replacement rates for unemployment, than it is to health policy, such as health care benefits.	Megan	 Beckett	Marc	 Elliott	Marika	 Suttorp
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	Explaining Cross-National Differences in Inequality of Mortality	In this paper, we study country differences in relative mortality inequality. Why is the total number of available life years in some countries distributed more equally among the population than in other countries? To what extent is mortality inequality related to national expenditures on health, the government’s share in health expenditures, educational level of the population, economic wealth and other forms of inequality? We construct a measure of relative mortality inequality in adult populations (aged 15+) for almost 200 countries in the year 2000. By standardizing by level of life expectancy, we are able to compare developed and developing countries. In multivariate regression analyses, we examine the association of relative mortality inequality with country characteristics on health expenditures, economic indicators and inequality indicators.	Christiaan	 Monden	Jeroen	 Smits
2007	31	Understanding Variation in Health and Survival	The Effect of Obesity and Diabetes on Mortality among Older Adults in Latin America and the Caribbean: Is It a Different Phenomenon than in the U.S.?	The excess mortality due to obesity has been acknowledged and investigated in the U.S. In Latin America it also needs to be carefully analyzed because of the high prevalence and the rapid growth of obesity in the region, and because obesity and overweight are frequently combined with frail conditions among those populations. The aim of the present study is to measure mortality differentials in Latin America and the U.S.A. in terms of years of life expectancy lost, excess deaths attributable to obesity and overweight, and the relative effect (on the mortality differentials) of the main non-communicable diseases related to obesity and overweight. We used data from the Mexican Health and Aging Study (MHAS) and the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our results suggest that mortality differentials between overweight or obese people are greater in Latin America than they are in the U.S.	Malena	 Monteverde	Beatriz	 Novak
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Cohort Fertility Patterns and Breast Cancer Mortality among U.S. Women	Epidemiological research has shown that women who have early births and numerous births have reduced risks of being diagnosed with breast cancer. We examine whether cohort fertility patterns are associated with breast cancer mortality rates in the U.S. We use negative binomial age-period-cohort models, and data from U.S. Vital Statistics and the U.S. Census to examine the relationship between breast cancer mortality rates among women aged 40 and older (in five-year age groups), and age-specific cumulative first birth rates, age-specific cumulative second birth rates, and completed birth rates at ages 35 to 39. Our results show that cohorts marked by higher rates of childlessness at ages 15 through 24, and lower cumulative second birth rates at ages 20 through 29, have higher rates of breast cancer mortality. Further, cohort fertility patterns appear to dampen the rise in breast cancer mortality rates in the 1970s through the 1990s.	Patrick	M. Krueger	Sam	 Preston
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Unwanted Fertility, Contraceptive Technology and Crime: Exploiting a Natural Experiment in Access to the Pill	Donohue and Levitt (2001) explain over 50% of the recent decline in U.S. crime rates with the legalization of abortion undertaken in the early 1970s. While these findings are being heavily debated, they point to unwanted fertility as a potentially important determinant of a cohort's criminality. In that spirit, I exploit a natural experiment induced by policy changes during the '60s and '70s. After the introduction of the contraceptive pill in 1960, single women below the age of majority faced restricted access to this new contraceptive method. Mostly as a by-product of unrelated policy changes, these access restrictions were lifted differentially across states during the '60s and '70s. This induces exogenous variation that can be used to identify the causal effect of unwanted fertility on crime. Preliminary results show that greater flexibility to avoid unwanted pregnancies reduces crime two decades later, when undesired children would have reached their criminal prime.	Juan	 Pantano
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	Better Later than Never? The Increase in Very Late Childbearing in Europe, Japan and the United States	Although the shift to later childbearing in advanced societies has been studied extensively, fertility trends at late reproductive ages remain largely unexplored. Our study provides a comprehensive exploration of very late childbearing (in our definition, ages 40+) in Europe, Japan and the United States. By the early 2000s, the trend reversal in fertility rates among women aged 40+ took place in almost all advanced societies. Although the absolute frequency of very late childbearing remains relatively low in comparison with the historical levels, the analysis of detailed age-parity data reveals that there was a ‘genuine’ increase in the intensity of childbearing at ages 40+. This reversal is attributable especially to the behavioural change among nulliparous women and women at parity 1.	Tomas	 Sobotka
2007	32	Fertility Timing: Sociodemographic Consequences	The Impact of Changes in Maternal Age on the Wellbeing of Children	The primary objective of this paper is to examine how recent changes in maternal age at first birth have impacted the health and wellbeing of children, accounting for changes in other factors associated with both age at first birth and wellbeing. An additional objective is to determine whether these relationships vary for children from different race/ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds. We use individual and contextual data from the 1995 and 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) to explore these questions. These data allow us to examine differences in health and wellbeing for two birth cohorts (1988-1992: high teenage fertility and 1998-2002: relatively lower teenage fertility). Specifically we look at birth cohort differences in birthweight, birth intendedness, and breastfeeding for children. We control for a variety of individual and contextual level characteristics that may also have changed over this time period.	Elizabeth	 Wildsmith	Frank	 Furstenberg
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	India and China: Demography, Human Capital, and Socioeconomic Transformations	Because of steep fertility decline, China now has declining population in the young working age groups. India’s demographic transition is more gradual. Labor force continues growing in both countries. China and India have masses of extremely low productivity workers; both struggle to provide enough modern employment opportunities.  China’s workforce continues growing due to fast increases in population and workers in their forties and older. But sharply increasing human capital, educational attainment, and talent are concentrated among China’s younger workers. India has benefited for decades from its higher educational system modeled on Britain's, so the high quality workforce is spread broadly across working ages.  This paper shows how the demographic transitions and changes in labor force quality in China and India are affecting economic competitiveness and socioeconomic inequalities. They are compared regarding fertility and age structure changes, educational attainment, labor force trends, and socioeconomic impacts of these demographic trends.	Judith	 Banister
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Why Has China’s Economy Taken Off Faster than India’s?	We investigate the determinants of the modest economic takeoff in India and the rapid economic takeoff in China after 1980. We do this by fitting a model of the growth of income per capita to cross-country panel data for 1960-2000. The model, which predicts reasonably well the “takeoffs” in China and India after 1980, highlights the importance to economic growth of improved health and longevity and an elevated labor force per capita due to falling fertility rates and dependency ratios. We also analyze the welfare benefits of gains in health and find that improvements in health in India mean that full income has risen about 50% more since 1980 than is suggested by economic growth figures. Almost all the welfare gains in China since 1980 have been due to rising consumption with little improvement in population health	David	E. Bloom	Linlin	 Hu	Yuanli	 Liu	Ajay	 Mahal	Winnie	 Yip
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Prevalence of Child Poverty in India and China	It is well known that when one compares infant and child health indicators, India lags China by a large margin. This paper focuses on child poverty, an issue gaining increasing attention. We review the literature on estimates of child poverty in China. We provide estimates of absolute and relative child poverty in India for the years 1993-94 and 1999-00. Comparability issues aside, it appears that that prevalence of child poverty is markedly higher in India compared to China. While absolute child poverty declined significantly in India during the reform period, relative child poverty decreased only marginally in rural areas. In fact relative child poverty increased in urban areas. One conclusion that can be drawn is that children in India are much more deprived along multiple dimensions (health and economic) compared to children in China.	S.	 Chandrasekhar	M.H.	 Suryanarayana
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Can Policy Interventions Reduce Excess Female Child Mortality in China and India? Lessons from South Korea	Like China and India, South Korea has shown a pattern of strong son preference, reflected in excess female child mortality, especially prenatally. In all three countries there have been strong policy interventions aimed at reducing parents’ preference for sons, but nevertheless sex ratios at birth continued to rise. Now Korea has shown some reversal of this trend. This raises questions for China and India: can social policies play a role, or will sex ratios normalize only when they reach Korea’s very high levels of urbanization and development? We explore these questions using the Korean family and fertility survey 2000. We decompose the net effect on son preference of (1) changes in the proportions educated and urbanized and (2) attitudinal shifts. We find that attitudinal shifts play much the larger role. This suggests that social policy can do much to reduce excess female child mortality.	Woojin	 Chung	Monica	 Das Gupta
2007	35	Demographic Billionaires: India and China Compared	Sex Ratio Imbalances among Children at Micro-Level: China and India Compared	Sex ratio imbalances found in Asia are primarily due to the increasing proportions of sons among children in China and India: the level of gender discrimination in several regions of East China and Northwest India may be extremely pronounced and tends to display a high level of spatial concentration. Comparable data from the last censuses (2000, 2001) can be mapped at the local level, using counties (xian) for China and sub-district units (tahsil, taluk, etc.) for India.  In this paper, we first present comparable statistics and maps for both countries using these detailed administrative divisions (2300 and 5500 units) and then use both statistical and geostatistical analyses to contrast the geographical distribution of gender discrimination in China and India and their main social and economic correlates. The paper ends with a discussion of the theoretical and policy implications of these findings.	Christophe	Z. Guilmoto	Sébastien	 Oliveau
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Accounting for Trends in the Labor Force Participation Rate of Older Men in the United States	After nearly a full century of decline, the Labor Force Participation Rate (LFPR) of older men in the U.S. leveled off in the 1980s and began to increase in the late 1990s. We use synthetic panel data from 1962 to 2005 to model the LFPR of older men in order to explain for these trends. We find that the decline in the LFPR of older men cannot be explained by demographic trends, changes to Social Security and private pension rules, health, or health insurance availability. We attribute the increase in the LFPR in recent years mainly to changes in the distribution of education among older men. Our results also suggest that increases in the Social Security delayed retirement credit, increased employment of the wives of older men, and the shift from Defined Benefit to Defined Contribution pension plans all may have contributed to the recent LFPR gains.	Ryan	 Goodstein
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Who Works Later in Life? A Cross-National Analysis of Employment Rates and Work Hours among Older Adults	Population aging and pressure on social budgets has sparked intense interest in increased work at older ages in both the U.S. and Europe. Using data from the Luxembourg Income Study (c.2000), we investigate employment rates and work hours among adults aged 55 to 74 in the U.S., in comparison to their counterparts in ten European countries.     The paper includes two lines of analysis, both of considerable interest to demographers.     First, we ask: which adults remain in employment later in life? We assess whether adults who work in their later years are more economically advantaged than their prime-age counterparts, or more disadvantaged, or whether the pattern is one of bifurcation.     Second, we analyze the usual work hours of those who remain employed after age 55. Extending our employment analysis, we ask: Which older workers work long(er) hours? Are longer hours among older workers associated with economic advantage or disadvantage? Finally, is there evidence of phased retirement, and where?	Janet	C. Gornick	Traci	 Schlesinger	Gary	 Burtless	Timothy	 Smeeding
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Labor Supply Effects of the Recent Social Security Benefit Cuts: Empirical Estimates Using Cohort Discontinuities	In response to an earlier crisis in Social Security financing two decades ago the U.S. Congress implemented an increase in the Normal Retirement Age (NRA) of two months per year for cohorts born in 1938 and after. These cohorts began reaching retirement age in 2000. In this paper I  study the effects of these benefit cuts on recent retirement behavior. The evidence strongly suggests that the mean retirement age of the affected cohorts has increased by about half as much as the increase in the NRA. If older workers continue to increase their labor supply,  there will be important implications for the estimates of Social Security trust fund exhaustion that have played such a major role in recent discussions of Social Security reform.	Giovanni	 Mastrobuoni
2007	36	Trends in the Timing and Pattern of Retirement in Developed Countries	Retirement Transitions of the Self-Employed in the United States and England	Motivated by high rates of self-employment among older workers, we examine how public and private pension and health insurance systems affect the retirement transitions of self-employed older workers compared to wage and salary workers using longitudinal data from the U.S. Health and Retirement Study and the English Longitudinal Survey of Ageing. These panel data have the advantage of collecting comparable demographic, economic, and labor market data on workers in the two countries and allow us to exploit cross-national variation in pension and health insurance systems. We find evidence that workers in the two countries respond strongly to incentives provided by key retirement ages in the public system and in private defined-benefit pensions. Health insurance coverage is also important in the United States for understanding differences in the probability a self-employed worker and a wage and salary worker exit the labor force.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Lynn	 Karoly	Nicole	 Maestas
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Transition to Parenthood: The Role of Social Interactions and Endogenous Networks	This paper investigates how the decision of having an additional child is influenced by an individual's peer group. We show via agent based simulations how social interaction creates interdependencies in the individual transition to parenthood and its timing. We build a one-sex model and provide agents with four different characteristics. Based on these characteristics agents endogenously form their network. Network members then may influence the agents’ transition to higher parity levels. The agents compare the share of agents with a higher parity than their own within their peer group with the same share on the aggregate level. Our numerical simulations indicate that accounting for social interactions is important to explain the shift of first birth probabilities in Austria over the period 1984 to 1994.	Belinda	 Aparicio Diaz	Thomas	 Fent
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Reevaluating the Socioeconomic Effects of Teenage Childbearing: A Counterfactual Approach	Despite the debate over 30 years on the socioeconomic effects of teenage childbearing, the consensus on its “true” effects is still unsettled. The debate is centered on theoretical considerations of early motherhood as a harmful event and/or teen mothers’ preexisting socioeconomic disadvantages, and methodological challenges against selection bias. Alternative models have been developed, but tend to rely on strong assumptions and unrepresentative samples. This study extends this literature by employing a counterfactual approach using propensity score matching, and data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). The counterfactual analysis attempts to obtain the causal effects of teenage childbearing by identifying better comparison groups to teen mothers, based on observed covariates. A sensitivity analysis is conducted to address selection bias on unobserved covariates. Add Health helps to capture recent changes in welfare policy and adolescent population composition. This study expects to produce new insights into the relationship between teenage childbearing and its socioeconomic consequences.	Dohoon	 Lee
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	Does Education Delay the Timing of First Birth?	The secular decline in fertility that has occurred over the last thirty years in both developing and developed economies is often attributed to rising levels of education of women. The decline is partly due to a delay in the timing of first birth. The average age of first birth in the United States has increased from 21.4 in 1970 to 25.1 in 2002 (Centers for Disease Control 2004). Whether education plays a causal role or only is an outcome of other unobserved factors remains an open question. We use exogenous variation in college tuition and residential location to investigate a causal effect of education on the timing of first birth. We use individual fertility and educational data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and tuition data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.	Dean	R. Lillard	Ning	 Zhang
2007	37	Timing of Childbearing	The Causal Effect of Fertility Timing on Educational Attainment: An Identification Test Using the Longitudinal Structure of Schooling	The strong correlation between educational attainment and fertility timing is well documented. For instance, young mothers seldom go on to earn a college degree. Researchers often use controls for observable characteristics or sibling fixed effects to determine whether this correlation reflects causation or simply unobserved factors. Using the cumulative nature of educational investment, this paper demonstrates that the key identifying assumption behind these approaches does not hold. Mothers and observably similar non-mothers begin college on the same footing, but their paths diverge well before the former enter pregnancy. No such divergence should exist if the causal effect of childbirth is the only reason educational attainment is lower for mothers than similar non-mothers. This finding suggests that time-varying factors that cause women to leave school and then enter parenthood are also behind the correlation. Controls for pre-determined characteristics and fixed effects do not address this temporal source of omitted variable bias.	Kevin	 Stange
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	AIDS Treatment and Intrahousehold Resource Allocations: Children’s Nutrition and Schooling in Kenya	The provision of life-saving antiretroviral (ARV) treatment is a key component of the global response to HIV/AIDS, but little is known about the impact of this intervention on the welfare of children in households of treated persons. We estimate the impact of ARV treatment on children’s schooling and nutrition outcomes using longitudinal household survey data collected in collaboration with a treatment program in western Kenya. We find that children’s weekly hours of school attendance increase by over 20 percent within about six months after treatment is initiated for the adult household member. For boys in treatment households, these increases are closely related to decreases in their market labor supply. Similarly, young children’s short-term nutritional status—as measured by their weight-for-height Z-score—also improves dramatically. Since the improvements in children’s schooling and nutrition will affect their socio-economic outcomes in adulthood, the provision of ARV treatment is likely to generate significant long-run macroeconomic benefits.	Markus	 Goldstein	Joshua	 Graff Zivin	Harsha	 Thirumurthy
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Within-Family Program Effect Estimators: The Impact of Oportunidades on Schooling in Mexico	This paper explores the use of dynamic panel data models and sibling-based estimation procedures for evaluating the effects of educational interventions aimed at children or youth. The frameworks presented provide a way of directly assessing short-term program impacts and of simulating longer term impacts that may extend beyond the program exposure times observed in the data. This paper also proposes a new estimation approach for the model, which combines matching, differencing and instrumental variables in a way that minimizes the need for parametric modeling assumptions. The approach uses retrospective data on older siblings’ schooling histories to identify how an educational intervention affects younger siblings. We apply the proposed method as well as other methods to study the effects of the Mexican Oportunidades conditional cash transfer program. Simulations based on the dynamic model indicate that long-term exposure to the program increases educational attainment by about half a year.	Susan	 Parker	Petra	 Todd	Kenneth	 Wolpin
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Nature and Nurture in the Intergenerational Transmission of Socioeconomic Status: Evidence from Swedish Children and Their Biological and Rearing Parents	This study uses an extraordinary Swedish data set to explore the sources of the intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status. Merging data from administrative sources and censuses, we investigate the association between sons’ and daughters’ socioeconomic outcomes and those of their biological and rearing parents. Our analysis focuses on children raised in different family circumstances: raised by both biological parents, raised by the biological mother/father without a stepfather/stepmother, raised by the biological mother/father with a stepfather/stepmother, and raised by two adoptive parents. The most remarkable feature of our data set is that it contains information on the biological parents even when they are not the rearing parents. We specify a simple additive model of pre-birth (including genetic) and post-birth influences and examine the model’s ability to provide a unified account of the intergenerational associations in all six family types. Our results suggest substantial roles for both pre-birth and post-birth factors.	Anders	 Björklund	Markus	 Jantti	Gary	M. Solon
2007	38	Economic Factors and Child Development I	Is Mortality in Developing Countries Procyclical? Health Production and the Value of Time in Colombia's Coffee-Growing Regions	The inability to smooth consumption in developing countries is thought to make health vulnerable to sudden economic downturns. However, studies suggesting this relationship often examine shocks that directly influence health independently of economic conditions (such as flooding or grain price fluctuations). This paper investigates how world coffee price shocks influence infant and child mortality in Colombia’s coffee growing regions. As in wealthy country studies, we find evidence of procyclical mortality and countercyclical health investments that are linked to changes in the opportunity cost of time. These results suggest that in rural Colombia, (1) Any adverse health consequences of incomplete consumption smoothing during bad economic  times are dominated by increases in time-intensive health investments, and (2) The relative price of health is a more powerful determinant of mortality than wealth.	Grant	 Miller	Piedad	 Urdinola
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Examining Patterns in Divorced Life Expectancy by Race: An Application of a Bayesian Approach to Sullivan’s Method	A considerable body of research has examined changing divorce rates over the last 40 years. Recently, divorce rates have stabilized at a fairly high level, suggesting that individuals may spend a significant proportion of their lives in a divorced state. However, little has examined how long individuals can expect to spend divorced over the life course. In this study, we use a Bayesian approach to Sullivan’s method (1971) of life table estimation to examine divorced life expectancy differences between blacks and whites across a wide range of birth cohorts. Our data come from the 1982-2000 General Social Surveys (GSS) linked to 1982-2000 vital statistics mortality data. We find that blacks, despite being less likely to marry, can expect to spend both more years, and a higher proportion of their remaining years, in a divorced state. The results also suggest that the racial gap in divorced life expectancy has expanded across birth cohorts born from 1900 to 1960.	J.	Scott  Brown	Scott	M. Lynch
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Status and Depressive Symptoms over Time: Modeling the Effects of Status Duration	This study critically examined the relationship between marital status duration and depressive symptoms by marital status and gender. Using data from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), a variety of empirical specifications of marital status duration were tested to determine the implications of modeling status duration in various ways. Overall, the duration analyses show a ‘crisis’ effect of marital dissolution for both men and women. However, the majority of the adaptation to this new role occurs within the first six months, and persistence in this state over time leads to increases in depressive symptoms after adjustment for widowed men and women and separated/divorced women. Based on the findings in this study it is clear that a single continuous indicator of marital status duration is a misspecification of the effect of marital status duration and results in biased and unstable estimates of marital status differences in depressive symptoms.	Tracey	A. LaPierre
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Disruption, Disability and Longevity	In this paper, we combine insights from two strands of literature to explain differences in health, disability and longevity among elderly persons with different marital history and family type. One strand, focusing on biological and psychological mechanisms, provides evidence that social support affects health outcomes. Other literature reveals that marital disruption affects the nature of intergenerational relations. Since children represent an important form of social support for elderly parents, we conjecture that changes in parent-child relations arising from marital disruption will affect the incidence and trajectory of disability and mortality of older persons. We expect these effects to work directly (through divorce/remarriage) and indirectly (through family structure and quality of relations between parents and children). Multivariate models that control for socio-economic and health characteristics of elderly persons and their families are applied to data from the first five waves of the Health and Retirement Survey to test the empirical implications of the model.	Barbara	 Schone	Liliana	E. Pezzin
2007	39	Family and Health over the Life Course	Marital Status, Marital Transitions, and Body Mass: Gender, Race, and Life Course Considerations	In this study, we adopt a life course perspective to understand how body mass changes over time. We direct particular attention to marital status and marital transitions in relation to change in body mass over the life course. Moreover, we consider whether and how marital and body mass patterns vary by race and gender over the life course. Results from a national 3-wave panel survey in the U.S. (the Americans’ Changing Lives Survey) covering an 8-year period suggest that 1) the transition into marriage is associated with weight gain for men and women—especially when first marriage occurs at older ages; 2) the transition out of marriage due to divorce or widowhood is associated with weight loss, but this effect occurs more profoundly for men; and 3) we find no race differences in the impact of marital status/transitions on body mass.	Debra	J. Umberson	Hui	 Liu
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Structure and Stress: Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms across Adolescence and Young Adulthood	This paper models trajectories of depression across adolescence and young adulthood. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, latent curve models (LCM) examined variation in mean depression trajectories, and the effects of childhood socioeconomic status (SES) and stressful life events (SLE), across racial/ethnic and gender groups. It was found that while all groups exhibit a curvilinear inverted U-shaped trajectory, significant variation among groups exists in both trajectory intercepts and slopes. For all racial/ethnic groups, women exhibited higher depression levels, with larger gender gaps among minorities. Racial disparity was found for both genders, with whites generally exhibiting lower levels than minorities. Childhood SES was primarily influential on the intercept component of the LCM, although there was considerable effect heterogeneity across groups. The effect of SLE generally decreased over time. Overall, the results indicate considerable heterogeneity among racial-gender groups for both normative depression trajectories and covariate effects.	Daniel	 Adkins	Lin	 Wang
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Depression, Self-Esteem, and Multiracial Adolescents: The Role of Socioeconomic Status and Family Structure	In light of the growing number of investigations of racial disparities in mental health, there has been an increased interest in multiracials. They are changing the meaning and measurement of race itself. The objective of this study is to investigate differences in depression and self-esteem by examining the role of individual characteristics and family structure. The analysis uses Wave I of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, a nationally representative sample of 20,743 students ages 12-18. Depression is dichotomized using a modified version of the CES-D. Self-esteem is assessed using the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Logistic regression and linear mixed models are used for the analysis. I find that Asian-White multiracials have the lowest self-esteem and highest risk of depression net of socioeconomic status and family structure, and Black-White multiracials cannot be differentiated from their single-race counterparts. These findings open up new avenues for research on the wellbeing of multiracials.	Jamie	Mihoko  Doyle
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Is Overweight a Heavy Burden for Teenagers? New Evidence about Adolescent Body Composition and Psychological Distress	Prior research investigating relationships between adolescent body composition and psychological well-being has surprisingly yielded null findings. We reexamine this association using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health to investigate whether unexplored complexities explain these unexpected findings. More specifically, we predict multiple aspects of psychological distress, evaluate how being underweight as well as overweight is related to distress, and assess whether relationships between body composition and distress vary by gender, age, and race/ethnicity. Results suggest few associations between body composition and psychological distress among female adolescents. Among male adolescents, underweight is more distressing than overweight. Furthermore, both age and race/ethnicity moderate relationships between body composition and psychological distress.	Michelle	 Frisco	Jason	 Houle	Molly	A. Martin
2007	40	Adolescent Mental Health in the U.S.	Gender Differences in Adolescent Depression: Social Integration into the Normative School Context	This study investigates gender differences in adolescent depression associated with different levels of social integration into the normative high school environment. Previous research stresses the importance of social integration for positive mental health outcomes, but assumes girls are more responsive to social networks. If this is true, gender differences in depression should be weaker in situations of good fit and stronger in situations of bad fit because social integration into the school should be more beneficial for girls and social isolation more risky. To test this assumption, a multilevel model is used to predict CES-D depression scores with data from waves I and II of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Independent variables will include both individual- and school-level measures. Fit indexes assess social integration, and cross-level interaction terms (gender * each fit index) detect gender differences.	Kurt	A. Gore	Robert	 Crosnoe
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Social Fathers in Fragile Families: Involvement and Associations with Child Well-Being	Previous research documents that married stepfathers tend to be less involved than married biological fathers with their co-resident children, and suggests that such lower levels of engagement may translate into worse outcomes for children. Little research to date has examined the well-being of children born to unwed parents living with one biological parent and that parent’s romantic partner. This paper uses longitudinal data from a recent cohort of children born to unwed mothers to examine how these young children fare when their mothers form new cohabiting or marital relationships. After comparing levels and types of involvement by mothers’ new partners (social fathers) with that of biological fathers, I ask if and how such involvement is associated with behavioral and health outcomes for these young children, and identify potential mediating factors.	Sharon	 Bzostek
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	The Unexamined Stable Family: An Examination of Child Well-Being in Stable-Single Parent Families	We find in an analysis of a merged mother-child NLSY79-C dataset that after controlling for characteristics of the child, mother, and family, children of married parents reported higher quality home environments and higher math and reading scores than children living with stable-single (never married or cohabited) mothers. Further, children born to cohabiting parents who either remain cohabiting or eventually marry were in homes with better environments than children living with stable-single mothers, but these unions did not appear to benefit children in terms of behavior or academic outcomes. We also find that unions, regardless of type, appear to benefit children who were born to single mothers in terms of their home environment and math scores. Even after these unions dissolve, children living with their newly single mother who has previously experienced a union still have higher math and reading scores than children still living with their stable-single mother.	Claire	M. Kamp Dush	Rachel	 Dunifon
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Should We Get Married? Effect of Parents' Marriage on Children Born to Cohabiting and Visiting Parents	Using a representative sample of children born out of wedlock drawn from the FFCWS, we investigate whether marriage after childbirth has a causal effect on early child cognitive ability, using a treatment outcome approach to account for the selection into marriage. Comparing children with similar backgrounds and parental mate-selection patterns who differ only by whether their parents marry, children whose parents marry score significantly higher on the PPVT at age three than children whose parents remain unmarried. Contrasting the estimates from potential-outcome and OLS models indicates that the marriage effect is greater for children whose parents transition into marriage. Those parents are found to be less well-matched. Without a legal arrangement, they may face lower incentives in allocating resources toward the child and experience greater difficulties in coordinating and monitoring their investments. As a result, children of parents who transition into marriage could have faced higher risks of receiving suboptimal investments had their parents remained unmarried.	Shirley	H. Liu	Frank	 Heiland
2007	41	Family Transition and Child Wellbeing	Transitions in Family Structure and Children’s Wellbeing	A considerable body of research explores associations between marital dissolution, single-parent family structure, and child wellbeing. Although about 30 percent of children will spend some time in stepfamilies, the effects of maternal re-partnering on children’s wellbeing have received much less scrutiny. We use longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and Hierarchical Linear Models (multilevel models) to estimate the effects of family structure transitions, with a specific focus on maternal re-partnering, on children’s achievement and behavior trajectories. We consider whether these effects vary by children’s ages and assess whether they are transitory or persist over time. Moreover, we focus on whether there are differences in these effects when maternal “re-partnerings” constitute cohabitations or marriages, as well as whether they differ by maternal education level. This research has implications for policies and programs regarding marriage and family formation and those that promote child wellbeing for children in complex families.	Katherine	  Magnuson	Lawrence	M. Berger
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	The Sources of the Racial and Ethnic Composition of the American Population: Past, Present, and Future	There are contradictory popular images of the origins of the American population and the demographic processes that led to its creation. In the classic demographic balancing equation, population change can occur only through natural increase, mortality, and migration. Racial and ethnic groups are largely treated as discrete subpopulations. Yet the popular “melting pot” image presupposes intermarriage of persons from different populations, the natural results of which are offspring with mixed ancestry. The fragile foundations of racial and ethnic measurement, both past and present, coexist with a social structure where even deeply flawed categories are strongly correlated with socioeconomic status, life expectancy, and multiple indicators of individual and collective well being. This enduring reality motivates the present exercise to better identify sources of racial and ethnic composition while explicitly accounting for wide margins of uncertainty in racial classification and measurement.	Charles	 Hirschman	Anthony	D. Perez
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	The Many Dimensions of Race: A Latent Variable Approach for Quantitative Research	Typically, race is measured through self-identification and included in quantitative research as a set of “dummy” variables that serve as controls in regression-type analyses. This implies several strong assumptions, including that race is a static characteristic of individuals and that it can be described by mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories. I propose a new approach to analyzing race in quantitative research in the hopes of bringing research practice closer to current social science theories of race. Using a statistical technique called latent class analysis, I combine measures of observed race, self-reported race and self-reported ethnic origins into a single variable that better captures the complexity of an individual’s experience of race and ethnicity in the United States. The latent variable consists of multiple racial classes, or categories, and can be used in subsequent studies as either a dependent or independent variable.	Aliya	 Saperstein
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	Determinants of Race Reporting by Hispanics in a National Health Survey	According to the 2000 Census, Hispanics are the largest racial/ethnic minority group in the United States (12.5% of the U.S. population). Nearly half (42%) of the Hispanic population selected “some other race”. Among persons who reported their race as “some other race, most were Hispanic (97%). We utilize data from the 1999-2005 National Health Interview Surveys to examine factors associated with the race of Hispanic persons. Preliminary findings show that none of the hypothesized determinants of race selection explain the Hispanic – non-Hispanic differential. Hispanics remain overwhelmingly more likely to be in the “other race” category. Preliminary results also show that Hispanic subgroups differ greatly in their racial profiles. These results underscore that race is an extremely complex dynamic for Hispanics in the U.S.	Jacqueline	W. Lucas	Elizabeth	 Arias
2007	42	Measurement Issues in Race/Ethnicity	Rethinking U.S. Census Racial and Ethnic Categories	How do high levels of immigration and a growing multiracial population challenge census racial and ethnic categories? We begin by discussing the relationship between race, ethnicity, and ancestry and their measurement in the census. We examine data from the 2000 Census 5 percent IPUMS to compare racial responses of native- and foreign-born Hispanics, Asians, and Middle Easterners, and native-born multiracial Hispanics, Asians, and Middle Easterners, by ancestry. For some groups, for example, Europeans and Africans, ancestry and race are expected to overlap well. However, we expect current census racial categories to be problematic for the growing numbers of people who reported Some Other Race (SOR) alone or in combination with another race, a diverse population that we found to include multiracial Hispanics, Middle Easterners, and Asians. We conclude with a discussion of possible changes to the census questions on race, Hispanic ethnicity, and ancestry in light of these challenges.	Sharon	M. Lee	Sonya	 Tafoya
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Romance and Sexual Initiation among Never-Married Young Men in Vietnam: A Multi-Method Analysis	Young men represent the highest proportion of sexually experienced unmarried population in Vietnam. Increasing levels of sexual activity, combined with reported low levels of knowledge about sex, HIV/AIDS, and STIs and an aversion to using contraceptives, suggest that they are ill-prepared to deal with Vietnam's emerging HIV epidemic. This study uses a multi-method approach to assess sexual activity and attitudes concerning romantic love among never-married men. I analyze the nationally representative Survey Assessment of Vietnamese Youth to examine patterns of emotional relationships and physical behaviors preceding young men's sexual initiation as well as determinants of premarital sex and an aversion to contraceptive use. Additionally, I analyze data from in-depth interviews to address social contexts in which sexual activities of male adolescents take place. Vietnam’s economic liberalization, which enhanced personal freedom and lessened parental control over children, combined with its cultural predisposition towards romantic love may explain the recent rising trends in sexual activities among young Vietnamese.	Puk	Bussarawan  Teerawichitchainan
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Transactional Sex among Adolescents in Sub-Saharan Africa amid the HIV Epidemic	Using national survey data collected in 2004 in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi, and Uganda with 12- to 19-year olds and focus group data with this same population, we examine the prevalence of transactional sex (i.e., sex in exchange for money or material goods): how it is experienced by adolescents and its association with their social and economic vulnerability. Receiving something in exchange for sex is very common among sexually active, unmarried female adolescents, but there are no consistent differences by household economic status or age difference between partners. The qualitative data suggest that transactional sex is not necessarily a coercive force and can be a routine aspect of dating and that there is the expectation of females getting something before having sex. Multivariate analyses show either no association or a positive association (in Uganda) between transactional sex and using any contraceptive method, including male condoms.	Ann	M. Moore	Ann	E. Biddlecom
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	Male Circumcision and HIV Infection in Rural Malawi	Observational studies in various settings have found consistent, significant, and negative associations between male circumcision and HIV infection, and circumcision’s protective effect has been confirmed recently by randomized control trials in South Africa, Uganda, and Kenya. Yet population-based data from husbands and wives (N=2240) from the 2004 wave of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP) present an interesting anomaly. When comparing HIV prevalence rates across the MDICP’s three study sites in the country’s three main administrative regions, we find that the region home to the highest HIV prevalence (8.6%) is also where most husbands (80%) are circumcised. Individual-level analyses using logit/probit models within this region, southern Balaka, do show a negative relationship between circumcision and infection status, but our data further find that certain behaviors, and possibly STI status, supersede the protective effect of male circumcision. These findings are expected to be important considerations for prevention policies.	Michelle	 Poulin	Adamson	 Muula
2007	43	Reproductive Health and Potentially Harmful Sexual Practices	The Protective Effect of Male Circumcision on HIV in Kenya	This paper uses data from the 2003 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, a nationally representative sample, to examine the association between male circumcision and HIV infection. The results show that 4.6 percent of men were HIV positive; 85 percent of all men in the sample were circumcised. The prevalence of HIV was significantly higher among uncircumcised men (12 percent), as compared to the circumcised ones (3 percent). We also found significantly higher prevalence of HIV among richer men. The logistic regression results show that male circumcision is the most important and significant predictor of HIV in Kenya. Net of the effects of socio-demographic variables and age at first sexual intercourse, uncircumcised men were 80 percent more likely to be HIV positive than circumcised men. The wealth impact became non-significant in the logistic regression model, suggesting that some of the independent variables may have mediating effects that we need to examine further.	Yanyi	K. Djamba	LaToya	S. Davis
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Who’s the Decider? How Different Dimensions of Power Are Related to Partner Belief about Control over the Couple’s Method Choice	A defining characteristic of most research on fertility regulation is women’s primacy in contraception decision making. With the growth of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, there has been greater emphasis on understanding men’s roles in the reproductive health of couples. This shift has led to a developing body of research directed at men, but has been less successful in generating research based on couples, where reports are obtained from both partners. This paper uses data from a new large-scale survey of married, cohabiting, and dating heterosexual couples in the United States (n=930) to examine whether who makes the contraceptive decisions in a couple is related to partner differences along various dimensions of power including status characteristics (age, education, personal income), gender role ideology, relationship commitment, and relationship alternatives. Preliminary analyses suggest that partners’ relative power does influence perceptions about who primarily makes the contraceptive decisions in a relationship.	Lisa	 Cubbins	Lucy	 Jordan	Virginia	E. Rutter	Koray	 Tanfer
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Decision-Making Patterns and Contraceptive Use: Evidence from Uganda	We differentiate two decision-making patterns in which  women have a voice—joint decisions and wife-dominated decisions—and test whether these as well as husband-dominated decisions each have distinct effects on contraceptive use. We confirm that wife-dominated decisions are the most likely to result in contraceptive use: in Uganda where fertility is high, joint decisions were more likely to result in traditional reproductive behavior. We also identify important community-level effects: in communities where husband-dominated decision-making is more common, the wife holding autonomous views does not promote contraceptive use as much as it does in more egalitarian settings.	Laurie	 DeRose	Alex	 Ezeh
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	The Role of Relationship Power in Couple Decisions about Contraception	In this study of couple decisions about contraception we investigate how each partner’s level of power in the relationship affects his/her influence over the couple’s contraceptive choices by affecting the relative weight that  method-related ratings, desires, and perceptions have in the decision-making process. We also examine the influence on this process of other partner and relationship characteristics. The data supporting this analysis are from a new, in-person survey of approximately 1,000 married, cohabiting couples and dating couples in which the female partner is aged 20-35, neither partner is sterile, and the couple is not currently pregnant or attempting to conceive. This survey obtained separate, parallel reports from each partner on the power relations, birth desires, and method-related expectancies, values, perceptions, preferences, and behaviors of men and women making contraceptive choices within the context of an intimate heterosexual relationship.	William	R. Grady	Daniel	H. Klepinger	John	O.G. Billy	Lisa	 Cubbins
2007	44	Gender and Reproduction: Micro-Level Approaches	Gender Differences in the Fertility Intentions of Italian Couples	Recently demographic studies have paid increasing attention to the formation process of reproductive intentions.   Since having a birth is a joint decision of both partners, the analysis of partners’ preferences combination takes a central role in the analysis of the family formation process.   In this paper we focus on the determinants of childbearing intentions considering female and male partner separately, but taking into account the characteristics and preferences of the other member of the couple.  In Italy the total fertility rate is around 1.3 children per woman, while the average desired family size is slightly higher than 2. How much does the possible disagreement within the couple contribute to this gap? What is the influence of late family formation on the couple's childbearing intentions?  We used the data of the nationally representative survey Family and Social Subjects, carried out in 2003.	Alessandro	 Rosina	Maria	Rita  Testa
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Family Life Course Transitions and the Economic Consequences of Internal Migration	Family life course events (i.e. marriage, childbearing,   separation/divorce) are seldom carefully conceptualized and measured as determinants of both internal migration and the economic well-being outcomes of family migration. The more usual focus of the demographic literature is on family and household STRUCTURE rather than on family life course PROCESSES. Based on life course transition theory and longitudinal population survey data from the 1996-1999 and 2001-2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, we utilize event history difference-in-difference models that consider time since migration to provide new evidence on how before- and after-migration life course transitions affect post-migration welfare receipt, employment, poverty status, and family earnings gains and losses of inter- and intra-state migrant families.	Gordon	F. De Jong	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Movin’ on Up? Residential Mobility, Gender and Coupled Work Careers	Theoretical perspectives on residential mobility typically view household outcomes as reasonable approximations of the outcomes for all individuals in the household. For many couple-headed households, however, residential mobility has different implications for the careers of each partner. We use matched data from the 2000-2005 March Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey to investigate the relationship between family status, residential mobility and short-term labor market outcomes for working-age couples in the United States. We find that, on average, the short-term impact of residential mobility on household income is insignificant. However, dual-earner couples who move out of state become more equal with respect to hours and earnings.	Claudia	 Geist	Patricia	A. McManus
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	Sex Asymmetry in Family Migration: Familial Gender Roles or Occupational Inequality?	Despite significant increases in women’s labor force attachment, occupational prestige and proportionate contribution to family income, the empirical evidence indicates that long-distance family migration continues to be motivated disproportionately by the employment dynamics of the male partner in married-couple families. Researchers have attributed this sex asymmetry to one of two influences: (1) individual-level human capital disparities between spouses or (2) familial gender role inequality. I test the human capital and gender-role explanations against Mincer's (1978) structural explanation. The structural perspective attributes sex asymmetry in family migration decision-making to sex inequality and segregation the labor market. This analysis uses individual- and family-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), occupation-level data from the 1970-1990 U.S. Decennial Censuses Integrated Public Use Micro Samples (IPUMS), and discrete-time event history models to estimate the influence of individual-, family- and occupational-level characteristics on family migration events.	Kimberlee	A. Shauman
2007	45	U.S. Family Migration	U.S. Family Migration: Do Housing Costs Matter?	The rapid increase in the cost of housing has recently been identified as a motivation for significant migration flows down the urban hierarchy. However, little empirical work has established the relationship between differential costs of living and migration flows, particularly for families. In this paper we measure the difference in the cost of living between origin and destination for all migration flows across the United States at the county level from 1995-2000. Particular focus is given to the top 0.1% of population flows (magnitude) to examine the cost-of-living outcomes for these exchanges. We then assess the impact of housing cost differentials on interstate migration specifically. Lastly, using the 2000 PUMS we assess the cost-of-living adjustments experienced by migrant families. The paper provides convincing evidence that cost-of-living adjustments are a critical component of understanding recent long-distance flows and family migration strategies.	Suzanne	 Withers	William	A.V. Clark	Tricia	 Ruiz
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Migrant Opportunity and the Educational Attainment of Youth in Rural China	In this paper, we investigate how reductions of barriers to migration affect the decision of middle school graduates to attend high school in rural China. Change in the cost of migration is identified using exogenous variation across counties in the timing of national identity card distribution, which made it easier for rural migrants to register as temporary residents in urban destinations. We show that timing of ID card distribution is unrelated to local rainfall shocks affecting demand for migration, and not related to proxies reflecting time-varying changes in village policy or administrative capacity. We find a robust negative relationship between migrant opportunity and high school enrollment. The mechanisms behind the negative relationship are suggested by observed increases in subsequent local and migrant non-agricultural employment of high school age young adults as the size of the current village migrant network increases.	John	T. Giles	Alan	 de Brauw
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	The Effect of Migration on Health of Adults Left Behind in Indonesia	As a large number of migrants remit income back to households they left behind, an increasing body of literature begins to examine the influence of migration on the well-being of left-behind household members and whether such effects extend to health. Results from previous studies are inconsistent, and depend on the subgroup of people and the specific aspect of health examined. The inconclusive findings may result from offsetting consequences of migration, which are seldom evaluated, and because of failure to address the potential endogeneity of migration. Using high-quality longitudinal data collected in Indonesia, I relate migration to the health of the left-behind population at origin (focusing on adults) through various mechanisms and distinguishing different dimensions of health. I also seek to address the potential endogeneity by incorporating macro-level information as a source of exogenous variation in migration decisions, using the instrumental variable approach.	Yao	 Lu
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Parental Migration and Child Health in Mexico	This study uses nationally representative, longitudinal data from Mexico to examine the effect of parental migration on child health in sending communities. I compare children within households who experience parental migration at different key periods of physical development. This comparison provides an estimate of the migration effect net of those family characteristics that are related both to migration and to child health. Using this type of approach addresses the concern that parents who choose to migrate are selected on a number of key characteristics that also affect child well-being. Initial results suggest that, in the short run, parental migration negatively affects child height-for-age, a long-term measure of child nutritional status and illness.	Jenna	 Nobles
2007	46	Impact of Migration on Sending Communities and Intergenerational Relations	Moving Forward, Looking Back: The Impact of Migrants’ Remittances on Assets, Consumption, and Credit Constraints in Sending Communities in the Rural Philippines	Using a longitudinal data set from Bukidnon, Philippines, this paper explores the impact of remittances on assets, consumption expenditures, and credit constraints of households in origin communities. We use instrumental variables regressions to examine the impact of remittances on parent and child households. Remittances have a positive and significant effect on parents’ livestock holdings and educational expenditures per adult equivalent. For migrants’ siblings, remittances have a weak negative impact on land and livestock, but a positive and significant effect on food, clothing, and footwear expenditures. While remittances do not affect current credit constraints, they have a stronger impact on households that were credit constrained in 1984/85. Among constrained households, remittances have a positive and significant effect on livestock, the value of land and assets, and educational expenditures. Remittances also have a greater impact on children whose parents were credit constrained, increasing values of housing, consumer durables, and total nonland assets.	Agnes	R. Quisumbing	Scott	 McNiven
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	The Role of Privatized Prison Industries in Post-Release Labor Market Reintegration	As the prison population has rapidly expanded, the share of inmates participating in educational and vocational prison programming has declined. Collaborations with private organizations have the potential to provide new funding sources for prisoner rehabilitation. Since 1981, Florida has outsourced all of its prison industry programs to Prison Rehabilitative Industries and Diversified Enterprises, Inc.  (PRIDE). PRIDE does not receive any public funding, but instead finances its operations and training activities with the revenue from its prison industries. Using administrative data from the Florida Department of Corrections, I compare the post-release employment outcomes of offenders who participate in the PRIDE program to those of similar offenders who do not. While the OLS results suggest that PRIDE participation increases earnings by 10 percent, this effect disappears when I correct for selection into treatment by exploiting conditional random assignment to initial prison facility.	Jillian	 Berk
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Employer Access to Criminal History Data and the Employment of Young Black Men	Criminal background checks have become a routine part of pre-employment screening. Since black men are overrepresented in the criminal justice system, increasing use of criminal background checks might have a significant employment effect for black men. Using a unique dataset on state availability of criminal history data over the Internet, I find that the relative employment of young black men was lowered by more than 2% in states that made the records of former criminal offenders available on the Internet compared with states that did not.	Keith	 Finlay
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion	This paper analyzes the relationships between juvenile justice system interactions and high school graduation. When controlling for a large set of observables as well as state- and household-level unobservables, arrested and incarcerated individuals are about 10 and 25 percentage points, respectively, less likely to graduate high school than non-arrested individuals. The effect of arrest, however, disappears when there is minimal selection on unobservables; in contrast, the incarceration effect is less sensitive to such selection and can be more readily interpreted as causal. An exploration of the mechanisms underlying the incarceration effect points most consistently toward an education-impeding stigma.	Randi	 Hjalmarsson
2007	47	Incarcerations and Labor Market Outcomes	Longitudinal Evidence on the Impact of Incarceration on Labour Market Outcomes and General Well-Being	This paper examines the impact of being incarcerated on labour market outcomes and general well-being using longitudinal data from the nationally representative Household Income and Labour Dynamics of Australia (HILDA) survey. We estimate OLS regression on the entire population, regression models that examine changes in outcomes before/after incarceration for individuals that have been incarcerated, and propensity score matching models that examine changes in outcomes before/after incarceration for individuals that have been incarcerated compared to changes in outcomes for individuals with similar observable characteristics over the same time period. The second and third type of models allow us to control for individual unobservable traits that may simultaneously cause certain individuals to commit crimes and put them at higher risk of poor outcomes. By comparing the OLS estimates to those from the other models, we are able to examine the extent to which individuals that are incarcerated in Australia are negatively selected.	Steven	 Stillman	Malathi	 Velamuri
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Men's Differing Work Trajectories and Fatherhood	In this paper we ask whether U.S. men can be usefully classified into distinct groups with respect to their trajectories of work effort from adolescence to adulthood. In addition, assuming such groups can be distinguished, we ask how their patterns of fathering differ across these groups. Our data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort, and our methods are latent class analysis.	Nan	M. Astone	Jacinda	K. Dariotis	Freya	 Sonenstein	Joseph	H. Pleck
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Fatherhood and Men’s Everyday Time Use in Sweden 1990-2000	Research in many countries confirms that the transition to parenthood intensifies gendered patterns in time use and strengthens a traditional division of labor in which women do more housework and caring than men. This is also the case in Sweden today. This paper investigates the impact of fatherhood on men’s everyday workload and how it changed over the 1990s by analyzing data from two Swedish Time Use Surveys, undertaken by Statistics Sweden in 1990/91 and 2000/01. Specifically, we ask: In what way do children affect the everyday workload of mothers and fathers? Do fathers have a greater workload than childless men? What are the determinants of time use among different groups of men? The results show a clear impact of fatherhood on men’s time use and that there has, over time, been an increasing reconciliation of gender roles but there is still a traditional specialization according to gender.	Martin	 Dribe	Maria	A. Stanfors
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Active Fatherhood Policy and Fertility in the Nordic Countries: A Comparative Study on the Impact of Fathers' Use of Parental Leave on Continued Childbearing in Norway and Sweden	In the Nordic countries gender equality is an explicit political goal integrated in present family policies. Norway and Sweden both offer paid parental leave for approximately one year with earnings-related benefits, with certain periods reserved exclusively for the father. This paper examines the relationship between fathers' use of parental leave and continued childbearing among couples in Norway and Sweden. These countries represent similar family policies, but differ concerning (political) context. While Sweden has a one-sided policy concerning gender relations, Norway has a less consistent policy giving incentives to both gender-equality and childrearing in the home. The analysis is based on longitudinal information on registered parental-leave use and childbearing of all intact unions during a 10-year period. A hazard rate model is used to explore whether fathers’ parental-leave use is positively associated with  couples' continued childbearing. We expect that paternal involvement has a stronger positive effect on childbearing in Sweden than in Norway.	Trude	 Lappegård	Duvander	 Ann-Zofie
2007	48	Work and Family: A Father's Perspective	Employment and Earnings across the Transition to Fatherhood: A Life Course Perspective	Existing studies support the hypotheses that married fathers are likely to work longer hours for pay than their childless counterparts, and to earn more money. In this study, I draw upon the life course perspective in asking whether married men respond to becoming fathers for the first time in the same way regardless of the age at which fertility takes place. Fitting fixed effects models to data from the NLSY79, I test several competing hypotheses particularly focused upon delayed fathers, or those who become first-time parents in their thirties and after. Preliminary findings suggest that while delayed fathers’ employment and earnings are not affected by parenthood, there is a significant (but small) disjunction among older men based on their attitudes toward gender egalitarianism. The results appear to have implications for the study of work-family linkages and for discussions of delayed fathers and the “new fatherhood”.	Matthew	 Weinshenker
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	Revisiting the 'Opt-Out' Question		Heather	 Boushey
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	The End of the Gender Revolution? Trends in Employment, Occupations, Earnings and Attitudes, 1950-2004.		David	A. Cotter	Joan	M. Hermsen	Reeve	 Vanneman
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	The Impact of Changing Gender Role Attitudes on Fertility Decisions		Nicole	 Fortin
2007	49	Women, Work and the Opt-Out Revolution	Who's Opting into Housewivery? Gender Employment, and Household Labor		Liana	C. Sayer	Sanjiv	 Gupta
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	After the Storm: Return Migration and Neighborhood Change in Post-Katrina New Orleans	In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, what remains of New Orleans is a smaller geographic footprint, where some neighborhoods are booming while others struggle to recover, each being transformed not only by the biophysical events that occurred but also by a combination of changing market forces, government action, and citizen activism. The objective of this study is to analyze this unprecedented process of urban change through the migratory lens of displaced and undisplaced residents themselves, focusing specifically on racial and class differences in network and institutional assistance. Data come from over 500 interviews conducted with pre-Katrina residents of New Orleans during the first six to twelve months of post-Katrina recovery. Preliminary results indicate substantial changes in the historical fabric of the city, as certain types of displaced residents use network ties to crowd into less damaged neighborhoods as they await the opportunity and resources needed to return home.	James	R. Elliott
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	Post-Katrina New Orleans as a New Migrant Destination	Latino migrants have been arriving in New Orleans to participate in the clean-up and rebuilding of the city ever since the floodwaters of Hurricane Katrina receded. While many southern cities have witnessed large increases in Latino migrant populations, this had not been the case in New Orleans until after Katrina. In this research I investigate the socio-demographic characteristics of this newcomer population to understand how it differs from migrant populations in other destinations in the U.S. The data I use for this research comes from two sources, a sample of New Orleans migrants interviewed between March and May of 2006 and a sample of migrants interviewed in the U.S. in 2004. I find some differences between migrants in New Orleans and those in other destinations, but these results suggest that they are more alike than not. More interesting differences exist between Latinos of different national origins in New Orleans.	Elizabeth	 Fussell
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	The Displaced New Orleans Residents Pilot Study	The Displaced New Orleans Residents Pilot Study was designed to examine the current location, well-being, and plans of people who lived in the City of New Orleans when Hurricane Katrina struck on 29 August 2005. The study is based on a representative sample of pre-Katrina dwellings in the city. Fieldwork efforts focused on tracking respondents wherever they had moved, including back to New Orleans. Respondents were administered a short paper-and-pencil interview by mail, by telephone, or in person.    In this paper, we present the preliminary results from the pilot study. We describe the study design and report on our ability to locate and successfully interview displaced New Orleans residents. We also describe the migration experience, mental health, socioeconomic status, and future plans of the respondents. We end with a discussion of the lessons learned from the pilot study. Our conclusions highlight the challenges and opportunities of studying this unique population.	Narayan	 Sastry
2007	50	Post-Katrina Migration Dynamics in New Orleans	Katrina-Related Health Impacts on Vietnamese New Orleanians: A Longitudinal Analysis	A wide range of self-reported and objective health measures collected for a Vietnamese immigrant sample living in the greater New Orleans area just weeks before Hurricane Katrina struck possess extraordinary potential as baseline measures for investigating how immigrants fare after such disasters. We assess the short-term (1 year) effects of a natural disaster upon the health of a recent immigrant population by comparing pre-event and post-event physical and mental health assessments for working age (20-49) Vietnamese-American New Orleanians. Individuals in our sample underwent a 90-minute health assessment during June and July 2005 (n=125); the majority of these same individuals have been located and re-assessed during August and September of 2006 (current n=75 and increasing). Our working sample is these 75 individuals for whom we now have both pre- and post-event physical and mental health measures.	Mark	 VanLandingham	Fran	 Norris	Lung	 Vu	Hongyun	 Fu
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Crime Load and Mental Health Decline: Longitudinal Evidence from the Mexican Family Life Survey	The literature on crime and victims’ mental health provides descriptive evidence of the association between the two, but there is very little causal evidence on the effect of victimization on individual health. We contribute to filling  this gap using nationally representative, longitudinal data from the Mexican Family Life Survey to examine the impact of victimization on mental health status of the population. We find evidence that crime poses a significant burden on several dimensions of health. Among asymptomatic individuals, victims are more likely than non-victims to develop an anxiety disorder. Symptoms that were absent before victimization, such as frequent nervousness, fear, pessimism, obsessiveness, headaches, and chest pain, tend to appear after it. Impacts vary across genders—females seem to endure a harder impact on mental health, being significantly more likely than males to start exhibiting anxiety symptomathology following crime.	Facundo	 Cuevas	Luis	 Rubalcava	Graciela	M. Teruel
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Marital Status and Psychological Wellbeing of Filipino Women	In developing countries like the Philippines, little is known about the association of changes in marital status from a married state and women’s psychological health. Using data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey of some 2,000 childbearing women in Metro Cebu, Philippines, this study examines the relationship between marital transitions from a married status and psychological wellbeing. We classify marital status transitions as: 1) still with first spouse, 2) widowed, 3) separated, and 4) remarried. Wellbeing is measured in terms of: 1) an index of depression symptoms experienced in the last month and 2) an index of violent acts done by, and done to, women in the last year. Logistic regression results show that transition to widowhood increases the likelihood of depression but reduces that of domestic violence. Remarriage increases the odds of being a victim of violence but is unrelated to depression and the perpetration of violence.	Socorro	A. Gultiano	Graeme	Ferdinand D. Armecin
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Domestic Violence as a Risk Factor for Psychosis in Bolivia	The experience of domestic violence is positively associated with depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, and substance abuse. While research suggests that traumatic, victimizing events are partially causally associated with psychosis, few studies have explored the association between domestic violence and psychotic symptoms, particularly in a developing country context. Using data from the 2003 Bolivia DHS, logistic regression is used to discern the risk factors for self-reported psychotic symptoms. Women who report domestic violence are 43% more likely to hear voices speaking to them than those who have not experienced domestic violence. Women whose mothers were beaten by their fathers are 20% more likely to report hearing voices, and women who were severely punished as children were 14% more likely to hear voices. These findings highlight the importance of the provision of mental health services that are also capable of addressing the problem of domestic violence, and vice versa.	Kiersten	 Johnson
2007	51	Population Perspectives on Mental Health	Why Women Attempt Suicide: The Role of Mental Illness and Social Disadvantage in a Community Cohort Study in India	The goal of this study was to describe the risk for attempted suicide in women associated with social disadvantage and mental disorder. The data is based on a cohort study of 2318 women in Goa, India. Information was collected at baseline on socioeconomic adversity, gender disadvantage, and physical and common mental disorders (CMD). The main outcome was self-report attempted suicide (AS) over the 12-month study period and the main method of analysis was exact logistic regression. Gender-based violence (OR=5.04, 95%CI: 1.69-15.45), CMD (OR=3.50, 95%CI: 1.04-10.90) and indebtedness (OR=2.89, 95%CI: 1.02-8.89) were the strongest independent predictors of incident AS cases. Experiencing both gender-based violence and CMD increases the risk of AS 25-fold when compared with women who have experienced neither risk factor. Strategies to reduce gender-based violence and discrimination, provide debt relief and improve the recognition and treatment of common mental disorders may reduce the population burden of attempted suicide.	Joanna	 Maselko	Vikram	 Patel
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Record Measures of Longevity	This study reviews the trend over time in three measures of typical longevity: life expectancy at birth, and median and modal ages at death. It also examines trends in record values observed for all three measures. Record life expectancy at birth increased steadily from a level of 44 years in 1840 to 82 years in 2004, and record median age at death showed a similar increasing pattern. However, record modal age at (adult) death remained at a plateau around age 80 until the 1940s. In more recent years, the mode has shown the same pace of increase observed for the other record measures. This trend in the modal age at death reflects a fundamental change over time from a dominance of child mortality reductions to a dominance of adult mortality reductions. It is argued that mortality forecasts based on shifting ages at death must take this change into account.	Vladimir	 Canudas-Romo	John	R. Wilmoth
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	The Narrowing Sex Gap in Life Expectancy: Effects of Sex Differences in the Age Pattern of Mortality	Using data from the Human Mortality Database for 29 high-income national populations (1751-2004), we review trends in the sex gap in e(0). Widening of the sex gap during most of the 1900s was largely due to slower mortality decline for males than females, which previous studies attributed to behavioural factors (e.g., smoking). More recently, the gap began to narrow in most countries, which researchers tried to explain with these same factors. However, our decomposition analysis reveals that for the majority of countries recent narrowing is primarily due to sex differences in the age pattern of mortality rather than declining sex ratios in mortality: the same rate of mortality decline produces smaller gains in e(0) for women than men because female deaths are less dispersed across age (i.e., survivorship is more rectangular). This study demonstrates that sex differences in the age pattern of mortality affect trends in the e(0) sex gap.	Dana	A. Glei	Shiro	 Horiuchi
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Evaluating the Performance of Death Distribution Methods for Estimating Death Registration Completeness: Applications to Data from High-Income Countries	In countries where vital registration systems are underdeveloped, mortality estimates derived from conventional methods can be badly biased. Analytical methods that estimate levels of death registration completeness are among the alternative approaches used for mortality measurement in these contexts. Although the use of such methods is increasing, few empirical studies have evaluated how they perform. One evaluation strategy is to apply them to settings where the recording of deaths and population is thought to be essentially complete. In this paper, we evaluate how three death-distribution methods perform with accurate data from the Human Mortality Database, and explore whether additional information can be used to improve performance. We also assess the sensitivity of death registration methods to the age groups used to estimate adjustment factors, and examine the association between registration completeness estimates and net international migration flows.	Kevin	J.A. Thomas
2007	52	Issues in the Measurement of Mortality	Verbal Autopsy Methods with Multiple Causes of Death	Verbal autopsy procedures are widely used for estimating cause-specific mortality in areas without medical death certification. Data on symptoms reported by caregivers along with the cause of death are collected from a medical facility, and the cause of death distribution is estimated in the population where only symptom data are available. Current approaches analyze only one cause at a time, involve assumptions judged impossible to satisfy, and require time-consuming or unreliable physician reviews, expert algorithms, or parametric statistical models. By generalizing current approaches to analyze multiple causes, we show how most of the difficult assumptions underlying existing methods can be dropped. These generalizations also make physician review, expert algorithms, and parametric statistical assumptions unnecessary. With theoretical results, and empirical analyses in data from China and Tanzania, we illustrate the accuracy of this approach. As a companion to this paper, we offer easy-to-use software that implements the methods discussed herein.	Gary	 King	Ying	 Lu
2007	53	Contraception  	Contraceptive Trends in the Developing World: A Comparative Analysis from the Demographic and Health Surveys	This study examines trends and differentials in key family-planning indicators in 35 developing countries. The study investigates how knowledge and utilization have changed; whether public/private, urban/rural, and other socioeconomic differentials in contraceptive use have narrowed; and whether women are making informed contraceptive decisions. It also examines discontinuation and switching and men’s involvement in family planning. Results indicate that knowledge levels are near universal in most countries, yet knowledge of multiple methods, despite increases over time, remains considerably lower, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Current use has been increasing consistently in most countries, but levels remain lower in sub-Saharan Africa. About half of current users are informed about alternative methods and side effects. Most women have switched methods. Discontinuation rates are particularly high in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, urban/rural and educational differentials in current use are narrowing, but remain substantial in sub-Saharan countries.	Shane	 Khan	Vinod	 Mishra	Fred	 Arnold	Noureddine	 Abderrahim
2007	53	Contraception  	Women’s and Men’s Social Networks and Contraceptive Use Dynamics: Longitudinal Evidence from Ghana	This paper examines the effects of social network experience on contraceptive use dynamics in six communities in southern Ghana. The data permit assessment of the explanatory power of both women’s and men’s social network experience. Men’s social networks have been largely neglected in research on social interaction and reproduction in developing countries, despite the fact that in most of these societies men have a decisive voice in reproductive decision-making. Panel survey data are analyzed for roughly 900 women and their male partners covering five years of observation. The monthly probability of use of modern contraception is modeled as a function of conventional demographic and socioeconomic variables and separate sets of social network variables specific to the woman and to her male partner. The regression modeling includes strategies for dealing with the endogeneity of social networks and unobservables that might bias the estimation of social network effects.	Peter	 Aglobitse	John	B. Casterline
2007	53	Contraception  	Adapting, Scaling Up, and Sustaining a Family Planning and Reproductive Health Model: The Willows Foundation Outreach Program in Turkey	The world is keenly interested in how successful family planning/reproductive health (FP/RH) models can be adapted to other settings and scaled up. Building on lessons of Matlab and other community-based approaches, Willows Foundation’s community-outreach and referral program has increased poor urban women’s access to FP/RH information and services in Turkey. Over 800,000 women were reached by 979 field educators between 1999 and 2005; the project worked simultaneously to improve government health services.    In 2004-2006, the program was externally evaluated in six urban areas of Turkey to assess the effects of the program on both clients and project staff regarding contraceptive use, FP/RH knowledge, familiarity with and use of preventive services. The evaluation details the successes of this scaled-up and intensive model of community-based education, counseling and referral. In establishing links between poor women and government services, the project provides important insights into both obstacles and needs regarding women’s access to health services.	Demet	 Gural	Hacer	 Nalbant	Aysen	 Bulut	Janet	M. Turan	Elaine	M. Murphy
2007	53	Contraception  	Interactions between Genes and Social Context for Contraceptive Use in Adolescence and Young Adulthood	Demographers studying contraceptive usage have heretofore emphasized elements such as relevant individual knowledge and motivation, and relationship and general social contexts. However, to date no work has examined potential genetic contributions to contraceptive behaviors which may interact with the environment, as with other risky behaviors (Caspi et al. 2002, 2003). Using genetic and behavioral data from three waves of the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), our study investigates possible relationships between theoretically relevant genetic polymorphism - including DRD2, MAOA, DRD4, and DAT1 - and contraceptive self-reports among adolescents and young adults.  Our preliminary results suggest that contraceptive behavior is structured both genetically as well as socially. Different genetic polymorphisms influence contraceptive usage at first sex, most recent sex, and more general patterns of contraceptive usage. Furthermore, the nature of these genetic effects appears to vary by social groupings, suggesting a strong possibility of gene-environment interactions.	Guang	 Guo	Jonathan	 Daw
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	The Consequences of Multi-Partnered Fertility for Parental Involvement and Relationships	At the nexus of major changes in marital and fertility behavior in recent decades is a new reality of contemporary family life - the fact that a significant fraction of adults today (will) have biological children by more than one partner, referred to as ‘multi-partnered fertility.’ This increasing family complexity creates challenges for managing parental roles and responsibilities important to the effective care and socialization of children. In this paper, we use new data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study with propensity-score matching techniques to explore the consequences of multi-partnered fertility for family relationships about three years after a baby’s birth in large U.S. cities. Overall, we find that a sizeable fraction of couples have one or more previous children and that these parental obligations are strongly linked to the focal couple’s ability to stay together and co-parent effectively. Fathers’ having previous children is particularly deleterious - at least from mothers’ perspectives.	Marcia	J. Carlson	Frank	 Furstenberg
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	The Structure of Intergenerational Exchange in the U.K.	In this paper, I analyse recent survey data on the exchange of practical support and assistance between adult children and their non-coresident parents. Using latent class analysis, three types of exchange relationships are identified: (1) those who rarely exchange assistance with their parents (low-level exchangers), (2) those who regularly exchange assistance with their parents (high-level exchangers), and (3) those who mainly give support to their parents (givers). Since low-level exchangers account for three-fifths of the sample, it is fair to say that, in contrast to previous research, the overall level of intergenerational exchange in contemporary U.K. is rather modest. However, the associations between latent class membership and other covariates are broadly consistent with previous research. Finally, members of all three latent classes report substantively similar levels of subjective well-being and overall social support received.	Tak	Wing  Chan
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	Divorce, Intergenerational Solidarity, and Perceived Support	Using two waves of the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, I examine how parental divorce and remarriage affect parent-child relationships and exchanges in midlife, and consequently how parents’ ties with their children affect parental perceptions of support availability in late life, with particular attention to gender differences. This analysis shows that parental divorce lowers parent-child solidarity in midlife, particularly for fathers. Divorced parents are also less likely than married parents to name their adult children as potential sources of support. Remarriage and having stepchildren do not improve parental beliefs about potential support from adult children. Surprisingly, the association between parental divorce and perceptions of support cannot be explained by intergenerational solidarity in midlife.	I-Fen	 Lin
2007	54	Family Relationships and Exchanges	Time and Money Transfer to Elderly Parents: Family Assistance and Labor Market Behavior	This paper examines the extent to which the baby-boom generation assists aging parents with time and money and how the helping behavior affects the helpers' labor market activities. We also compare behavior of the baby boomers to that of their predecessors. Patterns of assistance are similar, with one exception: the gender difference has narrowed. Sizable fractions of these individuals provided assistance to their elderly parents at some time during 1992. Time help was much more common than money help and health-related help tended to constitute a small part of the help to parents. Evidence indicates that baby boomers are assisting their elderly parents without changing the amount of time they spend working in the labor market. The findings suggest it is the challenge of juggling these activities collectively, rather than possible lost time at work, that merits the concerted attention of researchers, employers, and policy makers.	Wei-Jun	Jean  Yeung
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Minority Language Status, Generation, and the Educational Performance of Immigrant Children	The educational achievement of immigrant children is central to their success, but within the American educational system, they must overcome at least two major obstacles. One, the majority of recent immigrant families have lower SES than native students’ families, yet SES is key to parents’ ability to promote educational achievement. Second, immigrant parents often speak a language other than English; thus their children may begin schooling with a limited knowledge of the language used for instruction. Research has suggested that recent immigrants have higher achievement than native-borns, but studies finding this effect lack concrete data on students’ English ability. Using English language assessment data from the ECLS-K, this study tests whether generational effects on fifth-grade academic outcomes are mediated by early English ability. Results show that English skill is a suppressor on the generational effect, giving support to the “immigrant optimism hypothesis,” suggesting that this effect is evident among elementary students.	Rachel	E. Durham	George	 Farkas
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Where Do Trajectories Diverge? Nativity and Ethnic Differences in Home Environment and Very Early Cognitive Development	Racial and ethnic disparities in educational attainment have their origins in differential access to resources in early childhood. This paper addresses differences in early cognitive development and asks whether differences in socioeconomic resources and parenting practices mediate the relationship among mother's nativity, language use, ethnicity and early cognitive development even before children encounter formal school settings. Analyses of the first two waves of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth cohort (ECLS-B) indicate significant racial and ethnic differences in the home environments of young children. Mother's nativity, age at arrival and home language background are also associated with more disadvantaged home environments in multivariate models. Overall, home environment plays a significant role in explaining differences in cognitive development by ethnicity and nativity by the second wave of data. Further, mother's age at arrival and parenting practices do not have the same relationship to early cognitive development in all ethnic groups.	Jennifer	E. Glick	Littisha	 Scott
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Impact of Parental Involvement on the Gap in Kindergarten Math Scores between Children of Immigrants and Children of Natives	Children of immigrants are the fastest growing segment of the young child population in the United States (Hernandez, 1999). This population is quite diverse and is overall performing less well than their native counterparts. (Magnuson et al., 2006; Han, 2005; Crosnoe, 2005). Using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey - Kindergarten Cohort, this paper analyzes whether differences in parental involvement can explain part of the gap in math scores between children of immigrants and children of natives in the fall and the spring of kindergarten. Controlling for parental involvement reduces the gap for children of Mexican parents and increases the advantage of children of Chinese parents. From the fall to the spring of kindergarten, the negative impact of speaking a non-English language at home decreases and even more so with the inclusion of parental involvement variables. Finally, going to kindergarten all day instead of half day increases the math scores.	Claudia	 Lahaie
2007	55	Immigration and Child Development	Global Nutrition Patterns and Overweight among Young Children of U.S. Immigrants: Why Nutrition Assimilation Pathways Vary across Groups	Empirical efforts to assess the relationship between exposure to U.S. society and overweight among children have been hampered by a tendency to treat acculturation as a linear process. Global nutrition patterns and new formulations of assimilation theory suggest that variation in immigrants’ national origins and socioeconomic statuses are likely to generate variations in generational patterns in the prevalence of overweight. We analyze generational patterns in overweight among Hispanic, Asian, and non-Hispanic white children ages five and six using the Kindergarten cohort of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (N = 11,719). We find that the relationship between socioeconomic status and BMI reverses from positive to negative across immigrant generations. For children of newcomers, the relationship is positive for those from poor countries but negative for those from wealthier countries. National origin differences diminish among children of settled immigrants, and the relationship between SES and overweight becomes negative among children of natives.	Jennifer	 Van Hook	Kelly	 Balistreri
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	A Life Course Study of Racial and Ethnic Differences in Women’s Labor Market Exit Patterns	Do Black, Hispanic, and White women experience different rates of retirement, work-disability, and death? If so, what are the specific life course factors underlying racial and ethnic differences in women’s labor force exit behavior? We draw on life course themes and panel data from the HRS to examine race differences in women’s labor force exit pathways, with particular attention to the mediating effects of education, earnings, work and family patterns, wealth, and health. Findings show that women’s labor market exit pathways are diverse and vary by race and ethnicity. We find that while minority and White women have comparable retirement transition rates, Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to exit the labor market due to a work-disability. Additionally, Blacks are more likely than Whites to exit the workforce due to death. A wide array of life course factors account for these race differences in labor force exit pathways.	Tyson	H. Brown	David	F. Warner
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Understanding Racial Inequality in Homeownership: A Dynamic Approach	This analysis is interested in understanding why racial differences in homeownership have persisted in the past three decades and how they could be diminished. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics allows the opportunity to study the dynamics of the process of transitioning into and out of homeownership and answer many questions about the occurrence and timing of these flows. Using event history models I assess the effects of race and various other factors in the occurrence and timing of becoming an owner, buying subsequent homes and returning to renter status. An emphasis is placed on how these effects have changed over time and how they vary across cohorts. These estimates are then used in simulations to examine what accounts for the racial gap in aggregate homeownership levels and what changes might close this gap.	Vanesa	 Estrada
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Race/Ethnic Disparities in Cause-Specific Infant Mortality Change over Two Decades	It has been argued that “the past two decades have witnessed the most profound alterations ever recorded in the structure of infant mortality patterns in the United States” (Gortmaker and Wise 1997: 152). But despite the fact that race/ethnic disparities have increased during a time period when infant mortality was falling for virtually all groups, no research exists that examines changes in cause-specific infant mortality by race/ethnicity over this crucial time period. Here we document and model black-white change in infant mortality for 1983-2001 using the NCHS linked files. We also use data for the 10 states (including all four border states) that included Hispanic identifiers throughout this time period to carry out an analysis paralleling the one just mentioned. Preliminary results indicate substantial variation in race/ethnic changes in cause-specific infant mortality and identify several important inflection points in the trends.	Parker	 Frisbie	Seung-Eun	 Song
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Race-Ethnicity and Unhealthy Body Mass: A Quantile Regression Analysis	This paper examines racial-ethnic disparity in BMI using the 2005 NHIS. Quantile regression models are used to estimate the partial effect of race-ethnicity at the CDC standards for malnourishment, overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity.  Separately for men and women and controlling for age, income, immigrant arrival cohorts, marital status, and Food Stamp use, our analysis shows: (1) The black-white disparity is stronger in the overweight and obese ranges among women, whereas there is little black-white disparity among men. (2) Compared to whites, Hispanics generally have higher BMI over the full distribution: Hispanic men are particularly heavier in the extreme obese range while Hispanic women are so in the overweight and obese ranges. (3) Overall, Asians have lower BMI than whites: Asian men are particularly thinner than white men at the overweight and obese ranges whereas Asian women are particularly thinner at the obese and extreme obese ranges.	Lingxin	 Hao	Julie	 Kim
2007	56	Racial and Ethnic Inequality	Parental Incarceration, the Prison Boom, and the Concentration of Disadvantage	In an era of historically high imprisonment rates, parental imprisonment may have emerged as a novel experience for disadvantaged black children. Despite the possible effect of the prison boom on childhood inequality, no estimates of the risk of parental imprisonment exist. This paper estimates the risk of parental imprisonment for American children born between 1978 and 1990. Estimates show that: (1) three percent of children born in 1978 and six percent of children born in 1990 experienced parental imprisonment; (2) one in five black children and one in 40 white children born in 1990 had a parent imprisoned; (3) race and class inequality in the risk of parental imprisonment is growing; and (4) 40 percent of black children born in 1990 to high school dropouts experienced parental imprisonment. Estimates using longitudinal data confirm that parental imprisonment is a novel form of childhood disadvantage that concentrates disadvantage among black children of low-education parents.	Christopher	 Wildeman
2007	57	International Migration	All in the Family: Generational Acculturation among Immigrant Parents and Children	Over the past decade, a burgeoning literature has sought to determine how the “new” immigrant second generation is adapting to their host society. Acculturation is an important intervening variable in this assimilation process. However, little research has paid serious attention to theory-driven measurement of acculturation. I argue that acculturation can be viewed as a process that happens to families, not just to children. With the Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Survey, I measure familial acculturation and examine its determinants. Analyses first suggest that nationality status and variables measuring parental skills and resources combine to determine the likelihood that families will experience consonant acceptance, consonant rejection, and differences in the rate of acculturation. Second, there is little consistent evidence that the effects of parental resources on these measures of familial acculturation differ by nationality status or race of the child, a result that supports the expectations of straight-line assimilation theory.	David	A. Cort
2007	57	International Migration	What Role Does Religion Play in the Migration Process? And Vice Versa? Evidence from the New Immigrant Survey	We use data from the New Immigrant Survey to describe the composition of religious preference among the new legal immigrants. In a previous paper, the religious preference of immigrants was analyzed using the NIS-Pilot data. This paper extends that work, using a nationally representative prospective-retrospective study, to support the robustness of the previous results and to analyze and describe new findings of the different faith traditions and interrelations among the religions of the respondents, and of their spouses and offspring, as well as changes in faith over time. We pay particular attention to the immigrants’ behaviors across immigration visa categories, countries of origin, educational attainment, gender, and migration history. This focus is particularly relevant in the context of analyzing the characteristics of the major faith traditions as well as the immigration directions. We draw conclusions and make comparisons with the literature regarding the religious composition of the native-born U.S. population.	Monica	E. Higgins
2007	57	International Migration	Migration and Schooling among U.S.-Born Children of Mexican Parents	Second-generation migrants are invariably analyzed under the assumption that, having being born in the U.S., they grew up living in the U.S. The main aim of the present study is to explore the cases among U.S.-born Mexican children for which this assumption is not true. It describes their US-Mexico migration patterns during childhood, whether these moves involve parent-child separations or reunions, and differences in their school enrollment status by age when living in the U.S. or Mexico. It is the first study to provide direct evidence on these topics using national-level data. This is achieved by combining microdata from the U.S. and Mexico censuses of 1990 and 2000, including the place of residence 5 years ago question in both countries' censuses. Substantial proportions migrate to Mexico at pre-school ages and these children experience both higher parent-child separation and higher enrollment through the school-age years than do their peers.	Michael	 Rendall
2007	57	International Migration	Why Do Immigrants Re-Migrate from One Affluent Country to Another? Immigrants’ Opportunity Structure in Comparative Perspective	This research examines the causes of, and motives for, an emerging type of international migration: secondary migration, or re-migration, from one affluent country to another. Focusing on the secondary migration of West Indians and South Asians from the U.K. to the U.S. in comparison to Latin American and East Asian migratory flows from Japan to the U.S., I attempt to identify the trend of secondary migration in general, and re-migratory flows from the U.K. and Japan to the U.S. in particular. Why do immigrants re-migrate from Japan or U.K. to the U.S. despite the countries’ relatively comparable economic status? Who re-migrates?   In this paper I analyze how secondary migration relates to the opportunity structure for immigrants in each country. I hypothesize that the opportunity structure is related to immigrants’ racial/ethnic integration and that second migrants are more likely than primary migrants to be highly skilled and educated.	Ayumi	 Takenaka
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Exploring Access to Maternal Health Services and Infant Mortality Regional Differentials Peru 2000	This paper explores a new methodology to calculate regional estimates of the relationship between access to maternal health services, mainly the use of prenatal care, and infant mortality rates. Using geographic weighted regression and point-spatial autocorrelation techniques on DHS geo-referenced cluster data for Peru 2000, the strength of this relationship is tested when controlling for social factors such as the proportion of rural, indigenous and low-education women. The results show significant regional variations of the impact of public health policy even within regions inside the South Andean, Coast and Jungle parts of Peru that are not captured when using non-spatial statistical modeling methods based on survey data. An argument is made for the contribution of spatial techniques to analyze inter- and intra-regional variations.	Lissette	 Aliaga Linares	Thomas	W. Pullum
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Explaining Spatial Homogamy: Spatial, Socio-Economic and Cultural Aspects of the Partner Market in the Netherlands	Spatial homogamy, or the similarity concerning geographical background, is a dimension that has been underexposed in homogamy studies. This paper gives a complete picture of the level and variation of spatial homogamy in the Netherlands, and the factors influencing it. The data used is a unique set of micro data on all cohabiters in the country, including their stage in the life course, socio-economic status, and cultural resources. Explorative Spatial Data Analysis is used to detect interesting spatial patterns in spatial homogamy and to construct hypotheses on spatial regimes. With the GeoDa software, a spatial regression explains geographical variation in the spatial homogamy coefficient, taking into account demographic, socio-economic, and cultural attributes of couples. The spatial model of the partner market identifies which specific (spatial) factors explain spatial homogamy.	Karen	 Haandrikman	Leo	 van Wissen
2007	58	Spatial Demography	The Impact of Spatially Proximate Population Concentrations on Migration	Migration research often fails to explicitly consider the impact that large concentrations of population in spatial proximity have on migration patterns. We develop a measure that estimates the impact of spatial population concentration on migration for each of the 3100 U.S. counties, using a gravitational potential model with a negative exponential distance decay function. We use a multivariate GWR model incorporating the demographic, economic and amenity characteristics of a county together with this measure of the spatial population concentrations to predict migration. Our research objectives are: to develop a measure that explicitly takes into account the influence of spatially proximate population concentrations on migration; and to incorporate our measure of spatial population proximity into a model that estimates the impact of a variety of demographic, economic and social characteristics of a county on migration.	Kenneth	M. Johnson	Paul	R. Voss	Roger	B. Hammer	Guangqing	 Chi
2007	58	Spatial Demography	A Space-Time Model of Fertility and Development in China, 1982-2000	Although China is extremely regionally diverse, and fertility policy is implemented at a local level, research often implicitly assumes spatial homogeneity. This paper applies exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA) and spatial panel regression models to examine county-level variation in fertility rates in China. Spatial regressions reduce bias resulting from spatial and temporal autocorrelation in regression models, while spatial analysis allows detailed examination of relationships between pairs of predictors. Using county-level data from China’s 1982, 1990, and 2000 censuses, I model general fertility rates and changes in rates using variables related to social and economic development characteristics of the counties.	Katherine	 King
2007	58	Spatial Demography	Do Slums Promote High Fertility? Neighborhood Differences in Fertility in Accra, Ghana	Fertility in Ghana is still well above replacement level. Even in the capital city of Accra women are having nearly three children each, and the declines there, as in the rest of the country, seem to have stalled. The average for Accra, however, hides a great deal of variability within the city. Explaining that spatial variability is the goal of this paper. We test the hypothesis that slum characteristics of neighborhoods account for fertility variability within Accra, net of individual characteristics. We do this by using data from a ten percent sample of anonymized individual records from the 2000 census. We group enumeration areas into contiguous slum areas by applying a new spatial clustering technique called AMOEBA. We then evaluate the importance of slum neighborhoods as predictors of fertility at the individual level using logistic regression analysis, and at the neighborhood level using spatially filtered multiple regression analysis.	John	R. Weeks	Allan	G. Hill	Arthur	 Getis	Sarah	 Hinton
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Time Use between Work and Family over the Life Cycle: A Comparative Gender Analysis  of Italy, France, Sweden and U.S.	The aim of this work is to analyse cross-country disparities in time use over the life course in France, Italy, United States and Sweden, using data from the Time Use Surveys. We focus on gender differences in the allocation of time to market work, domestic work, care and leisure at specific stages of the life-cycle on a sample of adults.  First, we describe the evolution of time use according to the major events in the life course, such as exiting the family of origin, family formation, childbearing, and retiring from work. Then, we focus on the correlates of time allocation in paid and unpaid work in a gender perspective with tobit models.  Our results confirm that men's and women's profiles by life stages vary everywhere, but in differing degrees, depending on welfare regime, family and employment policies, as well as tax system. The gender gap is greater in Italy than anywhere else.	Dominique	 Anxo	Lennart	 Flood	Letizia	 Mencarini	Maria-Letizia	 Tanturri	Ariane	 Pailhe	Anne	 Solaz
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Is Gender Inequity in Time Allocation Associated with Low Fertility? A Cross-National Enquiry	Using time use data to highlight the impact of children in the domestic sphere, this paper explores fertility in comparative perspective. It investigates how variation in gendered time allocation to market and non-market work relates to national fertility outcomes. Time use data offer a unique window into how people allocate their labour resources to paid work and family care. Comparative research provides a framework for testing the effects of alternative policy settings. The paper uses the Multinational Time Use Study (MTUS) to analyse time use in seven countries representing four contrasting policy regimes. It uses three measures (total paid and unpaid workload, the gender division of domestic labour, and relative time spent in market and non-market work) to explore the time effects, by sex, of having children in each country. It concludes that gendered time allocation only partially corresponds to standard regime classification, but is more implicated in fertility outcomes.	Lyn	 Craig
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Nonstandard Work Schedules in 12 European Labor Markets: An Analysis of Gender Differentials	This paper examines nonday and weekend employment in 12 European countries, based on data from the 2005 Labour Force Surveys. We present descriptive findings on prevalence, recognizing that variation in work schedule behavior among countries may reflect both differences in the nature of the labor force and cross-national variability in relevant public policies and collective agreements. We then focus on gender differences within countries, and employ regression analyses to assess the effect of gender after controlling for relevant labor force, demographic, and socio-economic factors. A central hypothesis is that nonday employment (usually working evenings, nights, or a rotating shift) is more characteristic of men, whereas weekend employment—which is more benign in its personal and familial consequences and disproportionately entails service-sector jobs—is more characteristic of women. Finally, for a subset of countries with data on parental status, we examine the relevance of children for employment at nonstandard times.	Harriet	B. Presser	Sangeeta	 Parashar
2007	59	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality in the Labor Market	Fighting Gender Inequalities in the Labour Market: The Role of Family Friendly Policies in OECD Countries	This paper provides a comparison of family-friendly policies in OECD countries and their connection with gender inequalities in the labour market. In most countries, recent evolutions of family-related policies have been driven prominently by the issue of work and family reconciliation. However, the combination of this issue with the other goals of those policies still remains very diverse. To account for this variety, we proceed to a Multiple Factorial Analysis of data on family policies, using the very recent Family database provided by the OECD, and including their different dimensions (development of childcare services; transfers and financial support to families; flexibility arrangements at the workplace) and measure their relation with indicators of child outcome, poverty and gender labour market differences. Then we discuss the results of our cluster analysis with regard to standard typologies of welfare states regimes, which are only partially corroborated.	Olivier	 Thevenon
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Intended, Appropriate, and Actual Family Size in Israel: Policy Attitudes and Implications	Israel’s population reflects unique combinations of immigration and high fertility. Arab and Jewish TFRs were 4.0 and 2.7 in 2005 – above Europe, the U.S., and some Mid-Eastern countries. Demographic trends impact Israel’s regional and global political relations. We examine Jewish (79% of Israel’s total) fertility patterns based on a 2005 national survey of married women and men at reproductive ages, comparing actual, intended, and appropriate family sizes in different demographic, socioeconomic, and cultural contexts. Diffuse gaps exist between ideal perceptions (3-4 children) and actual performances (2-3 children). Perceptions of incentives and constraints to family size provide clues to a renewed approach to social policies: preference for private over public motives to family growth, and a demand for better early childcare, cheaper education, housing, and provisions for working women. Israel’s prevailing policies of transfer payments do not meet a persisting demand for children grounded on child quality and women’s equitable status.	Sergio	 Dellapergola
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Are Individuals' Family Size Preferences Stable? Evidence from West German Panel Data	While recent years have brought a renewed interest in fertility preference data, the properties of individuals' wanted fertility, in particular formation and stability, have received little attention. Using panel data of West German men and women, we document that more than 60% of individuals report the same wanted family size across survey waves and that the stability is lower among younger individuals. More than 50% of men and women want two children and up to 30% of those who state a preference for two children initially report a different number in the follow-up survey. Multivariate analysis indicates that individuals' experiences explain little of the person-specific variation in preferences. We find that the second child increases the desired number by 0.2 and that unemployment reduces wanted fertility for women, but there is no evidence that changes in income and marital or partnership status affect preferences. We conclude that researchers can expect some variation in individuals' preferences over time, much of which, however, appears to be unsystematic.	Frank	 Heiland	Warren	C. Sanderson
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Underachieving Fertility: Education, Life Course Factors, and Cohort Change	We use data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of Young Women and Youth to examine cohort change in the relationship between fertility intentions, completed fertility, and education. While all women tend to fall short of their childbearing intentions, the gap between intended and realized fertility is greatest among the college educated. We examine what accounts for women’s inability to meet their childbearing intentions, focusing in particular on how such factors differ by women’s education, and whether these factors have changed over time. A common explanation of the education gap in fertility is the better employment opportunities of the more educated, which make time out of the labor force for children more costly. Increasingly, however, more educated women can substitute income for time in child care; their better marriage market opportunities may also mean more help from spouses. Have these changes led to increases the ability of college-educated women to meet their fertility intentions?	Kelly	 Musick	Sarah	 Edgington
2007	60	Mismatches between Fertility Intentions and Behavior: Causes and Consequences	Differences in Health Seeking Behaviour among Urban Poor Women in Nairobi Who Experienced Intended or Unintended Pregnancies	The objective of this paper is to illustrate differences in health seeking behaviour among urban poor women who had intended or unintended pregnancies.     This paper uses data from a nested survey in the Nairobi Urban Health and Demographic Surveillance System (NUHDSS) done in two informal settlements of Nairobi, namely Korogocho and Viwandani. A total of 1927 women aged 12-54 who had a pregnancy outcome in 2004 and 2005 were sampled. Using logistic regression, the paper explores differences in seeking antenatal services and delivery care among women with intended or unintended pregnancies.    Preliminary results suggest that women with unintended pregnancies (31%) were more likely to seek care from unqualified personnel for antenatal and delivery care compared to those who wanted the pregnancies (69%). In addition, women with unintended pregnancies had fewer visits for antenatal care; however, they initiated these visits much earlier compared to those women who had intended pregnancies.	Teresa	V. Saliku
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Religion, Religiosity, and the Decline of Marital Fertility in the United States, 1850-1930	Demographic historians have long suspected that cultural factors played an important role in the historical decline of marital fertility in the United States. This paper relies on the 1850-1930 IPUMS samples of the U.S. census to investigate correlates of marital fertility among native-born white women of native parentage, focusing on the relationship between religion, religiosity, and fertility. Two proxies of religious sentiment are found to be significantly correlated with marital fertility. First, county-level census data indicate that the presence of Congregationalists and Universalists was associated with lower marital fertility, while the presence of Lutherans was associated with higher marital fertility. Second, the proportion of own children with biblical names--believed to be a proxy of parental religiosity--was found to be positively associated with marital fertility. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that “traditional” religious beliefs were an impediment to the adoption of family limitation strategies.	J.	David  Hacker
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Do Congregations Influence Fertility?	Numerous demographic studies demonstrate that individual religious commitment influences fertility and many other studies compare the fertility rates of large religious groups. However, the influence of congregations upon fertility has been largely overlooked by demographers even though congregations are principal mediators of religious instruction, socialization, and practice. Utilizing data from hundreds of American congregations, this paper describes patterns of congregational fertility by denomination and analyzes the determinants of congregational fertility patterns. Multilevel analysis is conducted to specify the characteristics of variation in congregational fertility and to control for regional fertility differences. Preliminary findings reveal that congregations with conservative theology tend to have high fertility and congregations with high education levels tend to have low fertility. High fertility levels are observed in congregations affiliated with several small denominations that are usually overlooked in demographic surveys.	Conrad	 Hackett
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Religiosity and Fertility Differences in the Contemporary U.S.: Evidence from the 2002 NSFG	Using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), we show that women who report that religion is “very important” in their everyday life have both higher fertility and higher intended fertility than those saying religion is “somewhat important” or “not at all important.” Further, net of intended fertility, factors such as unwanted fertility, age at childbearing, or degree of fertility postponement seem not to contribute to religiosity differentials in fertility. This answer prompts more fundamental questions: why do the more religious want more children? Using items available in the 2002 NSFG, we show that more religious women have more traditional gender and family attitudes and that these attitudinal differences account for a substantial part of the initial fertility differential. We speculate regarding other contributing causes.	Sarah	R. Hayford	S.	Philip  Morgan
2007	61	Religion and Family Formation in the United States	Be Fruitful and Multiply: Changing Family Formation Behavior and the Role of Religion, Religiosity and Ethnicity	The concepts of religion and ethnicity are changing over time as is family formation behavior. This paper explores the interlocking roles that religion, religiosity and ethnicity play in the family formation decisions of individuals and how that role has changed over time. Using unique data from the Houston Area Study from 1983 to 2006, the observed relationships are explored in order to elucidate the mechanisms through which religion, religiosity and ethnicity combine to influence socio-demographic behavior. The results show that ethnicity clearly continues to define fertility and family forming behavior, with Blacks and Hispanics displaying elevated fertility compared with Whites, and Hispanics a relative propensity to marriage while Blacks exhibit the opposite effect. Religion, on the other hand, especially Catholicism, is having a declining effect. However, the effect of religion and religiosity on demographic behavior differs according to ethnicity, indicating the importance of the cultural context within which these traits operate.	Petra	 Nahmias
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Married Fathers' and Mothers' Time with Children: Gender Differences in the Role of Parents’ and Their Spouses' Employment	The time that married fathers spend with their children rose over the past 20 years. Mothers’ time with children rose over this period, too, resulting in a narrowed but still substantial gender gap in parental time with children. Given longstanding gender differences in parental time with children, this paper explores how factors that promote parental time investments in children vary by gender, too, paying particular attention to the role of parents’ and their spouses’ employment. Our sample includes 4,770 married fathers and 5,428 married mothers from the 2003 and 2004 American Time Use Survey, a new U.S. time diary data set, which permits detailed analyses of the activities parent engage in while with their children. Using tobit regression models, we find that holding a high status occupation increases fathers’, but not mothers’, time with children and that a spouse’s employment affects mothers’ and fathers’ time with children differently.	Margaret	L. Usdansky	Wendy	 Parker
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Intergenerational Financial Transfers from Older Americans: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study	We know little about the effects of family changes among the older generation on intergenerational financial transfers. Research on marital status effects on social and financial support among the elderly has focused primarily on the effects of widowhood or divorce on the receipt of support by the elderly. Research on intergenerational transfers has focused on the motivations of parents and the competition among children for inheritance. This paper builds on these research traditions by exploring the role of family structure among older adults in transfers to children or grandchildren. To do this, we estimate logistic regression models of making a transfer to any child or grandchild among older adults using data from the Health and Retirement Study. Results show key differences in the determinants of transfers by marital status and gender, and show the inertia of transfer behavior.	Leah	K. VanWey	Shelley	 Nelson
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Intergenerational Transfer Inflows to Adult Children of Divorce	Are adult children of divorce shortchanged when it comes to receiving money from their parents? Though there is evidence that divorce lowers the amount an individual parent might give to an adult child, no study so far has summed the transfers given by both parents. This study takes the adult child’s perspective rather than the parents’ perspective, turning around the typical question in the transfer literature, “How much did the parent give?” and asks instead, “How much did the child get?” It is also the first to explicitly examine the effect remarriage has on this amount. I find no effect of divorce or remarriage on the probability of receiving a transfer, nor on the amount received in a selection-corrected regression. For those children who receive a transfer, however, divorce is correlated with an increase in transfer amount, while the father's remarriage is correlated with a lower overall transfer.	Megan	M. Way
2007	62	Downward Flows of Transfers	Inter Vivos Giving over the Lifecycle	Inter vivos cash transfers and bequests among family members total hundreds of billions of dollars each year. They may equalize resources within a generation of a family as well as across family generations. Transfers delayed to the end of life may represent a significant motive for saving. We use longitudinal data from the Health and Retirement Study on inter vivos transfers that span up to twelve years to: describe financial transfers made by parents to children and their correlation with donor characteristics, and examine age patterns in giving behavior, the persistence of transfers, and how transfers change in response to changes in marital status, economic status and health. Our empirical analysis is motivated by a dynamic life-cycle model with inter vivos transfers as an argument in the utility function, which generates hypotheses about the age pattern of transfers and how mortality risk, risk aversion and economic resources affect giving behavior.	Julie	M. Zissimopoulos	Michael	 Hurd	James	P. Smith
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Demographic Shifts and the Spread of HIV in China	Much speculation exists as to the role that China’s changing demography will play in contributing to the spread of HIV/AIDS. We employ a bio-behavioral macrosimulation model to assess the potential HIV epidemic impact of two important demographic shifts currently underway in China: (1) the imbalanced sex ratios that alter the market for sexual partners; and (2) the swells in labor migration from the countryside to China’s urban centers that accompany rapid socioeconomic transformation. Simulated scenarios are informed by the available evidence linking masculine sex ratios and migration to shifts in patterns of sexual partnering in both historical and contemporary societies. Results illustrate the influence of similar shifts in sexual behavior on the heterosexual spread of HIV within the context of China’s present and projected imbalanced sex ratios and migration flows between rural and urban areas.	Sara	 Hertog	Giovanna	 Merli
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Sexual Risk Behaviour and Vulnerability to HIV Infection among Young Migrant Women Workers in Urban India	The objective of this study, initiated in January 2005, is to explore migrant women worker’s AIDS-related health information and health care facilities, perceptions about vulnerability, and risk behaviour profile. Data was collected through a pre-tested questionnaire from a random sample of unmarried female migrant workers under 30 years old residing in Delhi, India. Findings suggest that city life, greater independence and social networks mold their behaviour and lure them to lavish lifestyles by having rich boyfriends, acquiring expensive items (e.g. home theatres, computers, luxury cars), visiting expensive restaurants, going to discos and clubs, attending late night parties. To maintain their lavish lifestyle, 20 percent of them had sex with their peers, colleagues or boss for monetary benefits or in exchange for promotion and 10 percent had sex with multiple partners. The high-risk behaviour of these women put them at greater health risk; a substantial percentage of women have been found suffering from various sexual health problems.	Ruchi	 Jain	Kamla	 Gupta	Ajay	Kumar  Singh
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	Forced Sex Work in Vietnam: Perceptions and Realities	Many girls from rural areas are persuaded into migration and end up in sex work as a result of need or desire for increased income. Young migrant women are commonly forced into work in the sex industry and are therefore exposed to HIV/AIDS/STIs. Their entry into a high-risk situation is frequently characterized by powerlessness, with  limited to no control over their sexual lives and well-being. Many female youth sex workers are faced with instability, loss of family environment, forced sex, violence, and stigmatisation. As a result, the risk of AIDS does not emerge high on their list of priorities. Drawing on data from interviews with young women now working as sex workers in the city, the young women reported that it was their duty or obligation to stay in the city and accept the risks due to the money it provided to themselves and their families.	Rosanne	M. Rushing
2007	63	HIV/AIDS in Asia	HIV/AIDS: Trends, Forecasts, Exploring HIV Policy and Program Alternative Predictions Using Deterministic Asian Epidemic Model	Estimates and projections of HIV infections make an important contribution to public health policy in India. In addition, identification of the right target populations for intervention could be the most cost-effective strategy in the AIDS control program. The epidemiological, behavioral, programmatic, policy, resource allocation and program coverage data from Mumbai was used in AEM, a deterministic model to estimate the current and future course of the epidemic. The results indicate that non-brothel based sex work is increasing in Mumbai. Nine out of every ten infections occurring are due to heterosexual transmission, mainly from non-brothel based sex workers to clients to their wives. Universal coverage and condom promotion among non-brothel based sex workers can avert eighty eight percent of the new infections. Targeting non-brothel based sex workers offers a critical window of hope in responding to the burden of HIV incidence.	Damodar	 Sahu	Niranjan	 Saggurti	Arvind	 Pandey
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Returning Home to Die: Circular Labor Migration and Mortality in Northeast South Africa	The aim is to examine the hypothesis that circular labor migrants who become seriously ill while living away from home return to their rural homes to convalesce and possibly to die. Using data collected by the Agincourt demographic and health surveillance system in rural northeast South Africa, event history analysis is used to estimate the likelihood of dying for residents, recently returned migrants and long-term returned migrants. The annual odds of dying for recently returned migrants are 1.1 to 1.9 times higher than for all other migrant types, and the proportion of HIV/TB deaths among recently returned migrants increases with time. This suggests that increasing numbers of circular labor migrants of working age are becoming ill in urban areas where they work and are coming home to be cared for and eventually to die in the rural areas where their families live.	Samuel	J. Clark	Mark	 Collinson	Kathleen	 Kahn	Kyle	 Drullinger	Stephen	 Tollman
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Child Well-Being, Imperfect Information, and Patterns of Rural-Urban Migration	Urban areas in developing countries are almost universally associated with lower child mortality and better educational opportunities than rural areas. Yet fifty three percent of all biological children of primary school ages born to married migrant men living in the Nairobi slums, are not living in Nairobi. Similarly, adult men outnumber adult women in all age cohorts by as much as 2.7 to 1. This paper, based on data collected in two Nairobi slums in 2004, argues that urban-rural price variation for child-related goods, as well as information asymmetries that can arise within the household when rural families embark upon split migration, are important for understanding migration patterns more generally, and this pattern in particular. With the developing world urbanizing rapidly, the Nairobi situation may become increasingly common.	Joost	 de Laat
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Rural-Urban Migration and Child Survival in Urban Bangladesh: Are the Urban Migrants and Poor Disadvantaged?	This paper analyses the child survival status in urban Bangladesh, and examines whether it is poorer among the urban poor and rural-urban migrants, using data from the 1999-2000 Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey. Urban-rural differentials in childhood mortality are  diminishing in recent years, which may be related to rapid growth of rural-urban migration. Under-five mortality is 1.6 times higher among children born to urban migrants compared to lifelong urban natives. Two distinct child morality regimes have been identified, one for natives and one for migrants. The migrant-native mortality differentials fairly correspond to the socio-economic differentials. Like childhood mortality rates, rural-urban migrants seem to be moderately disadvantaged by economic status compared to their urban native counterparts. Within the urban areas, the child survival status is even worse among the migrant poor than the average urban poor, especially the recent migrants. The study underscores the importance of mother’s education, especially beyond secondary levels, to child survival in urban areas.	M.	Mazharul  Islam
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Family Migration as a Vehicle for Urban Poverty and Child Morbidity	This paper aims to establish the main sources of the urbanization of poverty and its consequences on children's well-being in the informal settlements of Nairobi, Kenya. Children in the slums of Nairobi are exposed to enormous risks, health risks in particular. One coping strategy for slum dwellers is to adopt split migration (or temporary migration): wife and children are secured in the home village while the head of household undertakes the migration project. The study seeks to understand the contribution of the alternative strategy of joint migration (or family migration) as compared to the more efficient strategy of split migration in the urbanization of poverty and child morbidity in the two slums of the Nairobi Health and Demographic Surveillance System.	Adama	 Konseiga
2007	64	Migration and Wellbeing in Developing Countries	Health Selectivity of Migration: A Longitudinal Analysis of Health and Internal Migration in Indonesia	Previous migration studies have shown that immigrants are generally healthier than the native-born populations of receiving countries, a result generally attributed to the positive selection of immigrants with respect to health.  However, the health selectivity of migrants is often confounded with the causal effect of migration on health.  Using high-quality longitudinal data from Indonesia with rich retrospective histories, we explicitly test the health selectivity hypothesis with respect to internal migration, examining whether pre-migration health status affects the likelihood of migration by comparing those from the sending population who do and do not move.  Adjusting for unobserved heterogeneity (via fixed-effect models) and conducting sensitivity analysis, we find that migrants in Indonesia do tend to be selected with respect to health an that results are relavitely robust to household unobserved heterogeneity.  However, the effect of health on migration varies by different types of migration and distinct dimensions of health.	Yao	 Lu	Donald	J. Treiman
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Genes, Socioeconomic-Cultural Environments, and Health Behaviors in Adolescence and Young Adulthood		Guang	 Guo
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Self-Report, Saliva, and Vaginal Swab: Integrating Multi-Level Data to Understand Cervical Cancer Risk among Older Women		Stacy	Tessler Lindau	Melinda	 Drum	Elyzabeth	 Gaumer	Hanna	 Surawska	Jeanne	 Jordan
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	Childhood Obesity, Cholesterol, and Social Inequality		Narayan	 Sastry	Anne	 Pebley
2007	65	Collection and Analysis of Biomarker and Genetic Data	A Comparison of Biomarkers across Two Older Populations: Assessment of Consistency and Generalizability	Researchers continue to expand the array of biomarkers of physiological system function collected alongside traditional self-reported measures in population-based social surveys. Still, little is known about the variability of many biomarkers across populations or the consistency of associations between biomarkers and self-reported health measures. We take steps to address this gap using a wide array of traditional clinical and non-traditional biomarkers of physiological system function, together with two self-reported health outcomes (one physical, one cognitive), from two large, comparable, population-based studies of older adults from the U.S. and Taiwan. We provide a comprehensive descriptive assessment of the variability of biomarker distributions across populations, and we test two hypotheses regarding the consistency of 1) associations with the self-reported outcomes and 2) predictive performance both within and out-of-sample. We find mixed support regarding consistency of associations, and evidence suggesting variability in predictive performance.	Christopher	L Seplaki	Noreen	 Goldman	Maxine	 Weinstein	Tara	 Gruenewald	Arun	 Karlamangla	Teresa	E. Seeman
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Young and the Restless: Brain Drain or Life Stage?		Warren	A. Brown	Robert	 Scardamalia
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Second Generation: Coming of Age in the City		Philip	 Kasinitz
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Post 9/11 Economy and Changing NYC Demographics		Rae	D. Rosen
2007	66	Sociodemographic Change in a New York Minute	The Population of New York City: A Pre- and Post- 9/11 Look		Joseph	 Salvo	A.	Peter  Lobo	Joel	 Alvarez
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Denominational Differences in Child Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: The Example of Ghana	Despite the valorization of good heath by all religious faiths, recent events in Ghana have highlighted distinctive denominational subcultures which could impact child survivorship. Using pooled children's data from the 1998 and 2003 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey, this study examines religious differences in child survival. Guided by the particularized theology and selectivity theses, piecewise constant hazard models with gamma-shared frailty are used to explore denominational differences in child mortality, and whether that could be explained through other characteristics. At the bivariate level, children whose mothers identify as Moslem and Traditional are found to have significantly higher risk of death compared with their counterparts whose mothers are Christians. In the multivariate models, the religious differences disappear after the mediating and confounding influence of socio-economic factors are controlled. The findings provide support for the selectivity hypothesis based on the notion that religious variations mainly reflect differential access to social and human capital.	Stephen	Obeng  Gyimah
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Family Allowances and Fertility: Socio-Economic and Religious Differentials	This paper presents the results of an analysis of socio-economic and religious differentials in the effect of family allowances on the fertility of Israeli women using birth histories of women in the last two censuses of 1983 and 1995. Assuming the existence of economies of scale in a family, child allowances may have a larger effect on the birth of higher birth-order children. Hence, separate analyses are performed for each parity. Much of the difference between socio-economic groups occurs in the initial response to an increase in the allowance. The largest religious differentials are found in the third and fourth intervals. No significant religious differentials are found after the fourth interval, probably because most couples after the fourth birth are religious. The strong initial response to an increase in allowances raises doubt about the suitability of models that assume rational decision making in reproductive behavior.	Jona	 Schellekens
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Fertility, Religion and Religiousness in European Muslim Populations	This research builds on our 2006 PAA presentation,  “Religion, Religiousness and Fertility in Europe and the U.S.” which focused on how much higher European fertility might be if women in Europe were as religious as women in the U.S.     Data availability is limited for Muslims in Europe, where the most extensive source will be data on country of origin (available for at least seven countries). An important source of data, however, is sample survey data, mainly the successive waves of the World Values Survey and the European Social Surveys.    The main focus is to determine the extent to which the higher fertility of the Muslim populations, documented in the paper, can be attributed to strong attachments to religion. Preliminary findings suggest that this is part of the explanation, with the other part being stronger traditional family values among Muslim women.	Charles	 Westoff
2007	67	Religion, Religiosity and Fertility	Beyond Denomination: New Tests of Whether and How Religion Matters for Family Planning	The present study uses unique data from rural Malawi to extend the socialization hypothesis to clarify the complex relationship between religion and fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. In particular, the study focuses on four important and unanswered questions. First, if contraceptive learning is increased in rural Africa via involvement in a religious community, does religious participation matter? Second, does the effect of religious involvement on social learning extend to Muslim communities (a large and growing subpopulation)? Third, using more precise denominational categories, does the effect of religion or religious participation vary across Christian subgroups? And finally, looking beyond religious denomination, we ask whether the characteristics of a woman’s specific religious congregation are associated with the size of her family planning network. Our results suggest that religion does matter for women’s fertility networks, but that denomination and attendance at religious services are relatively poor ways of examining its influence.	Sara	 Yeatman	Jenny	 Trinitapoli
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Trends in Contraceptive Use and Condom Use among Single African Women: Evidence from DHS	This paper examines trends in current use of contraceptive and condom use at most recent coitus among sexually active single women aged 15-24 years in 18 African countries that have conducted two or more DHSs since 1990. Trends are stratified by education, place of residence, wealth quintile and age. Condoms have become the most commonly reported contraceptive method, with an absolute annual increase, averaged for all 18 surveys, of 1.4 percent. For 13 countries with relevant information, the annual increase was higher, at 2.10 percent. Large differences were apparent by education and residence but not for age.	Mohamed	M. Ali	John	G. Cleland
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Trends in the Percentage of Children Who Are Orphans in South Africa 1995-2005	There has been great concern about AIDS in South Africa and throughout the world. The welfare of children orphaned by AIDS has increasingly become a policy concern. Thus, there is interest in knowing the percentage of children whose mother's are dead and what the trend has been. This paper estimates the percentage of children age 0-14 who were orphans in South Africa 1995-2005. Through 1998, there was no change in the percentage of orphans, probably because of the long average lag (8-10 years) between becoming HIV-positive and death. After 1998, the percentage of children who were orphans rose rapidly. Children whose mothers were ill (often with AIDS) but alive, were increasingly sent out to be fostered. Through 2005, fostered and orphaned children were overwhelmingly in the care of relatives. Even in 2005, the percentage of non-African children who were orphans remained low.	Barbara	A. Anderson	Heston	 Phillips
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Estimation of Excess in Context of AIDS Deaths and the Probable Causes 1994-2002	Review of sample registration system revealed that age-specific death rates at 25-49 years declined from 1982 till the mid 1990s and after that showed a marginal increase. Hence residence and sex-wise estimation of excess deaths in the major states of India were computed 25-49 age group by adopting Kink Regression method, and effort has been made to link the increase to AIDS deaths. The difference in the observed and estimated death rates from  1982 to 2002 putting a kink in 1993 gave the excess deaths that have occurred from 1994 to 2002. Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu contributed more than 50 percent of the excess deaths. Causes of death were analysed for TB, infectious and parasitic diseases, neoplasms, cardiac and ill-defined illnesses, poisoning, injury and maternal deaths. No significant changes in the rates for the causes are elicited.	Madhulekha	 Bhattacharya	Sutapa	 Neogi	Ruchi	 Sogarwal
2007	68	Demography of HIV: Understanding Patterns, Risk Factors, and Impacts of HIV/AIDS	Ghana’s Mortality Profile: With and without HIV/AIDS	The present study seeks to raise awareness and expand knowledge about the deleterious effect of HIV/AIDS on Ghana’s life expectancy. Using multiple- and associated  single-decrement life table techniques, the study estimates the total number of Ghanaians who would die from HIV/AIDS by the time they reach age 75 from a hypothetical cohort of 100,000 live births, assuming that current mortality conditions prevail. The findings indicate that 7.2 percent of babies will eventually die of HIV/AIDS, and 13.0 percent and 23.4 percent of those aged 60 years, and 75 years and above, respectively, will die of HIV/AIDS. Most deaths will come from persons within the reproductive and productive age groups. A remarkable gain in life expectancy of 10 years would result in the absence of HIV/AIDS. The elderly are likely to be the most active persons to manage the family affairs in the event of the death of their adult children.	Chuks	J. Mba
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	New Destination 'Contexts of Reception': Coethnic Concentration and the Earnings of Mexican Immigrants	This paper studies the recent dispersion of low-skilled Mexican immigrant workers away from traditional areas of settlement to new destinations. Theoretical focus is placed on the role played by low-skilled immigrant social networks in facilitating economic incorporation. Using data from the 5% sample of the 2000 Census IPUMS, I examine the effect of coethnic concentration in local labor markets on the earnings of individual Mexican immigrants, and test whether the effects of concentration vary by destination type. I find a strong and statistically significant curvilinear relationship (inverted U-shape) between coethnic concentration and earnings, but only for immigrants in traditional areas of settlement. In conclusion, I highlight the empirical importance of characteristics of the coethnic community for understanding the economic outcomes of Mexican immigrants, and discuss the implications of the dispersion for Mexicans’ economic incorporation more generally.	James	D. Bachmeier
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	New Origins, New Destinations, and Their Pioneers	Using data from Mexican Migration Project, this study investigates two hypotheses: 1) compared to migrants from historic sending regions, migrants heading from newer origins in Mexico are more likely to go to newer destinations in the United States; and 2) within new destinations, the first migrants, or ‘pioneers’, differ in measurable ways from those who follow them. The results generally provide support for the first hypothesis, with migrants from new origins being more likely to head to new destinations. The results regarding the second hypothesis are less straightforward. There is no evidence that early migrants are more likely to be male. Yet the pioneer migrants are more likely to have come from higher skilled occupations in Mexico. Additionally, the data suggest that compared to pioneer migrants, more recent migrants are more likely to have come from communities with longer migration histories, and to have had prior U.S. experience.	Katherine	 Bartley
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	Is the Southeast Different? Interstate Migration and Geographic Assimilation of Hispanics	Amidst a very visible increase in Hispanic migration to the Southeast United States, a less conspicuous, yet far more numerous migration of non-Hispanic Whites and Blacks has occurred within the past two decades. Despite general population growth in the area, very little research has comparatively analyzed the migration flows of distinct racial and ethnic migrants to the Southeast. Merging data from the 2005 American Community Survey with the PUMS census data from 1980, 1990, and 2000, to track spatial patterns of immigration to the Southeast U.S. Moreover, we test whether Hispanic spatial migration patterns to the Southeast differ from Hispanic migration patterns to other areas of the country, and from non-Hispanic migration patterns. The data will allow us to track whether Hispanics are spatially assimilating to the residential movements of non-Hispanics, or whether the Hispanic migration to the Southeast is a distinct migration phenomenon.	Alexis	 Silver	Ted	 Mouw	Jacqueline	 Hagan
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	To Leave or Not to Leave: Exploring the Benefit of Exiting the South during the Great Migration	The exodus of millions of southerners between 1910 and 1970 is largely attributed to the economic and social push factors in the south combined with pull factors in other regions. Researchers generally find that participants in the Great Migration were positively selected from their origin, in terms of educational attainment and urban status. Although a considerable amount of attention examines how these migrants fared in their destinations, to fully measure the success of migrants, a comparison to those who remained within the south is necessary. This paper compares inter-regional migrants (i.e. migrants who left the south) with their southern contemporaries they left behind. Our findings indicate that although positively selected, migrants who left the south did not benefit appreciably in terms of employment status, income, or occupational status. In fact, in many instances, inter-regional migrants fared worse than did southerners who moved within the south or who remained sedentary.	Stewart	E. Tolnay	Trent	 Alexander	Jason	C. Digman	Suzanne	C. Eichenlaub
2007	69	Migration and Urbanization Processes	The Changing Demographic Characteristics of the Fastest-Growing Metropolitan Areas: A Comparison using the 2000 and 2005 American Community Survey	Of the top ten fastest-growing metropolitan areas in the U.S. between 1990 and 2000, three have populations of more than 1 million: Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Austin.  Utilizing the 2000 and 2005 American Community Survey, this paper examines the demographic and socioeconomic trends of new domestic migrants versus international migrants in these fastest-growing metropolitan areas. The 2005 ACS shows important shifts in composition due to an increasing proportion of domestic to international migrants. During 2000 to 2005, younger age structure, higher educational attainment, higher income and smaller household size are more prevalent among minorities, especially domestic migrants. However, older age structure and increasing household size are prevalent among Whites. The analyses should shed light on the extent to which young minorities come to these metro areas attracted by the fast economic and social development, while more older Whites come to seek space and sun in these once-sleepy Southwestern areas.	Yun	 Zhou
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Schools, Schooling, and Children’s Support of Their Aging Parents	Intergenerational transfers play an important role for most individuals across the life course. I construct a new theoretical framework for understanding how changes in  educational context influence children’s support of their parents.  I pull together theories on individualization, care of the elderly, intergenerational transfers, the social modes of organization framework, and wealth flows theories to study the relationship between social context and adult children’s support of their aging parents. By examining educational context across the life course this paper provides new information on the mechanisms through which changes in social context influence children’s support of their parents. I find that childhood exposure to schools has long-term effects on receipt of support from children, regardless of parents' educational enrollment, children’s educational enrollment, and later exposure to schools. Findings support (1) a long-term personality effect of early exposure to non-family organizations and (2) Caldwell’s theory of wealth flows.	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	The Behavioral Economics of Altruism, Reciprocity and Transfers within Families and Rural Communities: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa	This study examined patterns of transfers between family and non-family members when they played the Trust Games (which allowed for givings and reciprocations) and the Dictator Games (involving only givings), followed by surveys. A total of 240 individuals from 60 families in 20 villages in rural Malawi participated. Strong predictors of transfers behavior during the Trust Game were the amount of expected reciprocation, prior trusting behavior, and belief that others were trustworthy. Wealthier participants gave less but reciprocated more and those who thought the other player was poorer gave more. Participants in better physical health gave more and those in better mental health reciprocated more during the Trust Game.  Participants who thought they had HIV and had high felt-stigma gave less but reciprocated more during the Trust Game. In addition to expectations of reciprocity, wealth, health, HIV and stigma were important predictors of transfers behavior.	Li-Wei	 Chao
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Labor Supply Responses to Large Social Transfers: Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa	We analyze longitudinal data from a demographic surveillance area in KwaZulu-Natal to quantify the impact of the South African old-age pension on the labor force attachment of prime-aged adults in households with pensioner members. With panel data, we are able to compare households and individuals before and after pension receipt, and pension loss, allowing us to control for a host of unobservable household and individual characteristics that may determine labor market behavior. In sharp contrast to earlier work on this topic that relied on cross-sectional data analysis, we find no evidence of a reduction in labor supply in response to pension receipt. Indeed our results suggest that prime-age adults are more likely to migrate either to work or to look for work when pension receipt begins. Our results highlight the importance of including non-resident members in the analysis of household and individual behaviors.	Cally	C. Ardington	Anne	 Case	Victoria	 Hosegood
2007	70	Intergenerational Transfers: New Evidence from Developing Countries	Forward Thinking and Family Support: Explaining Retirement and Old-Age Labor Supply in Indonesia	In the developing world, where little formal institutional support exists, older individuals rely on their own labor income and on family support in the form of transfer payments, coresidence, and participation in family businesses. However, the dramatic gains in life expectancy and declines in family size and coresidence that accompany development suggest that these traditional forms of support may break down. In this paper, I estimate a structural dynamic model of labor supply for older men in Indonesia that incorporates these mechanisms, and I find evidence for  families and health playing key roles in these choices. Using the model, I then conduct simulations that show that implementation of a Latin-American-style defined-contribution pension program for government and private sector workers would provide modest welfare gains in Indonesia at a reasonable cost. I also find that these gains might not offset the welfare losses brought by potential declines in family support.	Douglas	 McKee
2007	71	Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Commitment: Is Cohabitation Really Indistinguishable from Marriage in Norway and Sweden?	The Scandinavian countries are often cited as examples of societies where cohabitation is common and largely indistinguishable from marriage. However, an overwhelming majority of young cohabiting couples in both Sweden and Norway expect to get married, and most of them actually do. This might be a signal to others, and to each other, of serious commitment to the relationship. Thus we hypothesize that some ‘distinction’ still remains. In this paper, we take advantage of recent survey data from the two countries to analyze several dimensions of ‘commitment’ in co-residential relationships. Controlling for a number of demographic, socio-economic and attitudinal variables, including length of relationship and presence of children, married couples are found to be significantly different from cohabiting couples on all three dimensions, namely seriousness, relationship satisfaction and break-up plans. Thus they are more serious about and satisfied with the relationship, and less frequently have plans to dissolve the union.	Eva	 Bernhardt	Turid	 Noack	Kenneth	Aarskaug  Wiik
2007	71	Cohabitation	European Latecomers: Cohabitation in Italy and Spain	In this paper we focus on cohabitation as an emerging although marginal trend in southern Europe, with Spain and Italy as case studies. We hypothesize that in this area, cohabitation is selective of women with higher potential for economic independence (employed, with higher education, living out of the parental home). We also discuss the roles that consensual unions may play throughout family formation processes, and whether its meaning is similar in both countries under study.   In order to address these issues, we use both cross-sectional and longitudinal techniques. We first present a description of the situation for our variables of interest at the aggregate level, using data from ISSP surveys, Censuses and National Statistics. Then we carry out a cross-sectional study of current marital status as well as a longitudinal analysis of first union formation, with data from the FFS. Our preliminary results confirm the selection hypothesis.	Marta	 Dominguez	Teresa	 Castro Martin	Letizia	 Mencarini
2007	71	Cohabitation	Cohabitation and Children’s Living Arrangements: New Estimates from the United States	This paper examines recent trends in women’s cohabitation and explores the impact of increased cohabitation for children’s living arrangements. The most recent estimates of children’s living arrangements currently date to 1995. Using the 2002 NSFG, we produce new estimates of U.S. family structure from the perspectives of women and children, replicating (as much possible) Bumpass and Lu’s (2000) analysis of the 1995 NSFG. Preliminary findings show continued increases in cohabitation experience for both adults and children. Additional analyses examine whether rising cohabitation has resulted in growing instability in the unions women form and in children’s living arrangements.	Sheela	 Kennedy	Larry	 Bumpass
2007	71	Cohabitation	The Rise of Cohabitation and Childbearing outside of Marriage in Bulgaria: Who Are the Forerunners of the New Family Model?	The economic and political transition in Bulgaria went hand in hand with considerable changes in the processes of family formation and childbearing. Traditionally, low age at marriage, nearly universal first marriage, and the two-child model prevalence were some of the main demographic features describing the family pattern in Bulgaria during the second half of the 20th century. After the transition in 1989 substantially different patterns are observed. By means of event history analysis using Bulgarian GGS data we investigate whether cohabitation is “institutionalized” among the couples to the level of marital family or is rather recognized as the final stage in a process leading to  marriage. The main stress is laid on the impact of the family background and socio-economic factors on first union formation as well as on the transformation of cohabitation into marriage.	Dora	 Kostova
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Gender and Socio-Economic Residential Segregation in Mexico City	This paper examines the effects of socio-economic residential segregation on precarious employment outcomes in Mexico City, particularly whether there is a gendered effect. The data comes from the 2000 Mexican Population and Dwelling Census. The extent of residential segregation is estimated at the Ageb level (similar to census tracts). Using hierarchical lineal models this paper considers whether residential segregation affects: a) informal employment, b) critical labor conditions, and c) hourly wages. A composite measure was also examined. Overall, the results suggest that residential segregation increases precariousness, even after considering other significant individual variables: age, education, gender, family structure, and occupation. However, its effect varies for the different dependent variables. Residential segregation does not significantly increase the probabilities of informality, while it enlarges those of critical labor conditions without significant gender differences. In addition, residential segregation negatively affects hourly wages and it is more detrimental for men than for women.	Landy	 Sanchez
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Black and Latino Low-Wage Workers and the Social Organization of Metropolitan Labor Markets	The under-employment of black and Latino workers, specifically their concentration in low-wage work, is of keen interest to researchers of labor market inequality. Previous research has identified structural explanations in the larger economy to account for this inequality, namely industrial restructuring, immigration, skills mismatch and minority population size. An ample space and work literature has demonstrated that inequality and the underlying factors that cause it vary spatially, most often examined within and across local labor markets. This paper asks: Does the spatial configuration of blacks and Latinos relative to whites in a metropolitan area (i.e. residential segregation) affect the percentage of blacks and Latinos employed in low-wage work, in conjunction with the structural features of local labor markets described above? To assess the contribution of both individual and metropolitan-level factors, this study utilizes a unique dataset of the structural characteristics of the 95 largest U.S. cities.	Niki	 Dickerson
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	The Effect of Segregation on Crime Rates	In this paper I examine the relationship between segregation (both racial and economic) and crime. In order to control for the potential endogenity of segregation (of either type) with respect to crime, I instrument for segregation using information regarding the manner in which public housing assistance is allocated in each city, as well as variables relating to the structure of local public finance in each city. The results of this analysis indicate that greater segregation (of either type) appears to have very different effects across different types of crimes. Specifically, greater segregation appears to have very little impact on basic property crimes such as larceny and motor vehicle theft, but slightly lowers burglary rates. However, the strongest results indicate that greater segregation appears to lead to large and significant increases in the rate of violent crimes such as aggravated assault and robbery.	David	 Bjerk
2007	72	Investigating the Consequences of Segregation	Patterns of Local Segregation: Do They Matter for Crime?	In this paper, we extend recent work on the spatial measurement of segregation to describe the local spatial dynamics of residential segregation by race, ethnicity, and economic status, and explore their consequences for levels of a single social outcome: urban crime. To do so, we construct Wong's asymmetric local segregation indices, which are spatially adjusted P* exposure measures, for 36 large cities in the United States. Maps and summary descriptive statistics are used to explore levels and variability in patterns of non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic White, Hispanic, low-income, and affluent local segregation. We then examine multivariate models to assess whether local segregation of privileged populations (e.g., Whites, affluent households) increases social advantage in the form of reduced urban crime problems, while local segregation of groups lower in the stratification hierarchy of the U.S. (e.g., Blacks, Hispanics, the poor) heightens crime as a neighborhood social problem.	Lauren	J. Krivo	Reginald	 Byron	Catherine	 Calder	Mei-Po	 Kwan
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	Household Disadvantage and Adolescents' Time Use	Adolescents living in single-parent and/or impoverished households tend to have worse schooling outcomes than adolescents in other households. Previous research has focused on parental “inputs” into the production of developmental outcomes, such as parental time, the provision of resources, and parenting practices. In this paper, we explore an alternative explanation that focuses on the time use of the adolescents themselves. We hypothesize that disadvantaged parents may rely more heavily on their adolescent children to contribute to household production and market work than other parents, and that these additional time burdens may come at the expense of such beneficial activities as schooling and sleep. We examine these hypotheses using time-diary data for over 2,400 15- to 18-year-old adolescents who participated in the 2003-2005 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS), estimating multiple-state, multiple-destination hazard models of adolescents’ activity spells conditional on parents’ living arrangements, household income, and other personal, household, and environmental characteristics.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski	David	C. Ribar	Leslie	 Stratton
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	The Time Use of Teenagers	Parents and policy makers often voice concerns about the ways in which teenagers use their time. This paper uses the American Time Use Survey to examine the time use of teenagers ages 15-17. We find very large gender differences, with girls spending significantly more time doing housework, caring for younger siblings, and studying and less time watching television. We also explore the degree to which parent characteristics influence the time use of teenagers, with particular focus given to activities that affect the teenagers well-being such as sleep patterns, eating habits, schoolwork, and television viewing. Our results indicate that teenagers with a single parent spend less time studying and are much less likely to eat dinner with their parent. Children from households with high incomes are more likely to eat dinner with their parents and are less likely to go to bed really late on school nights.	Joseph	P. Price
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	The Effects of Individual, Family and Community Characteristics on Youth’s Engagement in Sports and Volunteering in Mexico	Engagement in civil and community activities and in sports are two activities that are argued to have a positive effect on the development of children and adolescents and on their successful transition to adulthood. In this paper we explore the correlates at the individual and family level of children and youth aged 12 to 24 spending time exercising and in a civil organization. Because engagement in these activities may also depend on unobserved variables at the community and family level, we fit a multi-level probit model that controls for variation at the level of the individual, the family and the community. Data come from a nationally representative survey of time use in Mexico.	Estela	 Rivero-Fuentes	Mercedes	 Pedrero	Silvia	 Luna
2007	73	Teenagers' Time Use	Over-Scheduled or at Loose Ends? The Socioeconomic Correlates of American Adolescent Time Use in 1977-78 and 2003-05	Adolescence is a period in which time use can provide important developmental experiences that in turn affect an individual’s ease of transition into adult roles. In this paper, time diary data on U.S. youth aged 15-17 gathered in 1977-78 and 2003-05 are used to create portraits of time use in middle adolescence with a focus on answering three questions. First, what does U.S. adolescents’ time use look like and to what extent has it changed over the past quarter century? Second, what roles do socioeconomic factors (e.g., adolescent wage rates, household income, parents’ education levels) play in adolescent time allocation and have these relationships changed over time? Finally, to what extent does the mix of leisure undertaken by today’s adolescents reflect a choice set that favors positive developmental experiences?	Cathleen	 Zick
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Civil War, Crop Failure, and the Health Status of Young Children	Economic shocks at birth have lasting impacts on children’s health several years after the shock. We calculate height for age z-scores for children under age five using data from a Rwandan nationally representative household survey conducted in 1992. We exploit district and time variation in crop failure and civil conflict to measure the impact of exogenous shocks that children experience at birth on their height several years later. We find that girls born after a shock in a region experiencing these events exhibit 0.72 standard deviations lower height for age z-scores, and the impact is worse for poor households. There is no impact of these shocks on boys’ health status. Results are robust to using household-level production and rainfall shocks as alternative measures of crop failure. The analysis also contributes to the debate on the economic conditions prevailing on the eve of the Rwandan genocide.	Richard	 Akresh	Philip	 Verwimp
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Reproduction in Crisis: War, Migration and Fertility in Angola	Demographers have devoted a great deal of attention to studying the impact of migration on fertility. There is also a growing body of literature in recent times on the reproductive health risk and needs of forced migrants. However, research on both fronts fails to make an important distinction between voluntary and involuntary (forced) migrants. We believe the impact of war solicits different demographic responses from these two groups. We draw on old-age security theories of reproductive behavior and its alternative theories to formulate hypotheses for this study. Using data from two peri-urban municipalities of Greater Luanda, Angola, we first use multilevel discrete-time logit models to examine the timing of fertility among voluntary and involuntary migrants and compare it to non-migrants. We further analyze cumulated fertility and preferences for additional births among the different migratory groups. Preliminary findings and implications for Angola and other parts of sub-Saharan Africa are discussed.	Winfred	A. Avogo
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	Autocracy as a Form of Sustained Low-Intensity Civil Conflict: Does Age Structure Provide Insights into the Democratic Transition?	Why has there been, during the latter half of the 20th century, a tendency for partial democracies to stall or retreat along the path to full democracy? We approach this question by assuming that autocracy is a form of low-intensity civil conflict perpetuated by states on non-state actors and hostile state-factions, and that full democracy is civil peace (a cessation of violence, coercion and intimidation). This assumption allows for adapting the “youth bulge model of the risk of civil conflict” to investigate the democratic transition. Our analysis reports a consistent inverse relationship between the regional proportion of young adults and the proportion of countries that have attained full democracy. We use this relationship to generate a likelihood of full democracy, which can identify geographic regions and individual countries that, before 2015, are projected to experience a significant degree of demographic opportunity to achieve full democracy.	Richard	 Cincotta	Christian	G. Mesquida
2007	74	Demography of Armed Conflict	The Increasing Incidence of Civil Wars in Sub-Saharan Africa: Assessing the Role of Democratization and Age Structure	During the 1990s, sub-Saharan Africa experienced an increased incidence of civil war. Collier & Hoeffler (2002) find that worsening economic conditions during the period help account for this trend. This paper extends their analysis by focusing on the role of governance and youthful age structure in civil war onset. A combined model of youthful age structure, polity scores, and economic conditions is applied to data on the worldwide incidence of civil wars from 1961 to 2001. I find that exogenous changes in democratization and youthful age structure contributed to the rising incidence of civil war in sub-Saharan Africa during the 1990s. This is true even after accounting for economic conditions. My finding is consistent with literature suggesting that large incoming cohorts of young adults who cannot be sufficiently accommodated by the labor market and educational system experience increased dissatisfaction and alienation which in turn increase the likelihood of civil unrest.	Sarah	E. Staveteig
2007	75	Abortion I	Sex Selection and Fertility Choices: Analysis and Policy	This paper identifies sex selection via infanticide and abortion as the principal explanation for the sex ratio distortion in Asia, and rules out competing explanations such as biology. I outline a model of a mother's fertility choice when she has access to a sex-selection technology and faces a mandated fertility limit. By exploiting variation in fines levied in China for unsanctioned births, I demonstrate that higher fine regimes discourage fertility but are associated with higher sex ratios among those who choose to have an additional child. Estimation of the model using China's 2000 census indicates that a son is worth 2.90 years of income more than a daughter, and the premium is highest among less educated mothers and rural families. I conclude with a set of simulations to model the effect on sex ratios and total fertility of a proposed subsidy to families who fail to have a son.	Avraham	 Ebenstein
2007	75	Abortion I	Reporting of Induced and Spontaneous Abortion in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Population estimates of the incidence of pregnancy outcomes are widely used demographic measures, yet prior research demonstrates that both induced and spontaneous abortions are substantially underreported in surveys. We find that less than one-half (47%) of induced abortions performed in the United States between 1997 and 2001 were reported by women in the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG). Hispanic and low-income women were among the least likely to report their abortions, as were women in their 20s. Second-trimester abortions were more likely to be reported than first-trimester terminations. The levels of reported spontaneous abortion measured in the 2002 NSFG are consistent with the accumulated body of research, though substantially more pregnancy losses were reported on self-administered surveys than in face-to-face interviews. Our findings suggest that abortion reporting has not improved, and survey research involving pregnancy outcomes should be adjusted for unreported induced abortions.	Rachel	K. Jones	Kathryn	 Kost
2007	75	Abortion I	Methodological Issues in the Evaluation of Parental Involvement Laws: Evidence from Texas	The number of states that require parental involvement in a minor’s decision to terminate a pregnancy has more than doubled since 1988. The academic literature has not reached a consensus as to the impact of such abortion restrictions, mainly due to methodological limitations caused by the inability to measure cross-state travel and misclassification of exposure. Using detailed data on abortions and births from Texas, we demonstrate that these limitations led researchers to overestimate the decline in minors’ abortion rate, underestimate the increase in their birth rate, and to miss an important behavioral response to the law, which is the tendency to delay the abortion among a group of older minors. Correction of these methodological problems is important given the controversy surrounding abortion and the need of voters and policymakers to accurately assess the likely impact of these laws.	Theodore	 Joyce	Silvie	 Colman	Robert	 Kaestner
2007	75	Abortion I	Incidence and Recent Trends in Legal Abortion Worldwide	Abortion incidence is an important demographic and public health indicator, yet the quality of data on abortion can be problematic even in countries where the procedure is legal. Using data from government statistics, nationally representative surveys and other data collection systems, we present the most recent available estimates of induced abortion incidence in 58 countries and territories where abortion is broadly legal. Data are relatively complete (i.e., are deemed to fall within 20% of the true number) for 30 of these countries. We analyze trends from 1996 to 2003 and find that dramatic declines in incidence occurred in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, but these countries still have some of the highest rates in the world. The abortion rate in the United States declined modestly but remains higher than in many Western European countries. Rates are variable in developing countries where the procedure is legal. Possible explanations for trends are discussed.	Gilda	 Sedgh	Stanley	K. Henshaw	Susheela	D. Singh	Akinrinola	 Bankole	Joanna	 Drescher
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Scale of Questions and Scale of Answers: The Role of Remote Sensing for Public Health Policy	Currently, imagery resolution can be as precise as 0.61m or as coarse as 8Km. While one could argue that any image could be used for policy purposes, different questions would be answered by each sensor. Applications at coarse resolutions are useful to offer an overall picture and to identify potential critical areas/processes that need further investigation. These studies are not designed for decision making or for guiding spatially targeted interventions. Although this seems intuitive, the literature shows that, unfortunately, the issue of scale is largely overlooked. In this paper we describe the potential application of varied imagery, suggesting their suitability at different levels (national, regional, district, local) and environments (urban/rural). Although the paper has a focus on public health, we ultimately propose a grid that offers guidelines to social scientists on the appropriate scale for purposes of planning, monitoring, and assessment of policies and processes operating at different levels.	Marcia	C. Castro
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Eyes from Above: Remote Sensing and Virtual Globes in Spatial Demography	In the past few decades, research in spatial demography has revealed important patterns and disparities in fertility, mortality, and migration across space. The ability to visualize the place-based differences evident in choropleth maps has helped to attract demographers to study both the dynamic processes and persistent clustering of events and characteristics evident in populations. This paper explores the intersection of remote sensing and spatial demography by discussing the characteristics of gridded population data in contrast to residential populations often summarized in terms of political or administrative areal units and borders. The strengths and weaknesses of each type of measurement are considered, as are the ways in which differing data types may be combined. The implications of map making are also considered, from images of the earth, to digitally produced population maps, to virtual globes. Both concerns and opportunities related to global GIS systems and virtual globes in demography are discussed.	Lisa	M Jordan
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Spatial Sampling for Collecting Demographic Data	This article demonstrates the application of geographic information systems and remote sensing to construct a sampling frame and stochastic random point simulation in this sampling frame for a demographic survey. The proposed methodology was tested for the sampling of households in Delhi Metropolitan. Since a household sampling frame was not available, the sampling frame of residential areas within different air pollution strata was constructed, and the residential area weighted 2000 random points were simulated within the identified frame. The simulated random points were transferred onto a street map and into a global positioning system (GPS). These points were then navigated using GPS to identify households at the simulated location and acquire their consents. A total of 1576 of 2000 simulated locations were found suitable and households at these locations participated in the survey administered during January and April 2004.	Naresh	 Kumar
2007	76	Methods in Spatial Demography	Adding Structural Variables to Space-Time Interaction Tests: An Application to Fertility Transition in Brazil	A long debate in the fertility transition literature concerns the relative strengths of ideational diffusion and economic development. Spatial statistics have always been implicitly important in this debate, but they have recently moved to the foreground. Bocquet-Appel and Jakobi (1998) suggested using Knox’s space-time interaction test for a study of demographic transition in Great Britain. The Knox test is widely used in epidemiology, but it has a serious drawback for demographic applications. Specifically, it does not account for structural variables that also change in space and time. Consequently, the Knox test is too likely to find evidence for ‘epidemic’ patterns of fertility diffusion when local economic development levels are changing. We propose an improved space-time interaction test and illustrate with data from four Brazilian censuses. We also show how this method can be adapted to produce maps showing where and when diffusion effects seem strongest, net of covariate effects.	Carl	P. Schmertmann	Renato	M. Assuncao	Joseph	E. Potter
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Urban Bias and Labor Market Inequality: Trends in a Sub-Saharan Setting	This paper examines the sources and trends in labor market inequality stemming from rural parentage. While these differences are often attributed to variation in levels of human capital versus differences in returns to human capital, this paper attempts to empirically assess the importance of each factor and to examine how the relative contributions of each change over time within both the formal and informal labor markets. The paper advances previous studies in two ways: Conceptually, it recognizes the concurrent influences of both levels and returns to human capital. Methodologically, it examines these inequalities in historical perspective, applies fixed-effects methods to control for the possible influence of unobserved features of families, and decomposes inequality in labor market access to that which is due to variation in levels of human capital versus that which is due to differences in returns to human capital. Findings show a convergence in the occupational attainment prospects of rural and urban children over time.	Sarah	 Giroux
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Occupational Gender Segregation and Wage Differentials among Filipino Youth	The tendency of men and women to work in different occupations contributes to the persisting gender wage gap. This effect is suggested to be greater at younger ages as people begin their careers. However, this has not been ascertained in the Philippines because of data paucity, particularly among the youth which account for one fifth of the country’s employed population. Using 2005 Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey data on 924 employed youth ages 19-21 years, we examined the: (1) extent of occupational gender segregation using KI index; (2) demand and supply side factors associated with occupational choice; and (3) effect of segregation on wage rate. Multivariate regression and Heckman selection models were employed. Results showed that there is occupational gender segregation that is worst among rural residents and those who are still schooling. Occupational gender segregation is significantly associated with wage rate inequality, even after controlling for human capital.	Nanette	 Lee	Linda	 Adair
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Job Placement and Job Shift across Employment Sectors in Reform-Era China: The Effects of Education	Using the first wave (1989) and the fourth wave (1997) of the CHNS data, this study investigates the effects of education on job placement among the employment sectors for young workers (age 17 to 24) and the job shift across the employment sectors for older workers (age 25 to 44) in China. The change of these effects on young workers’ job placement from 1989 to 1997 is also examined. It is found that education is important in determining young workers’ employment sectors and older workers’ destination of employment sector if they change jobs, and the better-educated workers are more likely to have access to the state and collective sector. The findings suggest that access to different employment sectors is not equally distributed among Chinese workers. The hierarchy of employment sectors is reproduced through the procedure that assorts individual workers of different education levels to different employment sectors.	Lijuan	 Wu
2007	77	International Perspectives on Labor Market Inequality	Immigrant Wage Gaps in Cross-National Perspective: Immigrant-Specific Disadvantages or Wage Structure?	In this paper, I ask how immigrant/native-born wage gaps differ in two institutionally distinct receiving societies in Western Europe: Sweden, with a comparatively equal wage structure, and the United Kingdom, with a comparatively unequal wage structure. Examining 30 immigrant groups that reside in both countries, I document two varieties of inequality. In terms of wage percentiles, immigrants fare better in the UK, net of human capital, demographic characteristics, and sending country. But immigrant/native-born gaps in terms of logged wages are at least as large in the UK as in Sweden, and for some groups larger, because overall earnings inequality is so high in the UK. These findings complement previous findings on gender wage gaps in cross-national perspective, and suggest that policies to improve immigrant pay must consider immigrant-specific barriers in the labor market and detrimental effects of earnings inequality for immigrants.	Christel	 Kesler
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Household Transitions in Grassland Settlement: The View from Kansas	In the Demography and Environment in Grasslands Settlement project, we hypothesize a human imprint on the Plains environment where the cumulative impacts of household-level processes on landscape-level dynamics were the result of historical give and take between family forms and land use. Building on earlier work that showed a settlement by households at various stages, and key roles for environment and ethnicity, in this paper we explore household lifecycle transitions across Kansas from earliest Euro-American settlement through the development of a land-use system that remains the visible organizing principle of the landscape to this day. We estimate a series of three-level (or mixed) regressions with repeated measures (time is therefore the first-level unit) of household form nested within households and households nested within environmental region, to look at household transitions that model change in household life cycle location between censuses based on household characteristics at the beginning of the interval.	Myron	P. Gutmann	Susan	 Hautaniemi Leonard	Glenn	D. Deane
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Gone with the Wind? Hurricane Risk, Fertility and Education	This paper uses data on hurricanes in Guatemala over the last 120 years combined with a recent household survey to analyse how decisions on education and fertility respond to risk and shocks. For households with land an increase in the risk of hurricanes lead to both higher fertility and higher education, while households without land have fewer children but also higher education. Hurricane shocks lead to decreases in both fertility and education, and although there is a substantial compensatory effect on fertility later in life, that is not the case for education. The paper examines a number of possible explanations for these patterns and finds that the most likely explanation is insurance considerations through increased available man power and migration.	Claus	C. Pörtner
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	Moving Women: Household Composition, Labor Demand and Crop Choice	Analysis of the Indian census has shown that female marital migration accounts for the majority of the spatial mobility in India. Using a unique panel dataset, I estimate the effect of increases in the value of female labor on women’s marriage market outcomes. Female labor is more valuable in rice farming than wheat farming. I exploit rainfall shocks across rice farming households and wheat farming households to identify the effect of female labor productivity on the marriage market. Consistent with a model of household composition and crop choice in the presence of imperfect markets for female labor, I find that increases in female labor productivity are associated with decreases in the marriage rate of prime age females. Moreover, when female labor productivity is high, dowries paid out by the bride’s family households also decline, indicating a rise in the bargaining power of the bride’s family during dowry negotiations.	Isaac	 Mbiti
2007	78	Family Change, Development, and Environment	The Intra-Household Economics of Polygyny: Fertility and Child Mortality in Rural Mali	Building on anthropological evidence, we develop a model of intra-household decision making on fertility and child survival within the framework of the collective household model. We carry out a test of the implications of this framework with data from Demographic and Health Surveys in rural Mali, where polygyny rates among married women are close to 50 per cent. The econometric tests reject the implications of efficient intra-household allocations for junior wives in bigynous households and fail to reject for senior wives in bigynous households as well as for wives in monogamous households. These findings are consistent with existent narrative evidence according to which co-wife rivalry is responsible for resource-consuming struggle and junior wives are the adults with the weakest bargaining position in the household.	Harounan	 Kazianga	Stefan	 Klonner
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	The Impact of Poor Health on Education: New Evidence Using Genetic Markers	This paper examines the influence of health conditions on academic performance during adolescence. To account for the endogeneity of health outcomes and their interactions with risky behaviors we exploit natural variation within a set of genetic markers across individuals. We present strong evidence that these genetic markers serve as valid instruments with good statistical properties for ADHD, depression and obesity. They help to reveal a new dynamism from poor health to lower academic achievement with substantial heterogeneity in their impacts across genders. Our investigation further exposes the considerable challenges in identifying health impacts due to the prevalence of comorbid health conditions and endogenous health behaviors. This distinction between health outcomes from health behaviors is not apparent in earlier empirical studies which estimate equations derived from models where either the parents or children make all the health and education input decisions by themselves.	Weili	 Ding	Steven	F. Lehrer	J.	Niels  Rosenquist	Janet	 Audrain-McGovern
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Long-Term Consequences of Childhood ADHD on Early Adult Outcomes	Even though ADHD is one of the most prevalent mental conditions in school-age children, little is known about the long-term consequences of the illness for individuals and society. This paper uses retrospective ratings of ADHD symptoms in childhood to examine risky behaviors in early adulthood, controlling for a rich set of individual, family, and community level variables. This paper separately examines the effects of the different dimensions of ADHD symptoms, including inattentive, hyperactive, and combined typologies. The results show that both inattentive and hyperactive symptoms increase the likelihood of reporting many types of risky behaviors, in many cases the increases are substantial: However there is little evidence that individuals with symptoms of the combined type of ADHD face a multiplicative risk. Overall, the findings of this paper indicate that ADHD imposes significant long-term costs on both individuals and society and is an important area for future academic and clinical research.	Jason	 Fletcher	Barbara	 Wolfe
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Parental Health Expectations and Children's Educational Attainment in Rural Malawi	Studies on the relationship between HIV/AIDS and children’s educational attainment largely focus on the direct impacts of parental illness and death, overlooking the potential indirect impact that parental perceptions of the HIV epidemic may have on children’s school enrollment. I combine analysis of the 2004 and 2006 survey rounds of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project (MDICP) with findings from qualitative interviews with parents collected in summer 2006. The analysis examines the role of the parents' health expectations and concern about HIV/AIDS, their perception of HIV prevalence in the community, and their knowledge of their HIV status. Preliminary findings suggest that parental uncertainty about HIV is associated with lower levels of school participation. Interventions that target this uncertainty, such as HIV testing programs, may make a significant contribution to maintaining children’s educational attainment in communities affected by HIV/AIDS.	Monica	J. Grant
2007	79	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital I	Infant Morbidity and School Performance in Late Childhood in Cebu, Philippines	Diarrhea and respiratory infections continue to be the leading causes of childhood mortality and morbidity in the Philippines. These illnesses may also have long-term effects on surviving children's later health and development among those who survive, but few studies have examined the effects of early child morbidity on school performance. Using the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Study in the Philippines, we examine the associations and independent effects of diarrhea and respiratory diseases in the first 2 years of life on school absenteeism and English and Mathematics achievement tests scores at 10-12 years old. We also explore the combined effects of diarrhea and respiratory illnesses on the same education-related indicators. Analysis reveals that diarrhea and respiratory infections during infancy are associated with more school absenteeism and lower achievement test scores at ages 10-12. The long-term consequences of infant morbidity emphasize the importance of early interventions to improve child health.	Tita	Lorna L. Perez	Marilyn	V. Cinco
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Chinese and Irish Immigrants in Frontier California, 1860-1900	This study attempts to sketch out the social and demographic context missing from earlier studies of Chinese Americans, whose 19th-century migration patterns were precursors of contemporary global labor force exchange. Historical U.S. census microdata for the years 1860-1900 are used for comparisons between Massachusetts and California and, within California, between Chinese and Irish immigrants, who shared demographic, historical, and symbolic commonalities. Successive census cross-sections are used to explore changes in demographic composition, industry and occupation, nativity and place of birth, and living arrangements, with special scrutiny of households or other living arrangements that integrated Chinese with non-Chinese.	Ken	 Chew
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Spatial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Dimensions of Nineteenth Century Mortality: Philadelphia, 1880	Public Health Officials in Nineteenth Century cities linked ethnicity, immigrant status, poverty and mortality spatially—areal units inhabited by African-Americans and/or immigrants were seen as sites of both poverty and disease. I have examined how closely the mortality of an ethnic group was tied to its residential location and found that in Philadelphia in1880, ethnic group members living in areas that had a large concentration of their own group faced better mortality conditions than those living elsewhere in the city. Higher occupational status in ethnic areas may account for some of the spatial difference in life chances for African-Americans. However, other status characteristics of areas do not correlate with the mortality levels for African-Americans, and for the Irish and German populations, spatial mortality differences were not related to any measure of status. These results question both Nineteenth Century notions about urban mortality and our current views of our immigrant past.	Gretchen	A. Condran
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	The Jewish Anticipation of Fertility Control in Nineteenth-Century Europe: A Reassessment	This paper reconsiders the question of the Jewish anticipation of fertility decline in nineteenth-century Europe. The most popular explanations refer to the “characteristics” approach: the Jews retained higher SES, better education, larger income and lower infant mortality than their Gentile neighbors. Such an approach appears unsatisfactory in  several respects: it does not explain why Jewish fertility was lower than that of other groups with similar conditions, nor the different timing of fertility decline among Jewish communities. It also understates the existence of large intra-Jewish fertility differentials. I suggest that the “minority-group status” provides a better explanatory framework. Using residence as a proxy for assimilation, I show that in nineteenth-century Venice the fertility of assimilated Jews was much lower, and that of segregated Jews much higher, than their Catholic counterparts. I also show that the timing of fertility decline among European Jews closely followed the different pace of their emancipation.	Renzo	 Derosas
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Fare Thee Well: Human Capital and African American Migration before 1910	There are several theories that seek to link the decline in the aggregate skill level of the Southern African American population before the Great Migration to migration before World War I. Showing educational selection in migration is complicated since education and other features of human capital are highly correlated with one another. I use IPUMS and the Colored Troops Sample of the Union Army Data to estimate the effects of literacy and health (stock and flow) on the migration propensities of African Americans. I find that literacy and health flows were strong predictors of migration, and the effect of literacy on migration is reduced by one-quarter to one-third once health is controlled for. Additionally, the Colored Troops Sample allows us to measure migration in several ways, with migrations that would and would not be prone to educational selection. The results are robust to the measurement of migration and health.	Trevon	D. Logan
2007	80	Racial and Ethnic Differentials in Nineteenth Century Demographic Behavior	Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital: Accounting for Skin-Color Differences	Racial differences in socioeconomic achievement are  commonplace in the United States. Most contemporary observers attribute these differences to a combination of discrimination in the labor market and socioeconomic handicap imposed by slavery and other historical institutions. Discrimination portends to be an issue every time equally skilled individuals are treated differently by prospective employers, while slavery may play a role if the intergenerational transmission of human capital is strongly auto-correlated within the family. In order to better understand the intergenerational transmission process, we investigate the impact of the 19th century slavery abolition on the economic progress of African American families. We  examine how many generations are needed for people in separated groups (free blacks versus slaves) to converge in terms of socioeconomic outcomes after institutional barriers are lifted. We detail our analysis exploring differences within the non-white population that can be associated to complexion/skin-color.	Marcos	A. Rangel	Aaron	 Danielson
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Age, Aging, and Economic Growth: Perspectives on the Second Demographic Dividend	Over the demographic transition changes in population age distribution interact with age patterns of production and consumption to generate the first and second dividends. The second dividend arises from induced variations in aggregate saving and wealth holding, and depends on the relative size and upward or downward direction of intergenerational transfers in an economy. We draw on National Transfer Accounts estimates of transfers, labor productivity, and consumption by age for a number of countries to assess these effects and to estimate the first and second dividends. We derive concrete results for several different theoretical models: first, comparative golden rule steady states and, second, dynamic simulation models. We simulate three different models of saving, life cycle consumption, and economic growth over the transition: individualistic life cycle saving; interdependent altruistic sharing; and an optimizing social planner. We hypothesize that all three simulations will exhibit a second dividend, demonstrating that it is robust.	Ronald	 Lee	Andrew	 Mason
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Does the Demographic Dividend Forecast Economic Growth?	Demographic variables have been established as major determinants of countries’ long run economic performance. In this paper, we take the analysis a step further and test whether demographic variables can be used as a predictor of future economic growth. Applying estimates based on the period 1960 to 1980 to predict economic performance in the period 1980 to 2000, we find that a model including initial life expectancy, fertility and age structure significantly outperforms simple autoregressive models. We decompose the forecast errors into random shocks, parameter mis-estimation and parameter instability over time. The main source of forecast error is parameter instability, particularly a large fall in the intercept due to low economic growth in the period 1980-2000. The forecasting model does much better predicting relative rather than absolute economic performance, and is not improved significantly by the inclusion of an extended set of socio-economic, geographic and institutional variables.	Guenther	 Fink	Jocelyn	E. Finlay
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Demographic Change and Local Labor Market Outcomes in Brazil	This paper estimates the impact of the changing relative size of the adult male population classified by age and education groups on the earnings of employed males living in 502 Brazilian local labor markets during four time periods spanning thirty years. It takes advantage of the huge variation in age and educational structure across these local labor markets, a change that occurred over the 1970-2000 period, to test the impact of the relative size of age-education groups on earnings. This paper is an attempt to contribute to the demographic dividend literature by inserting cohort size and supply-demand frameworks in the determination of the productivity component that appears in the basic equation for per capita income growth. This approach adds another indirect effect of age structure to the per capita income equation, complementing the usual focus on the first and second demographic dividends.	Ernesto	F. Amaral	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Daniel	 Hamermesh	Joseph	E. Potter
2007	82	Perspectives on the Demographic Dividend	Demographic Dividends and Retirement Pensions in México	Social security should be a main instrument for the building and functioning of demographic dividends. Retirement pensions must build up savings and investments in a first dividend to enable financial resources, economic soundness, educational levels and health programs to guarantee a sustainable second dividend. This paper analyzes the onset and development of social security during the last century, depicting the invalidation of the first dividend through inequality and poor policies. Social security is now facing financial crisis, actuarial deficits, lack of coverage, meager benefits for most, and also allowing pampered retirement for the few. Such circumstances all together cancel the first dividend and jeopardize the second. The adoption of defined contributions in individual accounts is diverting resources from investments in economic productivity, education structures and health systems. Projections are made up to 2025 to suggest possibilities for a first and second dividend requiring strong political will and social commitments.	Isalia	 Nava	Roberto	 Ham-Chande
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Probabilistic Projections of HIV Prevalence Using Bayesian Melding	The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has developed the Estimation and Projection Package (EPP) for making national estimates and short-term projections of HIV prevalence based on observed prevalence trends in antenatal clinics.    Understanding uncertainty in its projections and related quantities is important for more informed policy decision making. We propose using Bayesian melding to assess the uncertainty around the EPP predictions. Prevalence data as well as information on the input parameters of the EPP model are used to derive probabilistic HIV prevalence projections - a probability distribution on a set of future prevalence trajectories. We relate antenatal clinic prevalence to population prevalence and account for variability among clinics using a random effects model.     We discuss the results of the Bayesian melding procedure for Uganda, where prevalence peaked at around 28% in 1990; the 95% prediction interval for 2010 ranges from 1% to 7%.	Leontine	 Alkema	Adrian	 Raftery	Samuel	J. Clark
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Projecting U.S. Household Changes with a New Household Model	Anticipating changes in number, size, and composition of households is an important element of many issues of social concern. To facilitate continued progress in these areas, an efficient household projection model with moderate data requirements, manageable complexity, explicit representation of demographic trends and output that includes the most important household characteristics is needed. None of the existing models meets all the needs. This study aims to specify appropriate models for size-specific headship rates as functions of overall population changes and demographic events. Based on the PUMS data of 1900-2000 and future household projection output using dynamic household model ProFamy, we empirically test the validity of the new proposed approach. Comparing the simulation results under various headship rate models with different levels of complexity, we analyze the importance of considering demographic events in projecting household changes with the new approach and provide recommendations for the development of the most efficient household model.	Leiwen	 Jiang	Brian	C. O'Neill
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Modeling Seasonal Effects on the Lexis Surface	We are modeling how seasonality in deaths changes over age and time using two-dimensional varying coefficient Poisson regression. This analysis represents a novel approach, which allows us to look at the dynamics of seasonal patterns in both dimensions on the Lexis surface simultaneously. Due to the strong and varying annual cyclical behavior over time, sine and cosine regressors model periodicity, but their coefficients are allowed flexibility by assuming smoothness over the age and time plane. The two-dimensional varying coefficient surfaces are estimated using a gridded tensor product B-spline basis of moderate dimension. Further smoothness is ensured using difference penalties on the rows  and columns of the tensor product coefficients. The optimal penalty tuning parameters are chosen based on minimization of AIC. The seasonal effects are summarized with two-dimensional amplitude and phase image plots. An illustrative example is provided using the female respiratory death monthly count data for ages 44-96 during  1959-1999.	Roland	 Rau	Jutta	 Gampe	Paul	H. Eilers	Brian	D. Marx
2007	83	Statistical Modeling Issues in Population Research	Connecting Fundamental Concepts of Human Aging: A Statistical Modeling Perspective	Numerous studies of aging and longevity in humans have accumulated a substantial amount of data about aging-related decline in health/well-being/survival status. Despite substantial progress in studying selected areas of aging, the research potential of these data remains largely under-explored. This is because traditional studies ignore a large portion of related information that might be important for better understanding systemic regularities of the human aging processes. As a result, many important features the human of aging process remain disconnected. Important examples include: age dependence of physiological norm; allostatic adaptation, and allostatic load; resistance to stress, as well as regular and stochastic components of physiological age trajectories. In this paper we describe the new method of statistical modeling that allows us to connect these fundamental concepts of human aging. The properties of this approach and its application to the analysis of Framingham Heart Study data are discussed.	Anatoliy	I. Yashin	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Igor	 Akushevich	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Lucy	 Akushevich	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	The Highest Fertility in Europe – For How Long? Analysis of Fertility Change in Albania Based on Individual Data	Despite dramatic changes in Albanian demographic trends, relatively little is known about the driving forces behind its observed fertility decline. Using individual-level data from 2002, we analyse fertility behaviour over the last five decades, emphasising changes taking place during the nineties, when Albania went through dramatic social and economic upheavals. Using the Albanian Living Standard and Measurement Survey (ALSMS) and survival analysis techniques, we analyse quantum and tempo effects of fertility. The reduction of fertility was mainly due to the improvements in the social agenda, with particular emphasis on female education, as well as the improvement in child mortality. But the analysis also reveals strong period effects during the nineties which mainly affected the higher parities. The persistence of traditional norms and values continue to influence family formation in Albania, while the changes in the social and economic circumstances determine the outcome of childbearing.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Arjan	 Gjonca
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Italian Fertility: Is a Recovery Under Way?	Italy is one of the lowest low fertility countries, often cited as an example of steady fertility decline. However, recent years period fertility seems to have recovered slightly, rising from a minimum of 1.19 child per woman in 1995 to 1.34 in 2005. In the first part of this paper we present these recent fertility developments in Italy, both at overall and regional levels.  We apply a cohort approach, showing changes in cohort TFR and in the timing of births for 1950-1980 cohorts. Signs of recovering are emerging in the more modern northern regions.  In the second part of our paper we focus on fertility after age 35, using individual data. Applying a multiprocess regression approach we investigate the determinants of postponement (propensity to reach age 35 without having had a child) and the determinants of recovering (propensity to subsequently have a child for those reaching age 35 without children).	Maria	 Castiglioni	Marcantonio	 Caltabiano	Alessandro	 Rosina
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Regional Context and Fertility in Contemporary Italy	Several countries have experienced persistent very low fertility. The case of Italy has attracted disproportionate attention, because conditions promoting decline (female-labor force participation, religious secularism, weakening of kin networks) were less in evidence. Nevertheless, Italy has continued to experience fertility rates well below replacement, dipping to a TFR as low as 1.2. What may be less well appreciated is that internal Italian regional differentials, both in levels and changes in childbearing rates, have also been manifest throughout this time. In this paper we examine sources of variation in Italy’s recent childbearing behavior. In so doing we evaluate hypotheses that emphasize structural socioeconomic factors and more cultural factors. To do so we estimate a multilevel contextual event history model, regressing transition to first birth and second birth on an array of personal characteristics, family background, and selected socioeconomic characteristics of the province or region.	Michael	J. White	Giuseppe	 Gabrielli	Laura	 Bernardi	David	I. Kertzer	Sabrina	 Perra
2007	84	Fertility Trends in Low Fertility Societies	Continuing Fertility Decline in South Korea	The total fertility rate in South Korea reached the replacement level in 1983 and continued to decline to lowest low level of 1.08 in 2004. Studies on fertility behavior up to year 2000 indicate that the major factor associated with declining total fertility rate is the trend toward later marriage. However, the most recent national fertility data show signs of a new trend: significant decline in marital fertility and increase in childlessness within marriage since 2000. This paper takes a closer look at the first birth interval as well as fertility intentions among South Korean women using the 2003 National Survey of Fertility and Family Health data together with 2000 census (2% sample). We are especially interested in estimating the effects of economic hardship, difficulty in combining work and family life, cost of children’s education, and attitudes on family and childbearing on fertility behavior among South Korean women.	Minja	K. Choe	Seoung-Kwon	 Kim
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Immigration and Generational Trends in Body Mass Index and Obesity in the United States: Results of the National Latino and Asian-American Survey (NLAAS), 2002-2003	Estimates of body mass index (BMI)/obesity in the U.S. rarely consider differences by nativity or country of origin. Using the National Latino and Asian-American Survey (NLAAS) 2002-2003, we generated nationally representative estimates of mean BMI and obesity prevalence and explored changes in the distribution of BMI with generation in the U.S. Analyses tested the association between generation status and BMI, and examined whether this association varied by ethnicity, education, and gender. We found substantial heterogeneity in BMI/obesity by country of origin and an increase in BMI with generation, overall and among most subgroups. The data suggest different patterns for Latinos and Asian-Americans in the nature and degree of distributional changes in BMI with generation in the U.S. Aggregate estimates not accounting for nativity and country of origin may mask significant heterogeneity in the prevalence of obesity and patterns of distributional change, with implications for prevention strategies.	Lisa	M. Bates	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia	Margarita	 Alegria	Nancy	 Krieger
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Social Support, Family Integration, and Health Outcomes of U.S. Immigrants	Research consistently reveals evidence of a health paradox among immigrants. Yet, while theoretical explanations for the paradox abound, actual research examining commonly hypothesized mediators, particularly social support, is lacking. This study examines the relationship between immigrant status and mental and physical health with data from the 2001 wave of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), focusing on the mediating role of social support. Results show clear evidence of an immigrant paradox in physical health, but less consistent support for differences between immigrants and non-immigrants in mental health status. Social support does not explain the bulk of the immigration effect on physical health, but is more successful at explaining effects of race and ethnicity on mental health outcomes. In our discussion, we refine theoretical models of the immigrant health paradox and offer implications these results have for future research on immigrant health.	Bridget	K. Gorman	Elaine	 Ecklund	Holly	 Heard
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Stress and Immigrant Health: The Relationship between Time in U.S. and Allostatic Load of Immigrants	It is well known that most immigrants arrive in this country healthier than comparable U.S.-born persons, but that their health declines with time in U.S. The conventional explanation of this immigrant health trajectory is that immigrants are positively selected on health, which explains their health advantage on arrival, and that assimilation is unhealthy because over time immigrants adopt unhealthy behaviors that adversely affect their health. While there is considerable evidence of a positive selection effect, the evidence is less clear as to the extent and causes of the assimilation effect (Jasso et al. 2004). One potential explanation of the “unhealthy assimilation” effect is greater stress. In this study, I investigate the relationship between stress and immigrant health, and how time in the U.S. mediates this relationship. Specifically, I use a multivariate regression framework to obtain associations between allostatic load and nativity status, and how time in U.S. mediates this association.	Robert	 Kaestner
2007	85	Immigrant Health	Another Mexican Birthweight Paradox? The Effect of Immigrant Enclaves and Neighborhood Poverty on the Birthweight of Mexican Origin Infants	We examined whether Mexican-origin infants in the U.S. exhibit worse health in metropolitan areas (MA) with higher Mexican-American residential segregation. We calculated MA segregation (exposure) indices for Mexican-Americans using Census 2000 data (168 MAs), and merged with Detail Natality year-2000 individual-level birth records (n=490,332). We examined segregation as predictor, mother’s place-of-birth as effect modifier, and birthweight as outcome in cross-sectional 2-level hierarchical-linear-regression, adjusting for individual, MA, and region covariates. Living in highly segregated (isolation) Mas and in MAs where Mexican-Americans had high exposure to poverty (EPOV) and high exposure to foreign born Mexicans (EFBMEX) were associated with lower infant birthweight for U.S. born (USB) Mexican-American mothers. However, foreign-born (FB) Mexican women were buffered against negative infant birthweight associations. Controlling for isolation, EFBMEX exhibited positive associations for both USB and FB. Controlling for EFBMEX, negative effects of isolation intensified for USB. Our findings suggest a paradox: immigrant enclaves exert both negative and positive health associations, further modified by nativity.	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Grandparents Raising Grandchildren: Racial Variations in Mental Health	Over four million children in the United States are being raised by grandparents. Although caring for one’s grandchildren can have benefits for grandparents, it also has potential costs. Previous work has largely failed to investigate whether there are racial differences in the effect of grandparenting on mental health, yet there are good reasons to expect variation. Prior research has documented the prevalence and importance of kin networks and social support for the family life of Blacks, which may ease the burden of grandchild care. However, Blacks have different economic and structural circumstances from Whites, which may impede their ability to care financially for a co-residential grandchild. In this paper, I assess whether there are racial and ethnic variations in the mental health of co-residential grandparents, using data from the Health and Retirement Study.	Jennifer	Roebuck Bulanda
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	How Do Multiple Roles Affect Women's Health? The Impacts of Employment and Family Roles over Women's Life Course	Two theoretical hypotheses regarding the combination of family and work roles are usually applied to explain health differences between employed women and housewives. The Role Accumulation Hypothesis proposes that the benefits of role accumulation on health tend to outweigh any stress caused by multiple roles. The Role Strain Hypothesis proposes that multiple roles cause role overload and role conflict that results in poorer health. Using data from the Taiwan Social Change Survey conducted in year 2000 and 2002, this study investigates the health effects of employment and family roles on health for women in different age groups. Logistic regression models of three health measures are estimated separately for young, middle-aged, and elderly women. Results suggest that although being employed is associated with better health in general for women, the health benefit may vary depending on the type of employment, the nature of family roles, and stage in the life course.	Gang-Hua	 Fan
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Together Forever? Relationship Dynamics and Maternal Investments in Children’s Health	Using Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Data (N=3,798), this paper examines the question of why relationship status matters for a mother's prenatal health behavior choices. The paper argues that a mother's decisions on how much to invest in her child are driven by her romantic relationship, such that the more committed she perceives the father to be, the better her prenatal health behavior decisions. The paper examines late prenatal care, smoking and drinking during pregnancy, and whether the mother breastfed her baby. Results show that several aspects of a mother’s relationship commitment, including multiple partner fertility, relationship quality, and for unmarried mothers, whether she believes she will eventually marry the father, all predict her prenatal health behaviors above and beyond confounding factors. Mothers who perceive a high degree of commitment on the part of the father have better prenatal health behaviors.	Rachel	T. Kimbro
2007	86	Family Dynamics, Intergenerational Relationships, and Health	Growing up with Smokers and Problem Drinkers: A Model of Social Reproduction of Family Environment and Health in Later Adulthood	I examined the life-long impact of childhood health environment (smokers and problem drinkers) on adult health environment, and their joint influences on individual health, using Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. I found that older adults who grew up with smokers or problem drinkers were more likely to smoke long, to have drinking problems, to live with smokers or problem drinker, and to have poorer health (status, height, depression, hypertensions/heart problems, cancer, symptoms, medical conditions). Controlling for one’s own risk behaviors and living with smokers or problem drinkers after 18, the associations remained. Those living with problem drinkers after age 18 or currently exposed to smokers also had poorer health, more diagnosed illnesses, and physical symptoms. The controls included age, gender, child abuse, family configuration, aspirations at age 18, high school performance and IQ, SES, marriage and fertility. None explained or moderated the influences of ever living with smokers and problem drinkers.	Daphne	 Kuo
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	The Transition to Elementary School: Assessing the Impact of Early Learning Opportunities and Classroom Quality on the Achievement Gap	In order to promote school readiness amongst disadvantaged children, developmental psychologists have suggested that high-quality child care centers, in contrast to other arrangements, provide children with the range of stimulating, positive experiences that are most likely to improve children’s cognitive achievement. However, disadvantaged children may be less likely to be enrolled in high quality, center-based care than advantaged children. This difference may represent economic inequalities that limit some children’s access to high quality center care. At the same time, children with more highly educated mothers may be more likely to be in high-quality care because mothers view child care as an investment in children’s development. Analyzing data from the NICHD SECCYD—a national, longitudinal study of 1,371 children—this study looks at how parents’ education structures variations in the types of arrangements children experience, the quality of the arrangement, and the average weekly amount of time spent in each arrangement.	Jennifer	M. Augustine	Robert	 Crosnoe	Aletha	 Huston
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	Endogenous Peer Effects in School Participation	A remaining obstacle in the literature on peer effects has been the inability to distinguish  between peer effects that are determined by a person’s reference group behavior (endogenous peer  effects), and effects generated as a result of specific background characteristics of the groups  themselves (contextual peer effects). This paper identifies and estimates endogenous peer effects on  children’s school participation decisions using evidence from the Mexican PROGRESA program, a  school subsidy program targeted at children of the rural poor. Because program eligibility was randomly assigned, we use this exogenous variation in school participation to identify peer effects on the school  enrollment of ineligible children residing in the same communities. We find that peers have considerable  influence on the enrollment decision of program-ineligible children, and these effects are concentrated among children from relatively poorer households. Our findings imply that educational policies aimed at  encouraging enrollment can produce large social multiplier effects.	Gustavo	J. Bobonis	Frederico	S. Finan
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	Do Public Goods Explain the Relationship between Income Inequality and Birthweight?	This paper examines the relationship between income inequality and birthweight, and delves into one causal pathway through which inequality may operate upon health. The “neo-materialist” relationship between inequality and health argues that income inequality impacts health mainly because inequality affects the distribution of resources in a community. The 1991 and 2001 Natality Detail Files are augmented with community data from several sources, including the decennial Censuses, the Annual Survey of Government Finances and the Area Resource File. I find that public goods are positively correlated with birthweight; and income inequality is associated with higher public goods. Moreover, the inclusion of public goods measures as controls, strengthens the relationship between inequality and birthweight. Inasmuch as income inequality causally increases public goods, public goods dampen the negative effect of income inequality on birthweight. Studies that do not account for the public goods affect potentially underestimate the negative effect of inequality on birthweight.	Aparna	 Lhila
2007	87	Economic Factors and Child Development II	The Supply of Birth Control Methods, Education and Fertility: Evidence from Romania	This paper investigates the effect of the supply of birth  control methods on fertility behavior by exploring the effects of Romania's 23-year period of continued pronatalist policies. In 1966, the Romanian government abruptly made abortion and family planning illegal. This policy was  sustained until December 1989 with only minor modifications. The implementation and repeal of the restrictive regime provide a useful and plausibly exogenous source of variation in the cost of birth control methods that is arguably orthogonal to the demand for children. Women who spent most of their reproductive years under the  restrictive regime experienced large increases in fertility. Less educated women had bigger increases  in fertility after policy implementation and larger fertility decreases following the lifting of restrictions in 1989, when fertility differentials between educational groups decreased by almost fifty percent. These findings strongly suggest that access to abortion and birth control are quantitatively significant determinants of fertility levels, particularly for less educated women.	Cristian	 Pop-Eleches
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Making Babies Healthier by Providing a Managed Care Option to California's Poor	During the 1990s, California shifted over half its Medicaid beneficiaries from a fee-for-service health system into managed care. California was not alone as 57 percent of all Medicaid recipients nation-wide were in managed care by 2002. Despite the expansion of Medicaid managed care, there has been little rigorous analysis of the impact on quality of care. This paper investigates whether mandating a managed care option for California Medicaid beneficiaries improves access to prenatal care and birth outcomes in a traditionally fee-for-service system. The research design exploits the phasing in of managed care over time and counties. We use longitudinal birth record information from 1991 through 2001. We find that offering managed care reduced the number of low-birth weight and premature births for some types of managed care but not all. That managed care had positive health benefits is important for public policy given that cost savings have not arisen.	Tania	 Barham	Paul	 Gertler	Kristiana	 Raube
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Disparities in Primary Care by Race and Ethnicity among Medicaid Children in California	Racial and ethnic disparities in primary care for children are well documented, but poorly understood. This study examines variation in preventable hospitalization rates of Medicaid children in California to extend our understanding of racial and ethnic disparity in primary care quality. I estimated a multivariate Poisson model from administrative data. The results show that primary care quality varies substantially by race and ethnicity even after controlling for beneficiaries’ primary language. The domain of primary care that minority children experience varies by race and ethnicity. Compared to white children, African-American children lack continuity and comprehensiveness of care necessary for the management of chronic conditions. Hispanic children, on the other hand have inadequate first contact care. Asian children experience a better quality of care overall. Independent of race, a non-English primary language has a protective effect on preventable hospitalization. The study finds no evidence of linguistic minorities’ disadvantage in managed care.	Arpita	 Chattopadhyay
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	Is There Adverse Self-Selection of Children with Special Health Care Needs in the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP)?	Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) use more health services than other children; hence health insurance is critical for them. We investigated disenrollment patterns for CSHCN and non-CSHCN in New Jersey’s State Children’s Health Insurance Program (NJ FamilyCare). We used the 2003 NJ FamilyCare Supplement to the New Jersey Family Health Survey. Children were randomly selected from those enrolled in NJ FamilyCare as of May 2002 (N=675). We used the CSHCN Screener – a non-categorical approach to identifying children with special health care needs. Twenty-one percent of children in NJ FamilyCare had at least one SHCN. In binary logistic regressions controlling for demographics and SCHIP features, CSHCN were only one-fifth as likely as non-CSHCN to become uninsured. Multinomial logit will be used to compare odds of (a) finding other insurance, (b) becoming uninsured, and (c) retaining SCHIP coverage. CSHCN were far less likely than non-CSHCN to become uninsured.	Tamarie	 Macon	Jane	E. Miller	Dorothy	 Gaboda	Theresa	 Simpson	Joel	 Cantor
2007	88	Policy and Child Health in the U.S.	The Effects of Head Start Participation on Child Health from Kindergarten to the 5th Grade	The effects of Head Start on child health have been under-studied in the literature and a limited number of well-designed studies show some flaws in research methods. This study examines the effects of Head Start participation prior to kindergarten on child health outcomes from the fall kindergarten through the 5th grade using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K) collected in fall kindergarten (1998), spring kindergarten (1999), 1st grade (spring 2000), 3rd grade (spring 2002), and 5th grade (spring 2004). Using advanced methods (propensity score matching and fixed effects) to address the issue of selection bias and to simulate random assignment with verified Head Start participation data, this study provides reliable findings to update and advance the evidence of Head Start effects on child health for researchers, policymakers, administrators, as well as practitioners.	Fuhua	 Zhai
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	Change in Beliefs or Change in Populations? A Decomposition of Cross-National Trends in Beliefs about Gender Equality.	Using linear regression decomposition, this research documents cross-national change in beliefs about gender equality. The data suggest that change in gender ideology is far from uniform for the cross section of countries included in this analysis and the major world cleavage lies between highly developed western countries, where beliefs about gender equality are the highest and rising, and the rest of the world, where means are lower and, in many cases, decreasing. Beliefs about gender equality in areas such as employment, higher education, and political representation are at best flat among highly populous and rapidly growing countries, and in a number of countries, egalitarian beliefs are on the declining. Decomposition of change into its proximate sources (within and between cohorts) suggest that in many cases, period and cohort effects are offsetting. In nearly all countries, cohort replacement contributed to more egalitarian beliefs, while period effects are negative for many countries.	Shawn	F. Dorius
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	National Context and Task Segregation in Housework, 1965-2003	Recent research explores the social construction of gender in welfare states by documenting the influence of national practices and policies on men and women’s housework time. I extend this research by focusing on how national context may influence the kinds of housework that men and women do, examining sex segregation within household tasks. I analyze 36 time use surveys from 19 countries (spanning 1965 to 2003) combined with original national-level data in multilevel models. I find that men and women spend more time on sex-typical housework in nations where work hours and parental leave are long, and women are less involved in the labor market. They spend less time on sex-typical housework in nations where men are eligible to take parental leave and the public provision of childcare is greater. The results suggest that national context affects not only the amount, but the character of gender inequality in the home.	Jennifer	L. Hook
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	Cross-National Gender Gaps in Educational and Occupational Expectations: A Study of Patterns and Causes	This paper explores the changing gender gaps in educational and occupational expectations cross-nationally. Using data from the 2003 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), it examines gender differences in expectations of 15-year-olds in 30 countries and the sources of cross-national variations in these gender differences. Preliminary results indicate that girls have higher educational expectations than boys in almost all countries. We find a similar pattern for occupational expectations: more girls than boys expect to have white collar occupations, and more boys than girls expect to be employed in blue collar occupations. In addition to mapping the similarities and differences in gender gaps in expectations across many countries, this study seeks to identify the individual-level and country-level variations that explain cross-national differences in the gender gap in educational expectations, thereby advancing knowledge of the changing patterns of gender inequalities in education throughout the world.	Anne	 McDaniel	Claudia	 Buchmann
2007	89	Cross-National Dimensions of Gender Inequality	The Apron Strings of Working Mothers? Socialization, Institutionalization, and the Allocation of Household Labor  in Cross-National Perspective	The increase in married women’s paid employment has prompted research on the effects of maternal employment on the children of working mothers. Because women’s paid employment challenges gender conventions, research has focused on childhood socialization and gender attitudes and behavior in the next generation. This paper considers a key indicator of gender parity, the division of household labor. We employ multi-level HLM models with cross-national ISSP survey data from 34 countries. Two hypotheses are evaluated: 1) the micro-level socialization hypothesis that having had a working mother is associated with a more egalitarian division of household labor between husbands and wives, and 2) the macro-level institutionalization hypothesis that growing up in a society where many children have working mothers fosters egalitarian practices consistent with societal processes of lagged accommodation to maternal employment. We find support for both hypotheses.	Judith	 Treas	Tsui-o	 Tai
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	Marital Paths from Welfare to Self-Sufficiency: A Dynamic Analysis of Women’s Marriage Timing and Transitions out of and into Welfare	Promoting marriage as a path out of welfare dependency has become a policy priority. It is unclear, however, how effective marriage can be at stabilizing poor women’s family circumstances. To understand the effect of marriage on welfare transitions, we employ two models. The first model examines whether women exit welfare through marriage. The second model examines whether the timing of marriage affects the probability of return. Do women who marry in subsequent years after welfare exit have lower rates of recidivism than women who marry during a welfare spell? Our preliminary results suggest that women who enter marriage in the years following a welfare exit have lower recidivism rates than women who marry during a welfare spell. However, in the fifteen years following a welfare exit, recidivism rates are high for both groups of women.	Tracy	 Roberts	Steven	P. Martin
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	Getting Married and Exiting Welfare: The Role of Two-Parent TANF Eligibility Rules	We use the 1996 and 2001 Panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and multinomial event history models to evaluate the role of changes in union status in competing-risk transitions from TANF: 1) with employment versus 2) without a job. Results show that becoming married was significantly related to TANF exits between 1996 and 2003, and compared with single women, women who were married were more likely to transition to work than to exit TANF without employment. Stringency in state welfare eligibility policies for two-parent families also affected the likelihood of leaving TANF for employment. Effects of becoming married on TANF exits without employment are conditional on state stringency of these rules. Findings imply that relaxing two-parent rules – providing financial support for marital relationships, in turn promoting employment – is an encouraging policy approach toward achieving self-sufficiency of disadvantaged families.	Deborah	Roempke  Graefe	Shelley	K. Irving	Gordon	F. De Jong
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	The Effect of Child Support on Subsequent Marriage and Cohabitation	We use data from an experiment that resulted in randomly assigned difference in child support receipt to investigate the effects of child support on cohabitation and marriage. Our results suggest that increases in child support received (associated with a policy of full pass-through and disregard of child support) are associated with significantly lower rates of cohabitation between mothers and men who are not the fathers of their child(ren). Thus a higher proportion of women remain single, given that rates of marriage and of cohabitation with fathers are similar. Overall, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that increased child support increases women’s economic independence, reducing the incentive for women to cohabit with men who are not related to their children.	Maria	 Cancian	Daniel	 Meyer
2007	90	Marriage and Public Policy	The Impact of Social and Economic Policy on the Family Structure Experiences of Children in the United States	We analyze the determinants of family structure change. We consider the major proposed explanations for the dramatic changes in family structure in the U.S.: changes in (1) public assistance policy, child support enforcement, divorce laws, and tax laws; (2) labor market opportunities facing men and women; and (3) marriage market conditions. We model the behavior of women who make union and childbearing decisions, but we derive from the model the consequences of these decisions for the family structure experienced by children. We use panel data from the NLSY79 to analyze the fertility, union formation, union dissolution, type of union (cohabiting versus married), and father identity (biological versus step) choices of women born from 1957 to 1964. We use the estimated model to evaluate the impacts of changes in policies and labor and marriage market conditions on the family structure experiences of children growing up during the early 1970s through 2004.	David	 Blau	Wilbert	 van der Klaauw
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Spatially Projecting Local Population Change Using Planning Support Software	This paper is born from an effort to project the spatial distribution of population growth expected in Vilas County, Wisconsin using, GIS-based planning support software. In the course of developing growth scenarios to reflect the impacts of migration, several barriers to producing reliable models have been encountered. These barriers are specific to rural locales in the midst of amenity growth, and include the difficulty in tracking seasonal resident flows, and the limited availability of spatial data in rural municipalities. This research suggests that accurate and locally applicable projections will require greater access to spatial data and a more nuanced understanding of the rate at which second-home owners become permanent residents. Furthermore, in order for local landuse projections to be fully utilized in the policy making process, applied demographers must assuage a political resistance to both landuse models and population projections harbored where population growth remains a contentious political issue.	Shaun	 Golding
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Basic Data for Forecasting Small Areas	Population forecasts of high quality are the best tool for the planning of a municipality, including child care and health care services for the elderly. For these applications it is necessary to make forecasts for smaller areas within municipalities. The statistical material for a single municipality may involve difficulties because it is based on too few observations to be reliable.  Therefore basic data are needed on an overall base for the whole country, which can easily be updated.  Experience has shown that it is best to analyse how risks for out-migration, age-distribution of in-migration and housing density varies for different residential types. Cluster analysis gives a division of different residential types with demographically similar classes. The division is defined by class of housing, tenure, year of construction, size of the town where the building is situated and also the taxation value.	Helen	 Marklund	Jeanette	 Bandel
2007	91	Small Area Demography	Applied Demography for Local Management: An Overview of the Belgian Experience	The field of applied demography is an area of research which fits into decision-making. In this perspective the three following goals seem to be essential: (1) to seek optimisation in the use of the local resources shared by a population; (2) to seek equity when establishing the rights and obligations of all citizens; (3) to ensure transparency in the making of policy decisions in order to guarantee democracy. In this contribution, we consider applied demography at the local level, examining its special features and the problems usually encountered by demographers within the framework of our practical experience at the communal level in Belgium. CYTISE, an interactive database available on the web, is presented and used on line. It represents a real improvement for policy support, providing appropriate and comparative data for the 262 French-speaking communes of Belgium for the period 1991-2005.	Michel	 Poulain
2007	91	Small Area Demography	An Evaluation of Land Parcel-Weighted Areal Interpolation in Small Areas	Small-area population estimates for user-defined boundaries require that administrative areal units be split and re-aggregated. This process of allocation requires a detailed understanding of the distribution of attributes at a greater scale than the finest areal unit. Rather than working with the assumption that attributes are distributed uniformly across areal units, accuracy can be improved by creating a population surface based on additional sources of data related to the true population distribution. Many complex strategies have been developed to estimate population distribution based on land use and land cover classification systems. A more simplistic strategy is accessible to applied demographers. Administrative data, such as land parcels, can be utilized to geo-reference actual housing units, which can then be transformed into a population surface. This paper describes the process of creating a population surface from land parcels and then tests this method of attribute distribution against the more common method of area-weighted areal allocation.	Kyle	 Reese-Cassal
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	The Numbers Question in Feminism: Bridging the Disciplinary Divide	One of the most striking developments of the past decade is an increased distance between scholars working within women’s studies programs and publishing in such journals as Signs and Feminist Studies and those working within more empirically grounded disciplines like sociology and demography. We argue that much of this distance can be attributed to a move away from “numbers” in women’s studies. This is exacerbated by the inability of demographers to make their work relevant to feminists from other disciplines.   Co-authored by feminist scholars in demography, sociology, and anthropology, this paper describes the developments in demography and women’s studies that led to this disjunction. It suggests ways in which fields like demography might increase their relevance to feminist studies as well as ways in which feminist scholarship might broaden itself to regain the lost ground.	Sonalde	B. Desai	Susan	 Greenhalgh	Nancy	E. Riley
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Politics of the Aging Body: Sexuality and Health in Aging Populations	Feminist thinkers assert that the body is reproduced every day by the context in which the physical body is viewed. In keeping with this theme, we examine how the sexual experience fits into the aging process of older individuals by examining two components of the body (physical health and perception of health) in a nationally representative sample. Our primary question is: How does the interaction between physical health and self-perceived health affect the sexual experience of the elderly? To answer this question, we turn to the initial wave (1995-1996) of the National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States (MIDUS). Using this dataset, we analyze a series of regression models that  examine present sexual experience in the combined context of physical and perceived health indicators. In order to capture differences in sexual experience and health by age, we also evaluate a similar set of models by categorical age cohorts.	Niveditha	 Menon	Latrica	E. Best
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Essentially Quantified? Towards a More Feminist Modelling Strategy	For decades, feminist theorists have made a clear and convincing case against the use of gender as a single analytic category. The treatment of gender as a single category has been robustly criticised for erroneously homogenising the experiences of women and for ignoring other important sources of variation that cut across gender in important and complex ways. Moreover, where multiple aspects of identity have been considered, researchers have been criticised for implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) treating multiple dimensions as additive and separable. Notwithstanding some notable exceptions, feminist demographers and quantitative social scientists continue to employ, often uncritically, methods that fail to address these concerns. This paper argues that feminist researchers need to pay greater attention to the assumptions that underlie their choice of method and the models they estimate. Additionally, the paper suggests the ways in which complexity or “intersectionality” might be better accommodated in gender-sensitive empirical work.	Wendy	 Sigle-Rushton	Diane	 Perrons
2007	92	Critical and Feminist Demography	Various Aspects of Fatherhood from a Gender Point of View: A Country Comparison - Austria, Germany, Finland, Hungary and Italy	In the context of changing gender relations and current low birth-rates in Europe, this paper emphasises the fathers’ contribution to family work. We compare five countries with different political and gender-specific backgrounds. The portrayals are based on the data in the Population Policy Acceptance Study. Research was addressed 1) changes in gender roles, 2) the influence of fathers on female labour participation and 3) fathers' influence on female attitudes towards desired fertility. The analyses are guided by the feministic hypothesis, according to which the responsibility of women during the reproductive field is decisive for their involvement in the labour market. The study is carried out by using univariate and multivariate statistics. The results show that the theory of the advance of the New Father is only partly true. Furthermore the presence of fathers in the family strengthens the traditional division of roles. Particularly low desired fertility is shown for men in the German-speaking area.	Mariam	Irene  Tazi-Preve	Jürgen	 Dorbritz
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Healthy Life Expectancy in People with and without Diabetes in Latin America and the Caribbean	This paper estimates diabetes-free life expectancy in Latin America and the Caribbean using data from two large surveys (SABE and MHAS). It also investigates the differences in total life expectancy, disability-free life expectancy, and disabled life expectancy between diabetics and non-diabetics. Results show that elderly individuals are expected to live a large proportion of their lives with diabetes. For example, men and women at age 60 in Mexico City can expect to live about 20% of their remaining years of life with diabetes. Data from Mexico show that diabetes reduces total and active life expectancy (at age 50) in eight years. Diabetics are also more likely to live a higher percentage of their lives with functional disability: disabled life expectancy (measured by activities of daily living) represents 17% of the remaining lives of diabetics and 12% of non-diabetics. Diabetes significantly shortens total and active life expectancy, which imposes considerable economic and social costs.	Flavia	 Andrade
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Retirement Patterns in Europe: The Effect of Health	This paper investigates the retirement decisions of older Europeans using a newly available pan-European dataset, the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). In particular, we analyze the role played by health factors and by social security and pension rules in shaping labor supply and retirement decisions. The preliminary results indicate that institutional differences in welfare systems clearly affect the distribution and age pattern of participation in the labor market and of retirement. In addition, we find that there is potentially huge unused labor capacity in countries such as Austria, Italy and France where “healthy” individuals are not in the labor force.	Enrica	 Croda	Agar	 Brugiavini	Franco	 Peracchi
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Lifestyle Risk Factors and Their Consequences among Older Adults in Mexico and the United States	We examine the determinants and consequences of lifestyle risk factors among older adults comparing the United States and Mexico. We focus on the determinants of: smoking tobacco, drinking alcohol, lack of physical activity, and overweight/obesity. We also investigate the consequences of these risk factors on: impaired physical activity, catastrophic health care needs (hospitalizations), and mortality. The research uses a conceptual framework incorporating the life course and economic model of health production. We use data from two-wave panels of the U.S. Health and Retirement Study 2000 and 2002, and the Mexican Health and Aging Study 2001 and 2003. We present a set of testable hypotheses for the cross-national comparison, descriptive analysis, and multivariate models of determinants and consequences of lifestyle risk factors. We follow with a discussion of results and implications for the likely burden of aging in countries in disparate stages of economic development.	Rebeca	 Wong	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Emily	M. Agree
2007	93	Aging and Health in Developing and Developed Countries: Comparative Aspects	Revealing Patterns: A Cross-Country Analysis of the Gender Gap in Mortality	This study intends to uncover explanations of the different country-patterns of the gender gap in mortality (concerning life expectancy at birth). Throughout the 20th century, until the 1970s/1980s the mortality differences between women and men in developed countries were generally increasing  in favor of women. Since then four different patterns arose: a narrowing, a plateau, an increasing, and a roller-coaster pattern. In a first step the Human Mortality Database was used to calculate sex-specific life tables for 26 countries and to decompose the overall differences in life expectancy at birth between women and men into absolute and relative contributions of all single age groups. In a next step we seek to explain those country-specific differences, i.e. the four patterns mentioned above, by an in-depth analysis using SHARE (Survey on Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe) to understand what might be hidden behind those age patterns of the gender gap in mortality.	Nadine	 Zielonke
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	The Most Important Graph in the World: U.S. Life Cycle Deficits, 1888-2003	The life cycle deficit – the difference between consumption and income at each age – is a basic problem of social and economic organization, indicating who needs resources and who has them to give. This paper examines trends in life cycle deficits in the United States reaching back as far as the 19th century up to the present. Over this long period we see increasing deficits for older people as their labor income decreases and their own and Medicare’s spending on their health rises steadily. Deficits for the young rise in the most recent period because of later entry into the labor force for greater education. These deficits are financed through transfers from the labor income of working age people but also through borrowing and asset income. The application of age profiles to study the impacts of these trends is discussed.	Gretchen	 Donehower
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	Cohort Differences in Wealth and Pension Participation of Near-Retirees	As the baby-boomers approach retirement it is important to know how they will fare in retirement relative to earlier cohorts. Many social and economic changes have occurred during the last half of the twentieth century, changes that are likely to affect the retirement well being of recent cohorts in many ways. In this paper we compare retirement economic resources of two cohorts of near retirees. Particularly we look at people born in 1933-1939 who were 55-61 years old in 1994, and the more recent cohort consisting of people of the same age (55-61) in 2004 who were born in 1943-1949. In this study, we take a narrower view, and focus on only two potential income resources for retirement: total net worth and pension participation (a proxy for pension wealth). We use data from Health and Retirement Study.	Howard	 Iams	Irena	 Dushi
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	The Effect of Childlessness on the Economic Status of Elders	An increasing proportion of American adults are childless. If childless elders require greater income support, and childlessness continues to increase, financial demands on public programs will expand even faster than the rising dependency ratio alone would imply. The existence and size of any effects of childlessness on elders’ economic well-being have received little attention from researchers or policymakers. This study examines the relationship of childlessness to elders’ economic status, including income, poverty status, retirement assets, and use of Supplemental Security Income and Medicaid. It presents descriptive data on differences between childless elders and those with children, and regression models to better establish the net association between childlessness and each outcome. The Health and Retirement Survey provides the data.	Robert	D. Plotnick
2007	94	Trends in Poverty and Wellbeing of the Elderly	Will Competing Objectives in Germany's Pension and Labor Market Policies Harm Women's Material Well-Being at Old Age?	Until recently, the German pension system assumed the typical German worker works full-time until retirement. Consequently, these workers received sufficiently high pensions during retirement to maintain approximately the same standard of living as when they worked. However, persistent unemployment that followed German reunification has led to reforms that promote so-called atypical low paid jobs and changes in unemployment compensation. Simultaneously, large demographic changes have prompted a sequence of pension reforms. These reforms will alter the level and composition of retirement income. Using a new dataset that merges administrative pension records with longitudinal household survey data, this paper investigates the effects of the confluence of demographic change, pension law reforms and atypical work exemptions on the retirement incomes of various demographic groups using event-history analysis. In particular, we ask whether these changes will undo the successes Germany has had in alleviating poverty amongst the elderly, and amongst elderly women in particular.	Anika	 Rasner	Marjorie	 McElroy
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Sexual Orientation, Earnings, and Occupational Choice	The sexual orientation wage gap is not the same for women and men. It is well-established in the economic literature that a while gay men tend to earn less than their heterosexual counterparts, lesbian women tend to earn more than their heterosexual peers. We use the 2000 Census and compare workers with same sex partners to married and cohabitating heterosexual workers. We show the sexual orientation wage gap varies greatly by age and heterosexual comparison group. We then examine the role occupational sorting plays in the sexual orientation wage differential, specifically sorting into occupations dominated by one sex. Using a DiNardo, Fortin, Lemieux decomposition we are able to estimate the effect of differential occupational sorting into heavily and lightly male dominated occupations in explaining the sexual orientation wage gap for both gays and lesbians.	Heather	 Antecol	Anneke	 Jong	Michael	D Steinberger
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Coresidential Stability among Same-Sex and Different-Sex Couples	Studies documenting numerous advantages to stable marriages and quality relationships explain why the indicators and outcomes of long-term relationship stability are of great interest to social scientists. The bulk of research on relationship stability and duration focuses on heterosexual couples. Many same-sex couples maintain long-term relationships, yet little is known about the degree to which these relationships provide similar advantages. This study uses data from Census 2000 (United States) to compare demographic and economic differences among three different coupling arrangements—different-sex married, different-sex unmarried, and same-sex couples—and explore how these differences correlate and perhaps predict long-term coresidential stability. Findings indicate broad similarity across couple types in predictors of stability. Notably, the odds of being in a long-term relationship relative to different-sex married couples are higher for same-sex couples living in states with sexual orientation anti-discrimination laws, suggesting that supportive social and legal climates do impact relationship stability in couples.	Gary	J. Gates
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Nontraditional Families and Childhood Grade Retention	This paper uses the massive sample size of the U.S. census to compare outcomes for children of different family types, specifically children of same-sex cohabiting couples with children of various types of families headed by heterosexual parents. This paper represents the first (as far as the author knows) large sample nationally representative study of the children of same-sex couples. The results show that heterosexual married couples are the family type whose children have the lowest rates of grade retention, but that the advantage of heterosexual married couples is mostly due to their higher SES. Children of same-sex couples have grade retention rates that are indistinguishable from the children of heterosexual cohabiting couples. In general, differences in grade retention rates between family types are modest. Children of all family types (including children of same-sex couples) have far lower grade retention rates than children living in group quarters. Some implications are discussed.	Michael	J. Rosenfeld
2007	95	Same-Sex Unions	Explaining Differences in Assortative Matching between Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Couples	Same-sex couples tend to be less homogamous than opposite-sex couples on a variety of characteristics, including age, education, and race/ethnicity. However, no study has systematically investigated the possible sources of these differences. We use data from the 1990 and 2000 censuses to investigate several hypotheses. One possibility is that same-sex couples are less homogamous than opposite-sex couples because there are fewer potential partners from which to choose. Another possibility is that if individuals choose homogamous relationships to ensure that their characteristics are passed on to their children, then differences in expected fertility may explain the lower odds of homogamy among same-sex couples. Finally, same-sex couples may be less homogamous than opposite-sex couples because they are more geographically mobile and thus subject to lower levels of parental influence over their choice of mates.	Christine	R. Schwartz	Nikki	L. Graf
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Is There a Deadline for Parenthood? An Example from Poland	The postponement of childbearing occurs universally across Europe and U.S.A., but still the paths of this trend differ profoundly from country to country. In Poland, similarly to other Central and Eastern European countries, women have their first child still at the relatively early ages. This paper asks the question about the role of the age norms in sustaining the pattern of early motherhood. We investigate young adults’ perceptions of age, in relation to their fertility choices. We find that the age is indeed a salient dimension that structures and regulates individual childbearing plans. The qualitative approach of our study allows for gaining insights in how the age norms are explained, argued about and sanctioned. We also reconstruct the mechanisms of the normative influence of the age limits (deadlines) on the fertility behaviour. Thus, the study not only improves our understanding of the timing of childbearing but also contributes to the general discussion on the age norms.	Monika	 Mynarska
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Becoming Parent in a Post-Communist Society: An Analysis of Ideational Factors	The move from an early fertility to a new, late fertility model is characteristic for each post-communist societies including the Hungarian one, and is the basic reason for low period fertility. The offered approaches explaining the changes, such as the second demographic transition theory, the economic crisis hypothesis, the disorderliness approach, can be located in a space stretching between structural and cultural explanations. Using two waves of an ongoing follow-up survey, we will be able to show “selection” effects of cultural factors on childbearing behaviour and at the same time control for some structural factors. The effects of religiosity, child related norms (ideal age and ideal number of children), individualism- and anomia-scale, and optimism are analysed in our models. Using parallel logistic regression models for male and female respondents, we could show and compare influences of ideational factors.	Zsolt	 Spéder	Balázs	 Kapitány
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	The Importance of Social Context in the Formation of Teenagers' Value of Children: Social Class and Rural Urban Differences in Taiwan	This paper examines how teenagers' values may be shaped by the immediate social context with special reference to social class and rural urban background. The locus of study is Taiwan, a society with drastic declining birth rates in recent years. It is hypothesized that teenagers’ fertility values of having children (or positive values) and not having children (or negative values) are accounted for by the individual, familial and social contextual factors. Data are taken from an island-wide sample of first year senior high students. Field survey was administered from winter of 2005 to early spring of 2006.  The analysis shows that three dimensions can be extracted, with emotional values the most important, followed by physical and social values. Results also indicate that social contextual factors and individual factors contribute to the formation of positive VOC among Taiwanese teenagers. The importance of social context is thus supported.	Chin-Chun	 Yi
2007	96	Ideational Factors in Fertility Behavior and Change	Health Services, Childbearing Beliefs, and Sterilization	The macro-micro link is a fundamental component of sociological theory and empirical research. This paper investigates the relationship between specific dimensions of health services and individuals’ childbearing beliefs and behaviors to help illuminate the mechanisms through which social context influences individual’s behavior. I construct a new theoretical framework that explicitly illustrates how specific dimensions of health services effect behavior and provide new information on the social-psychological mechanisms through which social context influences individual behavior by examining the relationship between health services and attitudes. My investigation focuses on a setting in rural Nepal that experienced dramatic social, economic, and demographic changes over the course of current residents’ lives. Findings reveal (1) social-psychological mechanisms are a key piece of the social context-individual behavior link; and (2) multiple characteristics of health services exhibit independent effects on childbearing beliefs.	Sarah	R. Brauner-Otto
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Consistency in the Reporting of Sexual Behavior: An Analysis of an Interview Mode Experiment in São Paulo, Brazil	This paper examines data from a study evaluating home-  versus clinic-based screening and diagnosis for STIs among over 800 women visiting a clinic in São Paulo, Brazil. In addition to random assignment to home or clinic screening for STIs, women were randomized at enrollment to either a face-to-face interviewer-administered survey or an audio-computer assisted self-interview. The enrollment interview included basic questions on the participant’s background, reproductive behavior, sexual behavior, contraceptive use, and prior STIs. At the six week follow-up interview, which was conducted with the computer for all participants, many of the same questions on sexual behavior, partners, and condom use were repeated as were questions on births, pregnancies, and abortion. The objectives of this paper are to investigate the consistency in reporting of sexual behavior at the enrollment interview by interview mode as well as consistency in reporting between enrollment and the six-week follow-up by interview mode.	Barbara	S. Mensch	Paul	C. Hewett	Heidi	 Jones	Carla	 Gianni Luppi	Sheri	A. Lippman	Adriana	 Pinho	Juan	 Diaz
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Research Power and Confidentiality Issues Associated with Combining Data Sets	Considerable benefits are associated with electronically linked datasets for demographic, biomedical and health researchers. Although such databases have substantial benefits, the public’s concern about misuse and the need for appropriate safeguards have sparked national discussions. This paper addresses some of the issues that are associated with combining or linking data sets for demographic research and how they can be addressed. It focuses on the challenges and solutions regarding the relationship with the data contributor. The development of research resources or centers to take the role of linking data sets for research use is explored. The Utah Population Database (UPDB) is used as an example of one possible way to approach these issues. It has existed for over 30 years and has a long history of developing policies and procedures that address such issues. It provides access to about 9 million records and supports 65 projects.	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Jean	E.  Wylie
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Ethics in Demographic Survey Research: Is the Minimal Risk Approach Sufficient in the Indian Context?	In the Indian context, health research involving human subjects is guided by two guidelines, the ICMR guidelines for biomedical research and the NCESSRH guidelines for social science research in health. These guidelines list four major principles of ethical research that are relevant for the protection of human subjects; the principles of autonomy, non-malficience, beneficence and justice. However, much of demographic research in India consists of surveys that are considered minimal risk research and therefore subjected to expedited review processes. Is the assumption of minimal risk tenable in all circumstances? This paper attempts to explore the potential for harm to human subjects who participate in such surveys in terms of violation of these four major ethical principles. It also proposes some possible remedies in keeping with the ideas based on the Certificates of Confidentiality under the U.S. – Common Federal Regulations and the Census of India Act of 1948.	Mala	 Ramanathan	Sajitha	 OG
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Census Confidentiality under the Second War Powers Act (1942-1947)	The Second War Powers Act was enacted in March 1942. One section of this law authorized the Secretary of Commerce to provide information to other Government agencies, including micro data collected under a pledge of confidentiality, if the data were needed “for use in connection with the conduct of the war.” The extent to which this provision was actually used has been disputed.    This paper, based on recent research, provides evidence of specific disclosures made between 1942 and 1947 of micro data collected by the Census Bureau under the confidentiality assurances of Title 13. The examples cited pertain to both businesses and persons, including micro-level information on persons obtained from the 1940 Census. Based on the materials so far located, it appears that Census Bureau staff and management considered such disclosures to be routine. The paper places these disclosures in the context of broader issues related to statistical confidentiality.	William	 Seltzer	Margo	 Anderson
2007	97	Confidentiality, Privacy, and Ethical Issues in Demographic Data	Disclosure Risk of Contextual Data: The Role of Identified Geography, Spatial Scale, and Nesting of Information in Public-Use Files	This project investigates the ways that contextual data associated with individual-level data in a dataset relate to disclosure risk. Analyzing an array of contextual data at different spatial scales, I simulate models to measure the likelihood of pinpointing geographic location under various distributional scenarios. Specifically, I investigate how disclosure risk for geographic units is affected by (1) spatial scale; (2) providing contextual data at multiple geographic levels; and (3) identifying region and state. Using individual geographic units as well as the “test data collection” as my units of analysis, the amount of disclosure risk as the outcome of interest, and associated experimental traits (e.g., masking technique), descriptive statistics, maps, and multivariate analyses are produced. As expected, disclosure risk increases when the geographic scope of a study is constrained to a sub-national level. Reidentification increases with the spatial scale of contextual data and is compounded when data is provided at multiple scales.	Kristine	 Witkowski
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Trajectories of Couple Relationship Quality after Childbirth: Does Marriage Matter?	This paper uses new data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study to examine trajectories in couple relationship quality subsequent to the birth of a child in large U.S. cities. Using latent growth curve modeling, I analyze the level and change in couple relationship quality from the time of birth through five years later, including factors associated with improvement or decline. I compare couples who were married versus unmarried at birth. Then, among those who had a nonmarital birth, I compare those who got married versus those who remained together but did not legally marry. This research sheds light on the extent to which marriage may yield beneficial effects for families with children and has implications for current policy efforts to enhance relationship skills and encourage marriage.	Marcia	J. Carlson
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Economic Disadvantage and Relationship Outcomes among Married Couples	The strong association between economic disadvantage and marital dissolution risks is well documented, but there has been practically no research on why poverty makes it more difficult to sustain marital relationships. In this paper, we use longitudinal data on 4,000 married couples from the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH) to explore the role of economic disadvantage. An initial step in the analysis is to construct two multidimensional indices measuring disadvantage at the couple- and neighborhood-level. Using a regression decomposition technique, the main analysis assesses the degree to which economic disadvantage (1) is associated directly with a wide range of factors hypothesized to affect marital outcomes and (2) moderates the effects of these factors on marital happiness, divorce disinclination, and marital stability. This study is the first, to our knowledge, to explore formally the connections between economic disadvantage and marriage outcomes.	David	J. Fein	Daniel	B. Gubits	Futoshi	 Yumoto
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Welfare to Work and Marriage? How the Transition from Welfare to Work Influences Relationships between Unmarried Parents	While researchers have devoted a great deal of attention to whether welfare influences marriage, they have rarely evaluated how welfare participation and transitions can impact relationship quality. Using data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, this article shows that even though there is a high degree of stability in reports of relationship quality, welfare and employment transitions are associated with changes in both objective and subjective indicators of parental relationship quality. In turn, relationship quality is a highly significant predictor of transitions into marriage and relationship dissolution. However, relationship quality serves as only a modest mediator between employment/welfare transitions and relationship status outcomes. These results suggest that parental relationship quality may be sensitive to welfare and employment transitions in the post-welfare reform era, above and beyond changes in marital or relationship status, but that substantial improvement in relationship quality may be difficult to achieve through policy interventions.	Laura	M. Tach
2007	98	Promoting Healthy Marriages: Can Government Play a Role?	Family Structure Changes and Maternal Health Trajectories	Recent trends in births to unmarried parents and the instability surrounding their relationships raise concerns about parental and child well-being when these relationships dissolve. Of particular interest is whether families might be better off if parents married, as current government policies suggest. Using the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWS) we examine trajectories of mental and physical health among mothers, specifically focusing on transitions into and out of residential relationships with the child’s biological father. Mothers who remain married have better mental and physical health than continuously cohabiting or continuously single mothers. For coresident parents at birth, exiting this relationship increases mental health problems and decreases self-rated health. No difference is found for exit from marriage versus exit from cohabitation. For non-residential parents, entering a residential relationship is beneficial for both mental and physical health, but the size of this impact decreases as the child ages.	Sarah	O. Meadows	Sara	 McLanahan	Jeanne	 Brooks-Gunn
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	Demographic Change and Future Carbon Emissions in China and India	This paper investigates whether expected changes in demographic characteristics of Chinese and Indian households over the next 25-50 years could have a substantial influence on consumption, economic growth, total energy demand, and carbon dioxide emissions, an important greenhouse gas. We develop new household projections for China and India intended to bracket a wide range of plausible outcomes for changes in population size, urban/rural status, age structure, and household size. Benchmark demand for consumer goods, supplies of labor, and capital, are estimated from household surveys and production data for each country. A global energy-economic growth model is used to simulate consumption of various goods, direct and indirect energy demand, and carbon emissions. Effects of demographic change are compared under different scenarios to technical change over the time horizon of analysis. Results show how demographic heterogeneity in China and India could affect future energy use and carbon emissions in these countries.	Michael	 Dalton	Leiwen	 Jiang	Shonali	 Pachauri	Brian	C. O'Neill
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	The Costs of Decentralization: Water Quality Spillovers from the Re-Drawing of County Boundaries in Brazil	We examine the effect of political decentralization on pollution levels in Brazilian rivers. Upstream water use has spillover effects on downstream jurisdictions; greater decentralization (e.g. a larger number of political jurisdictions managing the same river) may exacerbate these spillovers, as upstream communities have fewer incentives to restrain their members from polluting the river at their borders. We use a panel dataset of over 21,000 water quality measures collected at 795 monitoring stations located in all eight river basins across Brazil and the evolving boundaries of the 5500 counties across Brazil to study (a) whether water quality degrades across jurisdictional boundaries, and (b) whether the splitting of counties (i.e. greater decentralization) is associated with larger deterioration in water quality over time. We find that an additional county border crossing leads to a 29% larger decline in water quality after controlling for population levels.	Molly	 Lipscomb	Mushfiq	 Mobarak
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	The U.S. Population and Its Environmental Consequences: At 300 Million, Do the Numbers Count?	This paper examines U.S. population trends (including growth, density, movement, composition or make up) and per capita patterns of resource consumption, and how they effect the nation's environment, ecosystems, natural resources, air, land and water. The newly released U.S. National Report on Population and the Environment is  among the documents used as a discussion document. The new report is a detailed, balanced, easy-to-understand, science-based analysis of major population trends in the U.S. and how they impact the environment, including air, land, water and species. It looks at national, regional and state/local population trends (including growth, density, movement, and per capita resource consumption) and their specific population-environmental impacts. The report is part of a series produced by the Center for Environment and Population (CEP).	Vicky	 Markham	Martha	 Farnsworth Riche
2007	100	Environmental Consequences of Population Growth/Decline	Population Growth and Environmental Degradation in India	This paper examines the relationship of population to the environment.  With a growing population, poverty and urbanization is degrading the environment.  An analysis of changes and trends over last fifty years was conducted. The study reveals that the country's population growth is imposing an increasing burden on the country's limited and continually degrading natural resource base. The natural resources are under increasing strain, even though the majority of people survive at subsistence level. Population pressure on arable land contributes to the land degradation. The increasing population numbers and growing affluence have already resulted in rapid growth of energy production and consumption in India. The environmental effects like ground water and surface water contamination; air pollution and global warming are of growing concern to increasing consumption levels. The paper concludes with some policy reflections, the policy aimed at overall development should certainly include efforts to control population and environmental pollution.	Dewaram	A. Nagdeve
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Does Economic Growth Reduce Fertility? The Indian Green Revolution Experience.	A simple economic model is used to structure an empirical analysis of fertility decision-making using a newly available panel data set that constitutes a representative sample of rural India over the period 1971-1999.  The results provide strong support for the importance of increases in the value of time of women and of technical change-induced investments in child schooling that accompany economic growth in accounting for fertility decline, with little role for parental schooling. In particular, we find that aggregate wage changes, dominated by increases in the value of female wages, explain 39% of the decline in fertility over the 1982-1999 period. In combination, changes in agricultural productivity and agricultural wage rates explain fully 80% of the decline.  In summary, the Indian demographic revolution appears to have in large part resulted from, rather than just accompanied, the green revolution.	Andrew	 Foster	Mark	R.  Rosenzweig
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Poverty and Fertility Decline in Rural Pakistan: Results of a Longitudinal Study in Punjab and NWFP.	Since the late 1980’s, fertility has been falling rapidly in Pakistan. Moreover, in the past five years, poverty rates have also been falling, although recent estimates show that about one third of the population remains below the poverty line. In this paper, we plan to use longitudinal data on women of reproductive age collected in 1997 and 2004 in rural Punjab and Northwest Fronter Province (NWFP) to understand some of the factors which may underlie changes in both aspirations and behavior related to fertility in recent years. In addition to examining the complex relationship between changes in economic status along multiple dimensions (e.g. consumption, income and experience of economic shocks) and family building behavior, we consider the recent availability of door to door contraceptives, as well as rising aspirations in a context of globalization and expanded schooling opportunities for children.	Sharon	J. Ghuman	Zeba	A. Sathar	Cynthia	B. Lloyd
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Fertility Transition in the Developing World: Progress or Stagnation?	Over the past quarter century fertility has declined at a rapid pace in many developing countries. Projections typically assume that this trend will continue until the replacement level is reached. However, recent evidence suggests that ongoing declines may have slowed or stalled in a number of countries. The objective of this study is to examine the pace of recent fertility changes in the developing world to determine whether ongoing transitions are accelerating or decelerating. Levels and trends in six indicators of reproductive behavior are examined using data from DHS surveys. The main finding is that the average pace of decline in fertility is lower ca. 2000 than in the mid 1990s. A deceleration of the pace of decline is particularly evident in sub-Saharan Africa. The study concludes with an assessment of implications for future trends in fertility.	John	 Bongaarts
2007	101	Fertility Declines: Rapid, Slow, Stalled	Fertility Transition in Sub-Saharan Africa: Falling and Stalling	This paper uses data from the Demographic and Health Surveys that have been carried out in sub-Saharan Africa to:  1) examine the current status of fertility transition in the region, including the extent to which fertility decline has stalled;  2) study the links between contraceptive use, fertility preferences, and socioeconomic development (as reflected in women's education, infant and child survival, and real economic growth), on the one hand, and fertility decline and stalling, on the other; and  3) assess prospects for fertility decline in the region.    We focus on results from the 25 countries that have had multiple Demographic and Health Surveys, since these data, representing over 80 percent of the region's population, provide direct evidence on fertility transition within individual countries. While fertility decline is being experienced in the majority of countries, there are several countries exhibiting stalling of fertility decline, some in mid-transition and others in early transition.	David	 Shapiro	Tesfayi	 Gebreselassie
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Familyhood and Low Fertility in Italy in Comparative Perspective	This paper deals with the relation between strong family ties and reproductive behavior in contemporary Italy. Central to the analysis is the theoretical concept of “familyhood”   (famiglianza), term which expresses the sense of identity provided by being part of a social group of relatives. In particular, we examine the interdependencies between family exchanges and family formation in the two Italian regions of Sardinia and Emilia Romagna, two regions which are characterized by long term divergences in reproductive   behavior and gender role patterns. We use a multi methods approach, taking advantage of two large and regional representative surveys (Famiglie e Soggetti Sociali 1998 and 2003) and rich ethnographic data collected in 2004-5 in the main cities of the two regions. In all datasets both partners are interviewed. First results focus on the differences in the patterns of exchange among family members, the meaning attributed to them and   to family relations in general	Laura	 Bernardi	Alessandra	 Gribaldo	Anna	 Oppo
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Marital and Reproductive Behavior in Italy after 1990: Bridging the Gap with Western Europe?	During 1980-95, Italy shared with most of developed countries, the increasing age at first marriage and the decreasing fertility. On the other hand, behaviors that questioned the centrality of marriage were hardly widespread: cohabitation and out-of-wedlock births did not increase nor did marital separation become common. Moreover, fertility decreased at the lowest level in the world. In this paper we discuss if these Italian “anomalies” are disappearing. Is Italy moving toward marital and reproductive models already quite widespread in most other developed countries? In particular, we observe if in Italy after 1990, cohabitation and marital separations became more pervasive and if the recent increase in fertility may be an indicator of more considerable future changes. The main result is that the gap is bridging, mainly if some northern and central regions of Italy are considered.	Gianpiero	 Dalla Zuanna	Maria	 Castiglioni
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	New Empirical Evidence on the Low Fertility Trap Hypothesis	Recent studies have suggested the existence of a Low Fertility Trap, a downward spiral in the level of fertility for those countries falling below a possible threshold level (Lutz and Skirbekk, 2005; Lutz, Skribekk and Testa, forthcoming). The three main mechanisms that could lead the trap are: negative demographic momentum, declines in ideal family size as a consequence of low actual fertility in the generation before, and declining relative income of young couples. The paper aims to provide further evidence supporting the existence of these self-reinforcing mechanisms by looking at the new data from the Eurobarometer Survey conducted in 2006 and from the Luxembourg Income Study. Preliminary results show that the ideal family size of young women and men in the Southern European countries has been slightly declining over the last five years, as predicted by the low fertility trap. This finding is carefully analyzed in the paper.	Wolfgang	 Lutz	Vegard	 Skirbekk
2007	102	New Perspectives on Low Fertility	Fertility Decline in Brazil and México: Tempo, Quantum and Parity Composition Effects	Fertility studies in Brazil and Mexico are, in general, limited to the analysis of traditional measures, most because of the birth registration low quality and the absence of good birth histories. The investigation of alternative measures is becoming more important as fertility reaches lower levels. Miranda-Ribeiro & Rios-Neto present two birth history reconstruction methodologies and determine the one that produces better results to the Brazilian case. This methodology also produced good results when applied to the 2000 Mexican Census. The birth histories data allow the determination of period alternative measures, including those derived from fertility tables and the adjusted measure proposed by the Köhler & Ortega Method. The main purpose of this paper is to create and compare series of period fertility measures for Brazil and Mexico, focused on the study of tempo and parity composition effects.	Eduardo	L.G. Rios-Neto	Adriana	 Miranda-Ribeiro
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Hindu-Muslim Differentials in Infant and Child Survival in India: Some Unexpected Findings	Several researchers have commented on the higher fertility of Muslims than Hindus in India, even after adding many socioeconomic controls. Given known fertility-mortality interactions, for this reason alone, one would expect infant and child mortality to also be higher among Muslims, an expectation buttressed by the fact that Muslim women also display so many other predictors of high child mortality - relatively low levels of education, greater social conservatism and larger levels of poverty. But infant and child mortality rates are significantly lower among Muslims, whether one is looking at different states, urban and rural areas separately, over time, and indeed even in populations of Hindu or Muslim origin in Europe. To understand this intriguing finding, we analyze data from the second round of the Indian NFHS. We also look for hints in the qualitative literature on religious differences in norms and practices related to childbearing and childrearing.	Alaka	Malwade  Basu	Lindy	 Williams	Deladem	 Kusi-Appouh
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Explaining the Russian Mortality Paradox	In the former Soviet republics of Central Asia, ethnic Russians have exhibited higher adult mortality than native ethnic groups (Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Uzbek, etc.) in spite of their higher socio-economic status. This ethnic mortality differential has even widened since the break-up of the Soviet Union. The most common explanation for this paradox, which we term the Russian mortality paradox, is that deaths are better reported among ethnic Russians. In this paper, we use detailed mortality data from Kyrgyzstan between 1959 and 1999 to evaluate the different explanations for the Russian mortality paradox: (1) data artifacts; (2) migration effects; (3) cultural effects. We find that the most plausible explanation is the cultural hypothesis, because the personal behaviors that generate the observed adult mortality differentials (alcohol consumption, in particular) seem to be closely tied to cultural practices. We examine the implications of this finding for understanding the health crisis in post-Soviet states.	Michel	 Guillot	Natalia	S. Gavrilova	Tetyana	 Pudrovska
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	The Effects of Education and Nativity on Cause-Specific Older Age Mortality in Taiwan	Comparisons of migrants vs. native populations have become increasingly important as a means of gaining insight into the factors affecting health and mortality levels and the relationship between them. Taiwan underwent a unique migration in 1949-50, as more than a million people, mostly young males, arrived from Mainland China following the Communist civil war victory. The Mainlanders are distinct in several ways: they represented different provinces in China than the original settlers, were better educated, and had distinct occupational profiles. Since 1950, Taiwan has experienced a rapid demographic transition and notable economic development, resulting in mortality decline. In this paper, we generate age- and cause-specific death rates circa 1990 by education and nativity to evaluate the relative importance of each factor. We also use time series data on mortality and survey data to help interpret the differentials in terms of selection, risk factors, and other dynamics of health and mortality.	Albert	 Hermalin	Mary	Beth  Ofstedal	Cathy	 Sun	I-Wen	 Liu
2007	103	Race/Ethnic Differences in Mortality	Mortality Experience of Tsimane Amerindians of Bolivia: Regional Variation, Temporal Trends and Epidemiological Transition	This paper examines mortality patterns among the Tsimane, small-scale forager-horticulturalists from lowland Bolivia. We compare age-specific mortality in remote versus acculturated regions and examine changes among all age groups and by sex over the past fifty years. Villages in remote regions show 2-4 times higher mortality from infancy until middle adulthood than in the acculturated region. Overall life expectancy at birth improved by 8 years from 45 to 53 after 1990. Over half of all deaths are due to respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. Accidents and violence account for a quarter of all deaths. Unlike typical patterns described by epidemiologic transition theory, we find a much larger period reduction of death rates during middle and late adulthood than during infancy or childhood. We hypothesize that that this pattern is due to differential access to medical interventions, a continued lack of public health infrastructure and cultural beliefs concerning sickness and dying.	Hillard	S. Kaplan	Michael	D. Gurven
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Epistemology and Epidemiology: Local Interpretations of AIDS Epidemiology in Rural Malawi	In this paper we use a rich set of ethnographic journals collected in rural Malawi to examine understandings of the epidemiology of STIs and HIV. The journals vividly show Malawians publicly and urgently grappling with epidemiology of the new and confusing disease. In their local social networks, people ask each other why some people known to be promiscuous have died, while others known to be equally promiscuous are still alive? How can it be that an innocent wife dies before her philandering husband? Is sex once with an infected person inevitably fatal? We find that between the first journals in 1999 and the present, some of these questions have been resolved; others remain puzzling. We also compare current interpretations of the epidemiology of HIV with what is accepted objectively, on the basis of medical research, to be its natural history.	Gigi	 Santow	Susan	 Watkins	Michael	D. Bracher
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Sexual Behavior and Vulnerability to HIV among Brazilian Heterosexual Population	This paper investigates sexual behavior among Brazilian heterosexual population and how it defines men's and women’s degree of vulnerability to HIV. Vulnerability is defined by the association of the pattern of exposure to risk of HIV infection and the ability to answer (which includes both the individual skills to prevent infection and the change of behavior). Methodologically, the study inter-relates quantitative and qualitative approaches. Grade of Membership (GoM) analysis was used to build a vulnerability typology for a sample of 3068 self-identified heterosexual individuals aged 16 to 65 years. Types of more interest were: “circumstantially not exposed individuals”, “highly exposed individuals with high ability to answer”, and “exposed individuals with low ability to answer”. The latest group exhibited the highest degree of vulnerability and was further investigated by using in-depth interviews. Findings are useful to comprehend how the interplay among gender patterns, sexual behavior, and vulnerability to HIV infection.	Junia	 Quiroga	Neuma	 Aguiar	Diana	 Sawyer
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Fatal Attraction: A Qualitative Study of Western Male Clients of Sex Workers in Thailand	Globally, young women are trafficked into sex-work to meet the demand of clients. The sex industry would not exist without the demand-side which has had limited research. Consequently, the characteristics of clients are almost unknown.     This paper explores the perceptions of Western male clients of female sex-workers in Thailand to gain an understanding of the demand-side of the sex industry. This qualitative study took place in entertainment venues in Thailand.     The study identified factors common to clients of sex-workers: fulfillment of masculine roles, social and sexual acceptance and supply of sex-work. Findings suggest clients’ need to assert masculine identity through power and control over the sex-worker and the need to feel accepted.     Clients seek extremely unequal relationships in order to fulfill masculine hierarchal roles. In most cases, these men cannot fulfill these roles in their own countries. The socio-cultural context plays a crucial role in the encouragement of this problem.	Rosanne	M. Rushing	Juan	Manuel  Contreras
2007	104	Making Sense of Sex, Risk, and STDs/AIDS	Redefining Vulnerabilities: A Study of Men Having Sex with Men in the Wake of HIV Epidemic in Mumbai, India	Evidence shows that the HIV has narrowed down the space between risky and safe practices. The paper captures the concepts of sexuality and sexual health among the males having sex with males (MSM) and the social externalities that determine their behaviour. This paper argues that to arrest this menace, a new paradigm is required that accords greater acceptance to sexual realities based on deconstruction of sexual identities. It also addresses both the structural and biological factors construct sexual identities and choices. The study was carried out among 160 MSMs selected from 10 different cruising points in Mumbai. It shows that the MSMs do not reveal their actual sexual identity to family members and society. Due to this hidden identity the MSM cannot take the real advantage of counselling, testing and treatment. At the end, the paper suggests developing an effective institutional mechanism to redress the problems faced by the MSM.	Ashish	 Kumar Mishra	Arun	 Kumar Sharma
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Graves and the Family in Japan	In this study, first historical trends of graves in Japan was analyzed– how the idea of a traditional family grave was socially constructed and was transformed reflecting changes in demography, society, culture, and families. Then considering modernization theories and their constructive criticisms, hypotheses were framed to test how three salient factors, generation, gender, and the place of residence, have affected people’s expectations about burial partners in contemporary Japan. The analysis of JGSS-2001 data supported these hypotheses. Although the majority of people chose graves with succession across generations, younger generations were more likely to support diversified graves than are older generations. This difference was greater for women than for men, and those who live in urban areas than rural areas.	Kimiko	 Tanaka
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Attitudes and Behaviours of Family Formation: The Consequences of Parental Divorce	There is a considerable literature on the effects parental divorce has on several child outcomes such as age at marriage, marriage stability, cohabitation and attitudes toward divorce.   Such literature is much less wide where prevalence of divorce has remained relatively low and therein lay the seeds of the lack of studies on children of separated couples. This happens in Italy, even though in the recent past, we observed a rapid increase of separations also in this country where the phenomenon is acquiring social relevance. Moreover, Italian context is largely different from U.S., and this can bring about some differences in the effect of parental divorce on children. For instance, Italy is well known for its late transition to adulthood, in such a context is still true that parental divorce makes children marry earlier? In this work we analyze these questions using data from a national survey conducted in 2003.	Fausta	 Ongaro	Stefano	 Mazzuco
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	Cross-Cohort Changes in Attitudes about Intimate Relationships: Growing Liberalization or Polarization?	As once uncommon behaviors become more mainstream, their meaning and significance may change. This paper explores whether young adults' views of marital permanency, cohabitation, and adolescent sexuality have changed in the past few decades. Data are from waves 1 and 3 of the National Survey of Families and Households. We examine individuals who are single, cohabiting, and married at the time they were interviewed. Married couples are disaggregated into those who did and did not cohabit with their spouse. Preliminary results reveal growing liberalization towards living together, though young adults coming of age in the early years of the 21st century also express more conservative views regarding marital permanency and teen non-marital sexuality. Current cohabitors express the most liberal views at both time periods, while those who married without first cohabiting adhere to the most conservative attitudes. We find evidence of increasing polarization of family views.	Amanda	J. Miller
2007	105	Ideational Factors in Family Behavior and Change	The Political Significance of the Second Demographic Transition(SDT) in the U.S. : A Spatial Analysis	To what degree can political outcomes at the level of counties be predicted on the basis of the new patterns of household formation, commonly referred to as the Second Demographic Transition dimension (SDT)?     Dependent variables are: Presidential election of 2004, same sex marriage amendments in 24 states (2004+), and the 2006 Missouri stem cell referendum. The SDT predictor is the principal component of several indices related to marriage and parenthood postponement, subreplacement fertility, and cohabitation.    Controls include socio-economic variables (income, education, urbanity), cultural variables (percentages Evangelical/Mormon and Catholic) and ethnicity (percentages Black, Hispanic).    The spatial correlations between the voting outcomes and the SDT-dimension are strikingly high and resistant for ALL controls. This suggests that the spatial differentiation according to household formation is a significant and non-redundant predictor of political outcomes particularly when related to the so called Culture War.    Color maps available on www.sdt.psc.isr.umich.edu/ Both convential maps and Gastner-Newman cartograms.	Ron	J. Lesthaeghe	Lisa	J. Neidert	Didier	 Willaert
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	A Tale of Two Cities: Residential Context and the Health-Risk Behaviors of Latino Adolescents in Los Angeles and Chicago	This analysis explores the possibility that residential location alters the adaptive trajectories of Latino youth in two different metropolitan areas. The data for the analysis come from the Los Angeles Family and Neighborhood Survey (LAFANS) and the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHDCN). We estimate the effects of individual, family, and neighborhood-level influences on two scales of adolescent health risk-behaviors (substance use and delinquency). We find that in Los Angeles, residence in communities with high levels of Latino co-ethnics is associated with higher odds of substance use and delinquency, particularly for U.S.-born Latinos. In Chicago, a different pattern appears whereby residence in communities with a high concentration of non-Latino Black residents increases the odds of substance use and delinquency for U.S.-born Latinos. We conclude that both sets of results illustrate the negative effects of segregation and concentrated disadvantage for Latino children of immigrants.	Reanne	 Frank
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Adaptation and Immigrant-Native Disparities in Obesity among Older Americans	We explore how the immigrant-native gap in obesity changes over time and address limitations of previous health assimilation studies by utilizing panel data containing immigrants’ country of origin. We use growth curve modeling to analyze six waves of the Health and Retirement Survey, a nationally representative study of individuals aged 51-61 in 1992. Our multivariate results do not support a uniform pattern of negative adaptation to the U.S.  Immigrants from Asia, Europe, and Canada/Australia/New Zealand are significantly less likely to be obese than natives at baseline, while Mexican immigrants are more likely to be obese. With the exception of Asian immigrants, both natives and immigrants experience higher obesity by 2002. However, the rate of change is the same for all groups except Central American immigrants, who have a slightly faster rate of change than natives. Among immigrants, duration of time in the U.S. is not significant net of origin country.	Melonie	P. Heron	Katrina	M. Walsemann	Robert	 Schoeni
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	Acculturation and Diet among Mexican-American Women: Findings from the 2000 National Health Interview Survey	There is a growing literature that acculturation of Hispanic persons in the U.S. corresponds with health behaviors. Diet is a key health behavior whose directional association with acculturation is inconclusive. Understanding the true association is fundamental for developing a comprehensive picture of the behavioral changes that can accompany acculturation, and the health outcomes these may engender. We use data from the 2000 National Health Interview Survey to investigate the relationship between acculturation and diet among Mexican-American women. We incorporate two proxy measures of acculturation – nativity and a language composite – to predict dietary intake. Our results demonstrate that women born in Mexico and women with lower levels of language acculturation have healthier dietary intakes, and that the proxy measures are uniquely related to intake estimates. These findings should inform public health efforts concerning Mexican-American women. Furthermore, our findings underscore the importance of incorporating both acculturation measures in similar research.	Jennifer	Karas Montez	Karl	 Eschbach
2007	106	Immigrant Adaptation and Health Outcomes	Disentangling Mental Health, Immigrant Adaptation, and Selection: A Natural Experiment Approach	International migration is associated with a wide range of negative mental health outcomes among Southeast Asian immigrants to the U.S. The inherent stress of adapting to an especially foreign environment appears implicated; and it is widely held that successful adaptation (or acculturation) to the new setting will moderate these links between stress and poor mental health outcomes. A central problem with this paradigm is that the data employed to evaluate it often come from clinic populations; and nearly always consist of post-migration measures of outcomes and predictors, which beg the role of pre-migration attributes. Our approach to this dilemma is to employ a “natural experiment” research design, which involves comparisons of a wide range of mental health outcomes for three population-based samples of Vietnamese immigrants, never-leavers, and returnees. A central focus is the effect of social network, acculturation, and selection factors on several key dimensions of immigrant mental health.	Mark	 VanLandingham	Hongyun	 Fu
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Consequences of Unwanted Childbearing: A Study of Child Outcomes in Bangladesh	The assumption that unwanted childbearing has a wide array of detrimental consequences is an important justification for investment in family planning services. Existing empirical research suggests that such detrimental consequences are substantial. But this research, particularly studies in low-income non-Western settings, is suspect due to shortcomings in measurement (reliance on retrospective reports of the wantedness of births that are of questionable validity) and in statistical modeling (estimation of models that fail to account for effects of omitted family-level variables). The objective of this paper is to assess the consequences of unwanted childbearing using exceptional longitudinal data from two rural districts in Bangladesh. In these data, children are classified as wanted versus unwanted on the basis of prospective fertility preferences. Other advantages of this research include the large size of the sample of children and the measurement of sex-specific preferences.	Satvika	 Chalasani	Michael	 Koenig
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Is Birth Weight on the Causal Pathway to Infant Mortality: Maternal Age?	It is a common theoretical view that (low) birth weight is a correlate of adverse birth outcomes but not on the direct, causal pathway to infant mortality. On the other hand, U.S. national policy for reducing infant mortality is to reduce low birth weight. The development of covariate density defined mixtures of logistic regression, a non-linear structural equation like model, allows a formal test of this issue. This paper determines if maternal age influences birth outcomes directly, and/or indirectly through birth weight in four populations. The results indicate that a) maternal age has direct effects on infant mortality, b) maternal age influences the birth weight distribution, but c) the effects on birth weight have no effect on mortality, that is the birth weight specific mortality curve shifts to compensate for changes in the birth weight distribution. This is consistent with the theoretical view that birth weight may not be causal.	Timothy	B. Gage	Fu	 Fang	Erin	 O'Neill	Howard	 Stratton
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Maternity Timing, Wealth Accumulation, and Economic Well Being in Retirement	Given that the United States’ recent history is marked by the large scale entry of women into the workforce and large changes in employer pension plans, family planning impacts should be expected. During the past 30 years, large and simultaneous changes to both family and retirement planning have emerged. This paper which considers fertility and savings choices in the context of these changes. We consider how household structure, household wealth, labor force participation, and pension type relate to fertility and its timing empirically. We estimate the impact of fertility on life-cycle savings in a Defined Contribution environment using a simulation tuned to reflect the characteristics of initial empirical work. After considering the positive empirical evidence, we address the normative issue of optimal fertility within a life-cycle model which incorporates both fertility and savings for old age, and the possibility of fertility impacts for U.S. public pension finance.	Jason	S. Seligman	Yoko	 Mimura
2007	107	Short and Long Run Consequences of Childbearing	Timing of Childbearing and Disability in Older Age	Fertility is central to the life experiences of women. As such, it has consequences for all aspects of their lives and implications for their long-term well-being, yet how fertility matters in the later years is relatively unknown. Using data on a nationally representative cohort of women in the United States, I examine the relationship between the timing of childbearing and disability in later life as measured by functional limitations and ADL limitations with attention to the mediating effects of early life and adult social and economic circumstances and later life health. Preliminary results indicate that early and premarital initiation of childbearing is positively associated with disability, though these effects are accounted for by educational attainment and adult socioeconomic status, respectively. Late childbearing is also found to be associated with an increased likelihood of having ADL limitations, but again educational attainment and adult social and economic characteristics explain this relationship.	Naomi	J. Spence
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Going Most of the Way: Technical Virginity among Young Americans	Explanations for technical virginity have been based on weak empirical evidence and considerable conjecture. Using data from the National Survey of Family Growth, we examine technical virginity and its motivations among respondents aged 15–25. Despite perceptions to the contrary, the results suggest that religious adolescents are less likely than their counterparts to opt for non-vaginal sex over total abstinence. Abstinence pledgers who are virgins are neither more nor less likely than their counterparts to substitute non-vaginal sex for intercourse net of their (higher) religiosity. Moreover, religion and morality are the weakest motivators of sexual substitution among young people who have not had vaginal sex. Preserving technical virginity is instead more common among virgins who are driven by a desire to avoid potential life-altering consequences, like pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases, and those who are simply waiting for the right person and time to come along before engaging in vaginal sex.	Jeremy	 Uecker	Nicole	 Angotti	Mark	 Regnerus
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Conceptualizing Healthy Sexual Relationships: The Role of Parent-Teen Relationships and Peer Relationships in Teens’ Choice of First Sexual Partners	The initiation of heterosexual romantic relationships represents a key developmental task of adolescence, and research suggests that two aspects of healthy sexual relationships are having a steady, romantic relationship and having a similar-age partner. This paper uses longitudinal data from Rounds 1–8 of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 cohort, to assess the role of positive family and peer environments in the development of healthy sexual relationships among males and females. Using person-round files, we will explore the role of parenting (including parent-teen relationships, parental monitoring and awareness, and family routines), family structure and stability, and peer environments (including the presence of positive peers or negative peers) in delaying sexual initiation, and – among sexually experienced teens – with more positive relationship characteristics, including having a first sexual relationship that is romantic (vs. casual) and with a similar-aged (vs. older or younger) partner.	Jennifer	 Manlove	Elizabeth	 Terry-Humen	Erum	N. Ikramullah
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Friendship Network Quality and Structure and Sexual Behavior in Adolescence	Moving from same-sex to opposite-sex relationships is a key aspect of development that occurs during adolescence (Dunphy, 1963). This period of life is where peer networks come to take the place of parents as the context within which behavior is learned and developed. The majority of papers that explore the influence of adolescent friendships do not examine a wide variety of network characteristics that have the potential for influencing them. This paper analyzes the influence of eight friendship characteristics (number of male and female friends, closeness to friends of each gender, sexual behavior of each friend by gender, centrality, and density) on two categories of respondents (respondents with same-sex friends only versus friends of both genders). Clustering analysis reveals five distinct friendship profiles that are linked to healthy and unhealthy ways in which sexual relationships are initiated and maintained.	Elisa	 Rustenbach	Alan	 Booth
2007	108	Healthy Sexual Development in Adolescence	Adolescent Identities and Sexual Behavior: An Examination of Anderson’s Player Hypothesis	The current study relies on structured and qualitative data drawn from the first and third waves of the Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study (TARS). We first investigate the social characteristics of male adolescents who self-identify as players in order to evaluate Anderson’s claim that this social role is inextricably linked with poverty and minority status. A second phase of the analysis examines the attitude and behavioral repertoires that connect to the player identity. An important goal of this analysis is to determine whether the player identity contributes significant variance in levels of such reported sexual risk-taking behaviors, after traditional predictors have been taken into account. Finally, we supplement these quantitative analyses with excerpts from in-depth qualitative interviews with youths who self-identify as players, those whose behaviors (large number of sexual behaviors relative to similar aged- peers) would appear to qualify them for this label, and others who position against such an orientation.	Peggy	C. Giordano	Miriam	J.  Northcutt	Monica	A. Longmore	Wendy	D. Manning
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	HIV Sero-Discordance among Heterosexual Couples in Sub-Saharan Africa	Although protection of uninfected partner is a best practice in HIV prevention, we know very little about the level, patterns and determinants of HIV sero-discordance among couples in Africa. Using nationally representative data from six sub-Saharan African countries, we analyze matched couple files to investigate the extent of the problem, its pattern, and the characteristics of sero-discordant couples. The results show that the proportion of HIV-positive sero-discordant couples is higher than the proportion that is sero-concordant in all study countries except Lesotho. In Tanzania, Kenya and Cameroon, the proportion of sero-discordant couples is at least twice the proportion sero-concordant. The man is more likely than the woman to be the infected partner in most countries. In rural settings, and among the less educated and the poor, men are more likely to be the infected partner. The implications of these findings are discussed in the context of HIV prevention in Africa.	Jacob	A. Adetunji
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	Estimating the Impact of U.S. International Family Planning Policies on HIV/AIDS Infection Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa	This paper examines whether the Mexico City Policy, which restricts organizations that receive U.S. family planning funds from discussing abortion, affected the AIDS crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa. Although abortion and HIV/AIDS are not directly associated, the Mexico City Policy resulted in large funding cuts for non-governmental organizations that received U.S. funding and provided family planning services in Africa. Using data from 44 countries from 1970 – 2001 and difference-in-differences estimation, we find that the Mexico City Policy significantly increased AIDS infection rates in countries that received U.S. family planning funds.	Elizabeth	 Asiedu	Donna	K. Ginther
2007	109	HIV/AIDS in Africa	HIV and Family Planning Service Integration and Voluntary HIV Counseling and Testing Client Composition in Ethiopia.	Using multi-level logistic regression models, we examined associations between family planning (FP) and HIV service integration modality and VCT client composition, self-initiated HIV testing and HIV status among 30,257 VCT clients from Ethiopian non-governmental health facilities. Specifically, associations between facility FP-HIV integration level and the likelihood of VCT clients being atypical FP client-types, versus older (25+ years) married women were assessed. Facilities offering FP and HIV services in the same rooms were 2-13 times more likely to serve atypical FP client-types than those co-locating services in the same compound. Facilities where counselors jointly offered FP-HIV services, and served many repeat FP clients, were less likely to serve atypical FP client-types relative to older, married women. Younger, single men and older, married women were most likely to self-initiate HIV testing (78.2% and 80.6%, respectively), while the highest HIV prevalence was seen among older, married men and women (20.5% and 34.2%, respectively).	Heather	M. Bradley	Amare	 Bedada	Amy	 Tsui	Heena	 Brahmbhatt	Duff	G. Gillespie	Aklilu	 Kidanu
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Socioeconomic Differences and Family Clustering of Child Mortality: A Multilevel Analysis of Rural Southern Sweden, 1766-1895	This paper studies the determinants of child mortality during the first stages of the demographic transition. Previous analyses have shown that while socioeconomic differences in child mortality during the nineteenth century were modest but growing, there was a large amount of clustering in certain families. This paper examines the issue using multilevel Cox regression with shared unobserved factors at the family level included. The problem of comparing the impact of unobserved factors at family level with the effects of observed factors is solved by employing a new method for converting the variation stemming from unobserved factors at family level into Median Hazard Ratios (MHR), directly comparable with relative risks. The data come from the Scanian Demographic Database. The principal findings are that while socioeconomic differences in child mortality were greater than sex differences, differences between families, whether due to observed or unobserved factors, were even larger.	Tommy	 Bengtsson
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	A Cohort Analysis of Mortality in New Zealand, 1876-2004	New Zealand is one of few countries with relatively complete demographic data sources from the late 19th century. This has enabled the compilation from 1876 of detailed birth, death and external migration data series by year of occurrence and birth cohort. This pioneering work laid the foundation for the construction of complete cohort life tables and a systematic cohort analysis covering the entire nation over 130 years and beyond. The analysis provides empirical evidence of changes in mortality and survivorship during New Zealand’s history. This includes quantifying the under estimation of life expectancy in period life tables, and quantifying the major population shock of two World Wars. This compilation and analysis of cohort mortality provides a new and valuable resource to research endeavours in the areas of mortality, human longevity, and various transition theories, which will contribute to the understanding of the drivers of mortality changes and future mortality trends.	Kim	 Dunstan	Jit	 Cheung
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Decomposing Changes in Life Expectancy at Birth by Age, Sex, and Residence from 1929 to 2000 in China	Life expectancy at birth (LEAB) in China has doubled in the twentieth century from below 35 years to over 70 years. To capture the contribution of mortality change to the increase in LEAB, we decomposed the changes in LEAB by age, sex, and residence in six periods between 1929 and 2000. Based on available life tables, we performed the decomposition using Arriaga’s discrete method. The results showed dramatic increases in LEAB in the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s. Overall, mortality declines among young ages contributed more to the increase in LEAB, with an upward trend of contribution found among adulthood and elderhood since 1980. We discuss possible causalities between changes in LEAB and historical events and social disruptions such as wars, famine, regime change, women’s movement, the Cultural Revolution, economic reform and epidemiological transition in different periods.	Danan	 Gu	Danzhen	 You	Haiyan	 Zhu	Sarah	E. Tom	Yi	 Zeng
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	The Reversal of the Relation between Economic Growth and Health Progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th Centuries	It is often thought that health progress goes along with economic growth, at least in the long-run. Using the annual rate of growth of the national product as an index of the dynamic status of the economy, and (a) the annual decrease in longevity shortfall (= 90 minus life expectancy at birth), and (b) the decline of mortality rates as indicators of health progress, it is shown with different statistical models that, both in the short and in the long-run, economic growth is significantly associated with health progress in Sweden throughout the 19th century. However, the relation becomes weak as time passes and is completely reversed in the second half of the 20th century, in which it has periods of lower economic growth that associate with significantly greater improvements in health indicators. Evidence of lagged effects of economic growth on health progress is found only for small lags of very few years.	José	A. Tapia
2007	110	Long Run Trends and Differentials in Mortality	Gender, Environmental 'Stressors' and Mortality: Tracing Age- and Cause-Specific Mortality Differentials in a Century of Birth Cohorts from England and Wales, France, and the United States	Large-scale environmental ‘shocks’ or ‘stressors’, such as the two World Wars, are used examine the relationship between population demographics and gendered environmental conditions. Age- and cause-specific mortality differences between men and women are studied for cohorts born 1840-1980 in England and Wales, France and the U.S. (whites and non-whites). Key findings are: 1) dramatic peaks in male mortality disadvantage for cohorts reaching young adulthood (age 20-24) during WWI and WWII, and 2) a recent re-emergence of large sex-differentials in young adulthood that are consistent with increases in suicide among men (white and non-white) in the U.S. The study underscores the role of gendered environmental conditions in shaping young male exposure to mortal physical ‘stressors’ during war. In addition, it highlights the role of gender in shaping the exposures of more recent cohorts to mortal psychosocial ‘stressors’.	Margaret	M. Weden
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Shifting Geographies: Examining the Role of Suburbanization in Black’s Declining Segregation	This paper explores the relationship between black shifts to the suburbs and metropolitan segregation using the entropy index, which allows segregation to be decomposed into parts accounted for within suburb, within city, and between suburb and city components. I find that much of the decline in metropolitan segregation of blacks from others is due to declining central city segregation; suburban segregation has much lower average declines. Furthermore, a growing proportion of black/other segregation is explained by residential distributions within the suburbs. Uneven distributions of blacks across city lines account for nearly a third of black/other segregation in Midwest and Northeast in 2000. In the West, within suburban sorting is by far the most important component of metropolitan segregation of blacks from others, while in the South within city and within suburb sorting are relatively equal in importance.	Mary	J. Fischer
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	The Residential Segregation of Hispanics in Metropolitan America: The Significance of White, Black, and Other	This paper investigates the role that race plays in shaping the residential patterns of Hispanics. Our goal is to gauge the extent to which various groups of Hispanics in metropolitan America share similar generational spatial trajectories. Such an examination can provide insight into the power, and perhaps limitations, of spatial assimilation theory. Our study is guided by the following specific questions: To what extent do residential patterns of Hispanics vary by race? Does nativity play a similar role for all race groups? Among which groups are spatial differences attenuating across generations? Do these patterns remain after taking country of origin, socioeconomic status, and metropolitan-area characteristics into consideration? To answer these questions, we draw on restricted-use 2000 census data to calculate the levels of residential segregation of Hispanics by race and nativity, and then analyze multivariate models to examine the strength of these relationships.	John	 Iceland	Kyle	Anne  Nelson
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Neighborhood Characteristics: Objective versus Subjective Measurement	In this paper, we investigate the association between objective and subjective measures of neighborhood conditions in three domains: crime, physical disorder and social disorder. Specifically, we address the following:    (1) Do objective indicators of neighborhood conditions predict individual perceptions of neighborhood quality?   (2) Do individual-level characteristics predict perceptions of neighborhood quality and do they modify the association between objective indicators of neighborhood conditions and subjective assessment?  (3) Does the neighborhood racial and socioeconomic composition predict perceptions of neighborhood quality over and above objective indicators and individual characteristics?    The extent to which individuals’ perceptions of neighborhood conditions diverge from corresponding objective characteristics raises questions about the validity of using perceptions to study the effects of neighborhood context. Depending on the research question, objective or perceived measures may be more salient. Thus, using one measure as opposed to the other may cause researchers to overstate or understate neighborhood effects.	Laryssa	 Mykyta	Irma	T. Elo	Rachel	 Margolis
2007	111	Racial/Ethnic Residential Segregation	Resident Satisfaction in Racially and Ethnically Diverse Neighborhoods	Utilizing data from a recent survey of Chicago, this study investigates residents’ evaluations of multiple aspects of quality of life in racially and ethnically diverse neighborhoods. Initial results suggest that whites and Latinos evaluate quality of life in diverse neighborhoods differently than they perceive quality of life in homogeneous neighborhoods, but that African Americans do not. Whites report that they are less satisfied with residence in diverse compared to predominantly white neighborhoods. They believe that property upkeep and public school quality are worse in diverse neighborhoods but report no differences in levels of crime across neighborhoods. They also perceive less of a sense of community in diverse neighborhoods. African Americans report no differences in any quality of life measure across neighborhoods. For Latinos, residence in diverse neighborhoods is related to improvements in quality of life with respect to satisfaction with local public schools and lower levels of crime.	Sapna	 Swaroop	Maria	 Krysan
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	The Association between Children’s Earnings and Fathers’ Lifetime Earnings: Estimates Using Administrative Data	Recent studies have found large estimates of the intergenerational elasticity (IGE) in earnings in the United States – as high as 0.6. Recent work (Haider and Solon 2006) suggests that these estimates likely are subject to biases resulting from life-cycle variation in the association between lifetime earnings and current-year earnings. Thus, the ages at which children’s and father’s earnings are measured affect estimates of the IGE in earnings. By using new administrative data of nearly career-long earnings histories of fathers' and children’s earnings around an age that likely is a good proxy for lifetime earnings, we provide an estimate of the IGE in earnings that corrects for both “life-cycle” and attenuation bias. We estimate that the IGE in earnings between fathers and sons is 0.3 to 0.4 and between fathers and daughters is 0.2 to 0.3. Our estimates imply that the United States is substantially more mobile than previously believed.	Molly	 Dahl	Thomas	 DeLeire
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Progresa, Early Childbearing, and the Intergenerational Transmission of Poverty in Rural Mexico	This paper employs panel data on effects of conditional cash transfers under the Progresa (later renamed Oportunidades) program in Mexico to assess the effect of transfers in mitigating the adverse effects of early childbearing on educational attainment of children of mothers who had first births before age 18 compared to children of mothers whose first births occurred at age 18 and older. Evaluations of the cash transfer program have shown that transfers helped reduce differences in children’s progression from primary to secondary school between poor and non-poor families. Analysis of baseline data for this study shows that children of early child-bearers have lower progression ratios than children of later child-bearers. Further analysis indicates that most of this differential affects girls. By 2000, most of the differences between daughters of early vs. late child-bearers have disappeared. The paper will report results of an analysis comparing the baseline and 2000 surveys.	Tom	 Merrick	Margaret	 Greene
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	The Initiation of Intergenerational Financial Transfers from Parents to Their Adult Children	Intergenerational transfers, including both inter vivos transfers and bequests, account for a large portion of the intergenerational transfer of social and economic status. In related work, the authors of this paper are pursuing an analysis of how transfer behavior changes as a result of changes in the marital status of older men and women. One of the surprising findings of that work is the strong persistence of transfers over time. The current study will examine the timing of the initiation of transfers between parents and adult children and the effects of respondent and child characteristics on this timing. Using data from respondents ages 51-60 in the initial wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we will follow these respondents through subsequent waves (1992–2004), using discrete time event history analysis to examine the effects of age, marital status, health status, wealth, income, etc. on the hazard of transferring.	Leah	K. VanWey	Shelley	 Nelson
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Children, Family Size Change, and Household Wealth Trajectories	Wealth inequality continues to play an increasingly important role in the overall American stratification picture. Previous research tends to examine early childhood and adolescent processes that influence adult wealth accumulation to the exclusion of influential adult life course effects. One important aspect of adulthood is having children and the transition to parenthood, which can affect numerous outcomes, including wealth trajectories. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort (NLSY79), and latent-growth curve modeling techniques, we look at the direct effect of family size on wealth and at potential family-size threshold effects in wealth accumulation. Furthermore, we assess racial and ethnic differences between Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics in the effect of family size on wealth. Finally, we disaggregate net worth into its two component parts, financial and non-fungible wealth in order to evaluate the effect of family size and family change on each resource pool.	Matthew	A Painter II	Kevin	M. Shafer
2007	112	Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth and Educational Inequality	Assessing the Effect of Wealth on Education without Wealth Data	We analyze the association between parental wealth and diverse measures of children's educational attainment in two Latin American countries. Given that wealth data are usually not available in developing countries, we use Filmer and Pritchett's (1999, 2001) approach in which wealth is proxied by a set of household assets. Different specifications of this measure are tested, and its potential multidimensionality is explored. Methodological and conceptual issues of this approach are discussed.	Florencia	 Torche	Seymour	 Spilerman
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Demographic Change, Social Security Systems, and Savings		David	 Canning	Rick	 Mansfield	Michael	 Moore
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Establishing Causal Relationships in Demographic and Economic Analysis: Approaches and Data for Sub-Saharan Africa		Peter	 Glick	Chad	 Meyerhoefer	David	E. Sahn	Stephen	 Younger
2007	114	Impact of Population Dynamics and Reproductive Health on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction	Family Planning as an Investment in Development and Female Human Capital: Evaluating the Long-Term Consequences in Matlab, Bangladesh		T.	Paul  Schultz	Shareen	 Joshi
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	High Quality Nutrition in Childhood and Wages in Early Adulthood: A Two-Step Quantile Regression Approach from Guatemalan Workers	Establishing a causal relationship between health and productivity is not straightforward. On one hand, higher income individuals invest more in health: as their income grows, they invest in better diets and health care. On the other, if a worker is healthier and more energetic, then she will probably be more productive. This paper focuses on the second pathway and examines the effect of one dimension of health, height and body mass index (BMI), on wages. Data comes from a longitudinal study conducted in Guatemala, a low-income country, during 1969-1977 and followed-up in 2002-2004. The estimates suggest a very non-linear relationship between height, BMI and wages; however, the evidence is stronger for males than for females. While diminishing returns are operating at higher quantiles of the conditional wage distribution, increasing returns appear at lower quantiles, implying that height and BMI might have an increasing payoff for the poorer workers.	Maria	C. Calderon
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Parental, Gestational, and Birth-Related Risk Factors for Cognitive Development Problems at 9 Months of Age	Few studies have used population-based samples to examine the relationship of early childhood health to children’s cognitive development. This study uses a new nationally representative dataset, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) to analyze predictors of cognitive development problems at 9 months of age. A series of multiple logistic regression models are estimated predicting low scores on a modified version of the Bayley mental scale. Separate models are fit for singletons and non-singletons. Results indicate that a wide range of parental characteristics and gestational and birth-related risk factors are associated with cognitive development. Differences among singletons and non-singletons are also seen, and warrant further investigation.	Marianne	M. Hillemeier	George	 Farkas	Paul	 Morgan	Molly	A. Martin	Steven	 Maczuga
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Cumulative Index of Health Disorders and Longevity	We describe the accumulation of aging-associated health disorders by a cumulative measure known as a frailty index (FI) and evaluate the FIs ability to differentiate long- and short-life phenotypes as well as the FIs connection to aging-associated processes in the elderly analyzing the National Long Term Care Survey data. We show that males and females died before age 75 and those who lived long and died at age 85+ exhibit remarkably similar FI frequency patterns despite the ten-year age difference between age profiles in these samples. Long life is consistently characterized in longitudinal analyses by lower levels of the FIs. FI dynamics are found to be strongly sex-sensitive. The FI appears to be a sensitive age-independent indicator of sex-specific physiological decline in aging individuals and sex-specific discriminator of survival chances. The FI is a promising characteristic suitable for improving sex-sensitive forecasts of risks of adverse health outcomes in the elderly.	Aliaksandr	 Kulminski	Svetlana	V. Ukraintseva	Igor	 Akushevich	Konstantin	G. Arbeev	Anatoliy	I. Yashin
2007	115	Effects of Health on Development of Human Capital II	Obesity and Social Capital over the Life Course: Does Gaining Weight Mean Bowling Alone?	In this research, we seek to integrate two burgeoning literatures: social capital from the social sciences and the obesity epidemic in public health scholarship. Using the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, we explore whether changes in body mass between the ages of 17-18 and 53-54 influence the acquisition of social capital, and whether these effects differ for men and women. In addition to weight change, other potential sources of social capital accumulation are taken into account, including social background and social psychological influences. Results indicate that rather than having broad, predictive power, the influence of weight change is linked to participation in certain kinds of associational life, and, furthermore, differs in some respects for men and women.	Sandra	T. Marquart-Pyatt	Eric	N. Reither	Christy	M. Glass
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Sexual Risk Taking among Adult Dating Couples in the U.S.: The Influence of Respondent, Partner and Relationship Characteristics	We adopt a couple’s perspective to gain a more comprehensive understanding of factors affecting the risk of HIV and other STDs. Specifically, using reports from both partners in sexual dating relationships, we examine how female and male respondents’ reports of their personal and relationship characteristics are related to their reports of sexual risk taking within their relationship. We include measures of the respondent’s and partner’s perceptions of STD/HIV risk and examine how these perceptions mediate the impact of personal and relationship characteristics on sexual risk taking. We also take relationship power into account and examine how it weights the decision making process toward one partner or the other by reducing the importance of a person’s beliefs about levels of STD/HIV risk. Data come from a study of 335 dating couples (670 individuals) throughout the U.S., where the female partner is age 20-35 years and the male is age 18+.	John	O.G. Billy	William	R. Grady	Morgan	 Sill
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Power, Trust, and Pleasure: Relationship Components of Contraceptive Negotiations	Demographers have recently made the methodological decision to focus more on couples, rather than individuals, in research on fertility and contraceptive decision-making, but the theoretical foundations of this research remain underdeveloped. In this paper, I present a theoretical approach for analyzing contraceptive negotiations between partners, emphasizing the role of power, trust, and pleasure in determining whether those negotiations ever take place, and their outcome if they do. I explore the meaning of these factors and clarify their role in the contraceptive negotiation process, taking into account the multiple motivations people may have for contraceptive use. I contend that all three factors work in tandem, but I acknowledge that each factor assumes primacy in certain types of negotiations. This approach is grounded in the position that couple dynamics are important for fertility and contraceptive research because decisions about fertility and contraception occur in the context of sexual encounters and sexual relationships.	Julie	 Fennell
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	HIV/AIDS in Tanzania: Gender Based Structural Interventions	Current research on AIDS in Africa seeks to integrate both cultural and structural explanations as an alternative to research paradigms that focus on individual behavior (Parker 2001). Heavily influenced by developments within interactionist sociology, cultural anthropology, women’s studies, and gay and lesbian studies, AIDS research now considers the broader set of social representations and cultural meanings that shape sexual experiences in different contexts. It is unclear, however, if this shift in theory has translated to interventions. With a focus on gender, our project explores how and the degree to which AIDS prevention programs in Tanzania adopt structural strategies. Through document collection and interviews with program staff, we have created an inventory of AIDS prevention programs. Results indicate existing programs largely do not focus on changing gender norms but instead focus on changing individual behavior (e.g. condom use). These findings contribute to the discussion over the link between HIV/AIDS interventions and broader societal transformations.	Susan	 Mlangwa	Ann	 Meier
2007	116	Couple Dynamics, Sexual Behavior, and Family Planning	Couples Reproductive Intentions in Two Culturally Contrasting States of North Eastern India	Until recently, fertility and family planning research in developing countries has primarily focused on women. Data on fertility intention, contraception, contraceptive attitude, sex preference, etc. are generally collected from a select group of women. However, husbands who are the main decision makers on these issues are not covered. The extent to which couples agree with each other on fertility desires and intention to use family planning in future has a major role, not only in determining family size but also in the process of fertility transition. The present paper attempts to investigate this question in two culturally contrasting states of North Eastern India. The two states under study are Meghalaya and Manipur. Meghalaya is a matriarchal society where as Manipur is patriarchal. We have sufficient evidence from the present analysis to support the hypothesis that culture has considerable influence on the reproductive intention of the couples.	Abhishek	 Singh	Faujdar	 Ram	Rajiv	 Ranjan
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	Young Women and Fertility in Africa: The New Skepticism	DHS data from a number of sub-Saharan African countries show a recent sharp increase in unwanted fertility, in particular unwanted first births. If true, this is a remarkable development: among young African women, misgivings about childbearing are emerging that constitute a historic break from the past. This paper examines desired and realized fertility in the most recent DHS surveys, with limited comparison to previous surveys. We first describe patterns, focusing on fertility desires (planning status of recent births, ideal number, desire for a(nother) birth), then consider contending explanations for the surprising emergence of unwanted first births: measurement issues; changes in age and marital status at conception; and macro social changes (economic distress, HIV/AIDS, religious revival, deteriorating family planning services). By looking beyond macro indicators and, in particular, focusing on young women, this research adds complexity and qualifies the accepted picture of slow and stagnating fertility decline in Africa.	John	B. Casterline	Satvika	 Chalasani
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	The Dynamics of Adolescent Childbearing and Schooling in Urban South Africa.	In this paper, we examine the intersections of childbearing and educational attainment in urban South Africa. We compare the pathways of adolescent fertility according to race and how they impact educational attainment. Although racial apartheid ended, our preliminary results show that today’s adolescents experience different pathways to adulthood associated with race. Different childbearing experiences may lead to very different educational careers. Insufficient panel data in developing countries has hindered studies examining childbearing and schooling. We use data from the Cape Area Panel Study, a panel of 4,800 young people in Cape Town, to answer: How do adolescents experience childbearing in post-Apartheid South Africa? How do these pathways drive adolescents’ educational attainment for different racial groups? For adolescents enrolled in school in Wave 1, we examine the factors leading to a birth between waves. We then look at the factors driving educational attainment after birth, including test scores implemented in Wave 1.	David	 Lam	Leticia	J. Marteleto	Vimal	 Ranchhod
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	Traditional Gender Values and Adolescent Fertility Expectations in Ethiopia	We examine the influence of traditional gender values, education, family and peer relations, and community context on young people’s family size expectations in a sample of Ethiopian youth. In particular, we test whether the influence of traditional gender values on family size expectations varies by level of education and by the prevalence of traditional gender values among other youth in the community. We use survey data for 2,172 never married adolescents age 13-17 from the Jimma Longitudinal Family Survey of Youth (JLFSY). The JLFSY study area includes a regional city, three outlying towns, and surrounding rural communities in southwestern Ethiopia. Preliminary analyses indicate that the influence of traditional gender values on expected family size is highly conditioned by the level of schooling and the community context. Education reduces the influence of traditional values, whereas living in a community where traditional values are widespread magnifies the influence of individual values.	David	P. Lindstrom	Dennis	 Hogan	Craig	A. Hadley	Assefa	 Hailemariam
2007	117	Comparative Perspectives on Adolescent Fertility	School Attendance and Adolescent Fertility in Central America	This paper examines interrelationships between school attendance and adolescent fertility, using recent survey datasets from Honduras (2001), Guatemala (2002) and El Salvador (2002/03). It presents an overview of trends in adolescent fertility, ages at first birth, first sexual intercourse and first union; highest grade level completed and age at school completion by considering successive cohorts of women. It then presents a series of multivariate models of school completion as a risk factor for starting fertility and of pregnancy as a risk factor for dropping out of school. The analysis is stratified by wealth quintiles of the population, as it is expected that these relationships vary by socioeconomic status.	Paul	 Stupp	Danielle	B. Jackson
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Toward a Fuller Understanding of Nonresident Father Involvement: A Joint Examination of Child Support and In-Kind Support Receipt	Less than half of all custodial parents receive child support payments but nearly 60 percent receive in-kind support of some form. In-kind (i.e., noncash) contributions from nonresident parents include such things as purchasing food or clothing for the child, or paying for the child’s extracurricular activities. Based on a sample of children with nonresident fathers from the CDS-II of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, this study investigates the determinants of in-kind support receipt from nonresident fathers and addresses three research questions. First, is the receipt of cash child support and other economic contributions (in-kind support) positively (i.e., are complements) or negatively (i.e., are substitutes) related? Second, are frequent and high-quality visits with nonresident fathers positively associated with receipt of economic support (child support and in-kind)? Third, do the relationships between child support and in-kind support receipt and visitation vary by the income level of children’s families?	Steven	 Garasky	Susan	D. Stewart	Craig	G. Gundersen	Brenda	J. Lohman
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Phasing Out Fathers: Does Nonresidential Father Involvement Decline More when Mothers Have a New Partner?	Although research has focused on the role of father’s new relationships in the decline of paternal involvement over time, research has not yet investigated whether mother’s new relationships play a role. When children have social fathers, biological fathers may experience role confusion and withdraw or be excluded from their child’s life. Using the Fragile Families data, this research tracks father involvement among those who were not romantically involved with the mother at the first and second follow-up. Descriptive statistics suggest that the decline in paternal involvement is greatest when the mother formed a new relationship between follow-ups. Multivariate analyses of absolute levels of visitation and engagement suggest that paternal involvement is reduced when mothers (and fathers) have a new partner. When mothers formed a new relationship between follow-ups, fathers are more likely to have seen their child at the first follow-up but not at the second follow-up.	Karen	B. Guzzo
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Interhousehold Contributions of Nonresidential Fathers to Children	Parents living in separate residences comprise a major source of interfamilial exchange. A positive relationship and exchanges with a nonresidential father are believed to be important to child development. However, little is known about the extent to which nonresidential fathers are involved in children’s daily lives beyond their provision of child support. In this study, a structural equation model was used to evaluate the association between maternal and paternal characteristics and relationship and three aspects of father involvement: paternal accessibility (father-child contact), father-child interaction (relationship quality), and father’s responsibility (financial support). The results show that previous circumstances and current context, including years spent together, geographical distance between the child and father, and parents’ age and marital status at birth are associated with father involvement. Additionally, amount of contact is linked to father-child relationship quality and to financial support but not to parent relationship quality.	Sandra	 Hofferth	Nicole	 Forry
2007	118	Nonresidential Fathers and Family Relationships	Shared Caretaking in Disadvantaged Families: When Are Fathers Involved and What Does This Mean to Parents?	This analysis draws on two waves of in-depth interviews with mothers and fathers when their child was age one and four to provide new information about fathers’ co-parenting in low-income families. Interviews with new parents living in California suggest that three types of co-parenting situations emerged early in their child’s life which were related to the status of their relationship as a couple and to the relative economic and personal stability of each parent. These co-parenting situations were often perceived differently by parents who framed stable co-parenting during this time as a commitment, early co-parenting as an exchange of resources, and later co-parenting as compensation for mothers’ reduced share in parenting. Particular preferences for child support, custody, and visitation also appeared within each situation, with implications for policies directed toward low-income families.	Maureen	 Waller
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	The Rise and Fall of Excess Male Infant Mortality	A nearly universal female advantage in mortality has been well-documented. We use data from fifteen countries to document a remarkably consistent pattern of sex differences in infant mortality over time. Data for Sweden show 10% higher infant mortality among males, which increases to 20% around 1900. Data for other European countries conform to the 19th century pattern. The male disadvantage in infant mortality increased during the 20th century as overall mortality declined rapidly. It reached a peak in the second half of the 20th century in the U.S. and many European countries, but has declined in recent decades. Although lifestyle factors such as smoking contributed to widening adult sex mortality differences, these factors are more questionable at the youngest ages. We test hypotheses that reduced exposure to infection, increased maternal nutrition, and changes in birth practices contributed to observed changes in sex differences in infant mortality.	Greg	L. Drevenstedt	Eileen	 Crimmins	Sarinnapha	 Vasunilashorn	Caleb	E. Finch
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Death of a Sibling in Early Life and Health of the Survivor Sibling in Later Adulthood	This study is to examine the long-term consequences of death of a sibling on the health of the survivor siblings in later adulthood using a modern data with rich information on family environment, SES, and life events. Using Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS), I found that experiencing the death of a sibling before age 36 had direct and robust harming effects on many measures of physical health of men and women at age 50 after controlling for childhood family environment (SES, family configuration, and others), socioeconomic attainment in adulthood, and other important life events. Next, I explore some possible explanations on the associations using information on all deceased siblings in WLS, including dissecting the effects of the death by the age and the cause of the death and looking into the associations between the sibling’s death, early parental death (before age 50), family medical history, and childhood health of the respondents.	Daphne	 Kuo
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Does Parenthood Affect Mortality? A Study of Norwegian Men and Women Aged 20-67 in the Years 1971-2002	The impact of children on mortality has received some attention, although largely in studies of all-cause mortality. Some studies find weak effects of children on mortality, while others conclude that such effects are strong for either parents or stronger for women than for men. To reach a better understanding of the importance of parenthood for mortality, in this paper I use logistic regression and Norwegian register data that includes cause of death. I analyze effects of children for both sexes controlling for relevant confounders. The specific research questions are:    1) How does the number of dependent children influence the parents’ mortality, given marital status, and does it explain the effects of marital status?   2) Do the sex of adult children and the proximity to these children have effects? Are effects of step-children different from those of own children? In particular, do the children serve as important “buffers” after bereavement?	Svenn-Erik	 Mamelund
2007	119	Intergenerational Determinants of Health	Paternal and Maternal Age and Their Effects on Adult Offspring Mortality	This paper assesses the role of paternal and maternal age at conception on the longevity of their offspring. The analysis relies on the Utah Population Database and includes approximately 77,000 offspring. Results indicate a strong adverse effect of parental age at conception on the longevity of offspring, with varying levels of significance based on offspring sex. Male longevity appears less sensitive to late paternal age and more sensitive to late maternal age than female longevity. Female longevity is independent of maternal age at which the mother conceived the target child, as well as the age at which the mother last conceived. These results are somewhat surprising since current theory holds that late, maternal-fertility may be a marker for longevity, a benefit that might be shared with their offspring.	Ken	R. Smith	Geraldine	P. Mineau	Cynthia	 Sahm
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Mortality Crossovers: The Effects of Socioeconomic Status and Race	Research has documented a Black-White mortality crossover at older ages; Blacks have higher mortality rates than Whites until approximately age 80, when survival curves cross and Blacks have lower mortality rates than Whites. We take a “fundamental cause” approach to this literature, predicting that a socioeconomic gradient drives this mortality crossover. Individuals at the lower end of the gradient suffer poor health at earlier ages, leading to high mortality; this phenomenon selects frail individuals out of the population, leaving a robust low-SES group that has relatively low mortality at older ages. First, we use data from the Duke EPESE to examine the possibility of a socioeconomic mortality crossover in later life. Second, we examine how socioeconomic status moderates the Black-White crossover by modeling main effects, interaction effects, and the mediating effects of health status, health risks, and health resources.	Jessica	M. Sautter	Patricia	 Thomas	Linda	K. George	Matthew	E. Dupre
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Changes in Active Life Expectancy by Race and Sex between 1984-2000	This paper investigates improvements in active life expectancy by sex and race for older persons in the U.S. Estimates of active life expectancy are based on two comparable longitudinal surveys, representative of the U.S. elderly population 70+, collected 10 years apart: the Longitudinal Study of Aging (LSOA I) and the Second Longitudinal Study of Aging (LSOA II). Total life expectancy at age 70 increased about .7 year for non-blacks over the 10-year period, with almost all the increase in active life expectancy. There was no improvement in total life expectancy at age 70 for the black population, but some increase in active life and decrease in non-active life (although not significant). At age 70, there was no increase in total life expectancy for women, but an increase of almost a year for men. Increases in active life were also greater for men during this time.	Aaron	 Hagedorn
2007	120	Health and Mortality Disparities: Methodological and Substantive Issues	Racial Crossovers in Morbidity and Mortality of U.S. Birth Cohorts	Disability and mortality disparities by sex and race are a source of inequality among the elderly. Differential changes in disability life expectancy and total life expectancy over time are a public health concern. I address the previously unanswered question of whether some race/sex groups of actual birth cohorts live longer healthy lives as well as longer lives when compared with others. I study disparities in the expected remaining life in mild and severe disability by race and sex in cohorts born between 1904 and 1909. To estimate the quantities, I employ a refined definition of physical disability and apply a new extension of Sullivan's method to actual birth cohorts. Results suggest black women are the most disadvantaged group. The most striking finding is concordant compression of severe disability among all race/sex groups. Decreases in the expected remaining life in severe disability are associated with constant life expectancy over time.	Samir	 Soneji
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	When Do Health Insurance Mandates Matter? The Case of Infertility Treatment	The literature on mandated health insurance benefits has found little evidence of effects on the utilization of health care services. A number of explanations have been considered for these findings of no effects. In this paper, we examine whether mandated insurance coverage for infertility treatment affects utilization for a specific subgroup in the population: older, highly educated women. These women are both most likely to experience fertility problems and most likely to have insurance plans affected by the mandates. We find robust evidence that while an effect of the mandates on utilization can not be found for the full population of women, the mandates do have a large and significant effect on utilization for exactly this subgroup.	Marianne	 Bitler	Lucie	 Schmidt
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Men’s and Women’s Reports of Nonbiological Children within the Household: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Using data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth, we provide information on the presence and relationship type of minor, nonbiological children living with male and female respondents 18 years of age or older, detail the characteristics of men and women who are caring for nonbiological children, and produce national estimates of the prevalence and characteristics of all types of relationships with nonbiological children being cared for in U.S. homes today. We find that men are more likely than women to report currently caring for a nonbiological child and the majority of these children are step children. However, persons who are currently cohabiting report larger percentages of children of other relationships residing in the household than step children—these are most likely their partner’s children. Differences in propensity to be caring for a nonbiological child are evident by age, marital status and religious affiliation for both men and women.	Jo	 Jones	Brittany	 McGill	Penelope	 Maza
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Child Adoption: A Path to Parenthood?	In 1974, the World Population Plan of Action encouraged countries to facilitate child adoption so as to enable couples to achieve their desired family size. Thirty years later, there is the perception that an increasing number of persons are looking for alternative ways of experiencing parenthood, including via adoption. Is this really the case? The paper addresses this question by focusing on national data. Specifically, it examines data compiled by the United Nations Population Division on total, domestic, intercountry and step-parent adoptions for over 100 countries. The data are supplemented by information on national adoption legislation. The paper concludes that while in many cases couples and individuals may be resorting to adoption as a way to experience parenthood, not all countries conform to this pattern. In these countries, adoption cannot simply be viewed as a demographic response. Other factors, including societal norms and personal values may also be at play.	Clare	 Menozzi	Barry	 Mirkin
2007	121	Alternative Pathways to Parenthood: New Reproductive Technologies, Adoption, and Stepparenting	Will Fertility among Danish Women Remain Stable Due to Assisted Reproduction? Assessing the Role of In Vitro Fertilization in Sustaining Cohort Fertility Rates	Broad availability and widespread use of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) could become one of the most prominent factors preventing a decline in completed fertility of Danish women, who have increasingly postponed childbearing to higher ages. We analyse and project cohort trends in total and ART-related fertility rates, using register data on births and ART treatments among native Danish women born in 1960-1978. Our projections show that women born in the 1970s are likely to retain fertility rates that are relatively close to the replacement-level threshold. The projections indicate that the continuation of relatively high and stable fertility will be partly sustained by a rapid rise in the use of assisted reproduction technologies. The projected proportion of children born after ART treatment shows a substantial increase from 2.5 percent among women born in 1965 to 5-6 percent among women born in 1978.	Tomas	 Sobotka	Martin	 Hansen	Tina	 Jensen	Niels	E. Skakkebæk
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Impact of Intermarriage on Ethnic and Racial Stratification	We investigate macro-level implications of ethnic/racial intermarriage on ethnic/racial inequality in subsequent generations. In our model, effects of ethnic intermarriage on stratification are thought to operate through the intergenerational transmissions of socioeconomic status and ethnicity. If ethnic intermarriage is selective on the basis of spousal SES, then intermarriage may increase socioeconomic gaps among primary ethnic groups. Thus, the model's predictions may contrast with those of assimilation and melting pot theories, which suggest that ethnic intermarriage reduces the social distance between ethnic groups.     We illustrate the model implications using data on young Jewish adults in Israel. We investigate educational gaps that might have arisen in a variety of counterfactual scenarios in which past ethnic intermarriage had not occurred. Analyses suggest that 10-15% of actual ethnic gaps in educational attainment is attributable to past ethnic intermarriage. Moreover, in the absence of intermarriage, intergenerational decreases in inequality would have been substantially more pronounced.	Barbara	S. Okun	Orna	 Khait-Marelly
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Distribution of Neighborhood Poverty and Racial Disparities in Neighborhood Context: The Unequal American Geography of Opportunity	Our objective is to broaden the conceptualization of neighborhood poverty beyond the average to illustrate the non-overlap of entire distributions of neighborhood poverty by race, and to highlight the differences in poverty/race distributions across U.S. Metropolitan Areas (MAs). We used Census 2000 tract data for 100 largest MAs. We analyzed proportions of total tract population in poverty. To examine race-specific neighborhood-poverty distributions, we applied weights based on tract-level counts for NH-Blacks, NH-Whites, and Hispanics. For each MA and racial/ethnic group, we calculated exposure measures of mean, median, and quartiles of the neighborhood-poverty distribution; we tested for non-distributional-overlap between groups; we calculated a relative measure of the distribution of poverty, calibrated within MAs. We found the entire distribution of neighborhood-poverty shifted in a worse direction for minorities; white-minority distributions barely overlap. The MA-neighborhood poverty variation is substantially larger for minorities. MAs with highest neighborhood poverty had the widest distributions (rho=.66, p	Theresa	L. Osypuk	Sandro	 Galea	Dolores	 Acevedo-Garcia
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	Hispanic Population Growth and Rural Income Inequality	Recent Hispanic population growth may substantially alter income inequality in rural areas because rural Hispanics are often relatively young, less educated, lack U.S. experience, and work in low-skilled and low-paying jobs. We examine the impact of rural Hispanic population growth on income inequality in nonmetro counties from 1990 to 2000. We model income inequality as a function of economic and demographic variables using county-level decennial census data and OLS regression. Results document higher increases in inequality among rapid growth Hispanic counties relative to low growth counties. However, this growing inequality is explained mostly by typical educational and industrial changes. When compared across counties, rapidly growing Hispanic counties behave similar to other rapidly growing non-Hispanic counties. Rather than something unique to Hispanic groups, changes that these counties experienced appear part of broader processes of educational and industrial change that resemble those occurring in other rapidly growing rural counties without Hispanic in-migration.	Emilio	A. Parrado	William	A. Kandel
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	Race and Place Differentials of Poverty and Their Determinants: A Comparative Analysis of Poverty in the Texas Borderland and the Lower Mississippi Delta	This paper analyzes poverty among race/ethnic groups in the Texas Borderland and the Lower Mississippi Delta, the two poorest regions in the United States. Its objectives are (1) to develop a comparative model to determine how the patterns of poverty differ between the Borderland and the Delta; and (2) to investigate differences in the mechanisms that influence poverty rates across race and ethnicity in these regions. The paper presents a model that includes various indicators of economic structure, family structure, demographic structure, and human capital. Using 2000 census data, the paper models the correlates of poverty for non-Hispanic whites, Latinos, and blacks. Results show that the race/ethnic poverty differential is especially high in the core part of the two regions and related to the relative presence of minority populations. There also exist substantial differences across race/ethnic groups in the effects of structural factors.	Dudley	L. Poston, Jr.	Rogelio	 Saenz	Joachim	 Singelmann	Tim	 Slack
2007	122	Race/Ethnicity and Social and Economic Inequality	The Socioeconomic Attainments of Single-Racial and Multi-Racial Native Americans	Using data from the 2000 U.S. Census, this study investigates the schooling and wages of single-racial and multi-racial Native Americans. Our analysis distinguishes between single-race Native Americans, biracial White Native Americans, biracial Hispanic-White Native Americans, biracial Black Native Americans, and whites who report Native American ancestry. Our findings show significant variation in socioeconomic attainments across these different Native American groups. In general, however, most of these Native American groups have lower levels of schooling and/or wages relative to non-Hispanic whites for both men and women. Furthermore, most of these Native American groups have lower wages than comparable non-Hispanic whites after taking into account schooling, age, place of residence, and other demographic characteristics. Single-race Native Americans are the most disadvantaged, but socioeconomic differentials across the groups are not clearly consistent with traditional assimilation theory, and suggest the significance of the socioeconomic selectivity of whites who choose to report Native American ancestry.	Kimberly	R. Huyser	Isao	 Takei
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Comparison Analysis of the Official Population Estimates and the American Community Survey Results: 2001-2005	This paper attempts to assess the impact on American Community Survey (ACS) results of the official population estimates that were used by the ACS as controls for the years 2001-2005. We provide descriptive analyses of the differences between the ACS results and official population estimates before and after the ACS results were controlled to the official estimates. The differences are shown at the national, state, and county levels by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin. The population universe in this study includes both the civilian and military population in households and excludes the group quarters’ population. Results from this analysis would be helpful for revisiting the ways the weights are developed to adjust the ACS results. Similarly, the geographic level and/or characteristics for which the ACS provides better estimates would help the Population Estimates Program revise its official estimates.	Antonio	 Bruce	Alfredo	 Navarro	Bashiruddin	 Ahmed
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Gross Migration Optimization Technique of Developing In- and Out-Migration Assumptions for Regional Population Projections	Gross migration approach may produce more adequate population projections than net migration approach for several reasons. But, gross migration approach is not popular among local demographers due to the limited availability of gross migration data and the difficulty in its application. This study proposes a gross migration optimization technique of developing reasonable in-migration and out-migration assumptions for local population projections. The gross migration optimization technique is designed to produce gross in-migration and out-migration assumptions by efficiently finding optimal adjustment factors for the plus-minus adjustment method. The major advantage of this gross migration optimization technique is to immediately develop the size of in-migration and out-migration, while maintaining acceptable age and sex specific in-migration and out-migration schedules. The gross migration optimization technique is applied to regional population projections of Southern California in an economic-demographic modeling framework. The gross migration optimization technique is useful and easily applicable in developing reasonable in-migration and out-migration assumptions.	S.	Simon  Choi
2007	123	State and Local Population Estimates and Projections	A Methodology for Projecting Sub-National Populations Allowing for the Impact of HIV/AIDS and Where Data Are Limited and Defective	Sub-national population projections are complex at the best of times. As the population being modelled represents a potentially small proportion of the national whole, the least understood of the three major demographic forces – migration (local and international) – plays an increasingly significant role, while, in addition, sub-population specific estimates of the other demographic variables may not be available or reliable. This paper describes an approach to projecting sub-national population dynamics in 28 districts of a country (Botswana) whose aggregate population is less than one-fifth that of New York City. Apart from having to ensure that the sum of the regional projections remains consistent with that of the national population, the projection needs to incorporate HIV epidemiological dynamics in each region and work with severely limited and defective census and survey data. In the process, interesting insights into the regional demographic dynamics of the country are developed.	Rob	 Dorrington	Tom	A. Moultrie
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Work Hour Differences in Child Care Time: Cross National Variation	Parental time investments in children are an important indicator of children’s present and future well-being. Employment depresses mothers’ and fathers’ time caring for children in the United States and other Western industrialized countries. Many researchers have called for reducing the number of hours American parents spend in paid employment, arguing that this would ease the time crunch for working parents (Jacobs and Gerson 2004; Williams 2000). Whether shorter hours in paid work necessarily translate into more time spent in caregiving, however, is an open empirical question, which we examine in this study. Our preliminary results indicate that the association of parents' level of work hours with child care time differs across country.	Liana	C. Sayer
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Working for Peanuts: Food Insecurity among Nonstandard Workers' Households	Nonstandard work affects household functioning in many ways, but the relationship between nonstandard work and food insecurity has not been explored. Utilizing the 2003 and 2004 Food Security Supplements to the Current Population Survey I investigate the effects of household head’s work form (by combining number of hours worked with multiple job holding) on household food security status. I find that households where the head is employed in multiple jobs, with varied hours or part-time work are more likely to be food insecure than households with a head in a regular full-time job even when controlling for income and other sociodemographic characteristics. Because the odds of food insecurity vary across household types, models will be estimated separately for married, cohabiting, female headed and male headed households. The lack of benefits, instability of income and unstable schedules associated with nonstandard employment may account for the greater odds of food insecurity.	Alisha	J. Coleman
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	The Impact of Non-Standard Work Times on Partnership Quality and Stability: Quantitative and Qualitative Findings from the Netherlands	The aim of this paper is to examine whether non-standard work times impact partnership quality and stability. Employment and partnership behaviour are understood via a multi-level theoretical framework that addresses preferences, networks and context. Data is drawn from the Netherlands Kinship Panel Study (N=8,161) and in-depth individual interviews from 30 couples. Previous research shows a high correlation between non-standard work times and marital divorce. A quantitative and qualitative approach extends this research to allow a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms and causality in this relationship. Results indicate that the impact of non-standard work times on partnerships is highly related to preferences and the (in)voluntary nature of this work. There is a strong association between particular types of work times with lower partnership quality/stability and inequality within certain social groups. Results also demonstrate several key variations in quantitative and qualitative measures, complex strategies, and deviation from previous U.S. findings.	Melinda	 Mills	Taht	 Kadri
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	The Effect of Shift Work on Parental Interaction with Children, Marital Quality, and Depression.	We use the Early Child Longitudinal Survey-Birth Cohort to explore whether couples with one or both partners working  non-standard shifts differ from other couples in terms of three outcomes: parent-infant interaction, depression, and marital quality.   This paper promises to add to our understanding of shift work and family issues for several reasons. First, we consider both parents’ work schedules. Looking only at one parent’s shift does not provide complete information about the time dynamics within a family. Second, our analysis focuses on infants. Previous analyses focus on interaction with older children. Here, we focus on a crucial developmental stage.   Preliminary findings show that work schedules are related to depression. They are also related to parent-infant interaction, but the pattern is thus far complex. Finally, shift work is related to marital discord, but weakly. We consider the implication of these findings for past research on work schedules and family outcomes.	Chris	 Morett	Emily	 Rosenbaum
2007	124	Effects of Work Hours on Families and Children	Maternal Work Hours and Adolescents’ School Outcomes among Low-Income Families in Four Urban Counties	We examine how changes in maternal work hours affect adolescents' school participation and performance outcomes using data from interviews in 1998 and 2001 with 1,700 women who are single mothers of adolescents living in the most-disadvantaged neighborhoods in four urban counties. We find unfavorable effects of maternal work hours on several aspects of adolescents’ schooling: Full-time maternal employment increases the likelihood of skipping school, decreases adolescent school performance, and increases the likelihood of parent contact by a school about behavior problems. Sons seem to be particularly sensitive to changes in mothers’ average hours of work, with notable increases in incidences of being late for school and declines in school performance when mothers work more hours. These findings hold up controlling for a rich array of mothers’ characteristics, including their psychological and physical health and experiences with domestic and substance abuse, as well as unobserved time-invariant characteristics of the adolescent.	Leonard	M. Lopoo	Andrew	S. London
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	Linguistic Assimilation across the Generations: An Analysis of Home Language among Second- and Third-Generation Children from Contemporary Immigrant Groups	The U.S. is seen as a graveyard for languages other than English. However, given the high volume of immigration to the U.S. and the possibilities of transnational relationships, it might be argued that the viability of bilingualism among the U.S. born has been enhanced. To look for possible changes in patterns of linguistic assimilation, we replicate with 2000 Census data the analysis of children’s home language conducted by Alba et al. (2002) with the 1990 Census. Our descriptive results demonstrate that, while bilingualism appears more prevalent among the later generations descended from Latin American immigrants than it was among the descendants of Europeans, it remains a minority pattern; a three-generation assimilation to English monolingualism remains predominant for almost all groups. The multivariate analysis reveals that the determinants of home language have very similar effects to those found in 1990, suggesting that the dynamics of language assimilation have not shifted.	Richard	D. Alba	Jacob	 Stowell
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	The Pace and Flow of English Language Acquisition among the U.S. Latino Population	This paper examines the pace and flow of English language acquisition along a range of demographic variables that are critical to understanding the details of this social process. The study determines the effect, if any, of age at entry, time in country, educational attainment, and gender on both the rate and flow of language acquisition. The study is based on a sample of approximately 10,000 Latino adults produced through a series of Pew Hispanic Center surveys conducted between April 2002- July 2006. The richness of the information collected in the Pew Hispanic Center surveys on language proficiencies and usage will substantially extend our understanding of English language acquisition of Latinos.	Shirin	 Hakimzadeh
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	English Language Ability of Foreign Born in the United States: Assimilation and Cohort Effects, 2003	Past research on language acquisition of the foreign born population in the United States has identified age at entry and duration of stay as the two critical factors associated with the language acquisition. There have been attempts to examine the role of age after controlling for the length of stay and vice versa. However, none of these studies have explored the interaction between age, cohort and the assimilation effects besides the fact that they are all dated. This paper by using the 1980 through 2000 Census data and the American Community Survey between 2000 and 2003, attempts to fill that gap in the literature. Further, we examine these interactions by the major immigrant sub-groups. Preliminary results indicate that duration of stay is positively related with language acquisition and there is evidence of the existence of cohort effects with earlier cohorts doing better than recent cohorts.	Xiaohan	 Hu	Veena	 Kulkarni	John	P. Robinson
2007	125	Immigrant Adaptation and Linguistic Outcomes	The Gradient of Immigrant Age at Arrival Effects on Socioeconomic Outcomes in the U.S.	A young age at arrival is believed to be one of the primary predictors of adult immigrant achievement. So important is this pre-adolescent arrival that a special classification is given these ‘1.5 generation’ immigrants. However, it is not agreed if the appropriate dividing line should be 5, 10, 15, or another age. The 2000 census provides opportunity to test a more specific gradient of age at arrival effects by using exact years of age. We test for nonlinearities and breakpoints in the gradient with respect to several outcomes, and we compare Latino and Asian immigrants. Results indicate that the effect of early arrival is much greater for English proficiency than other outcomes, and Latinos benefit more than Asians in most outcomes.	Dowell	 Myers	Xin	 Gao	Julie	 Park
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Including Covariates and Constructing Interval Estimates of Multistate Life Table Quantities Using Cross-Sectional Data: An Alternative to Sullivan's Method	Healthy life expectancy (HLE) is an important measure of population health. Sullivan's method is the most commonly used method for estimating HLE, because its data requirements are less stringent than those for multistate methods: Sullivan's method requires only cross-sectional mortality rates and cross-sectional health prevalence rates, whereas multistate methods require panel data. Sullivan’s method, however, is limited in its ability to produce HLE estimates for subpopulations due to limited disaggregation of cross-sectional mortality rates and small cell sizes in health surveys. We develop an alternative method that allows the inclusion of covariates in HLE estimation and the construction of interval estimates of HLE for any desired subpopulation. The method involves using Gibbs sampling to sample parameters from a hazard model, using an ecological inference model for producing transition probability matrices from the Gibbs samples, and using standard multistate equations to convert the transition probability matrices into HLE estimates.	Scott	M. Lynch	J.	Scott  Brown
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Respondent Cooperation and Requests for Contacts in Longitudinal Research	Researchers contemplating panel research designs regularly face the problem of panel attrition. A vital tool in reducing panel attrition is first wave information, which can be used to locate respondents who move. We analyze data from the 1988 National Survey of Families and Households (N = 13,007) to examine respondent cooperation to requests made during the initial interview for names and addresses of friends and relatives who might help researchers locate respondents who move. About 90 percent of respondents provided at least one contact. Compared to respondents who provide three contacts, respondents who provide one or no contacts have 26% or 60%, respectively, lower odds of being found the next year. Utilizing censored Poisson and sequential logistic regression we find that respondents with greater interest in the survey, and larger family and social networks, supply more contacts. Respondents from racial minority groups and respondents in the East provide fewer contacts.	Colter	 Mitchell	Vaughn	R.A. Call
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Disparities in Birthweight by Maternal Educational Attainment and Race/Ethnicity: An Illustrative Example of a New Modeling Approach	This paper takes an in-depth look at a new way of modeling the major underlying cause of infant mortality and childhood morbidity – low birth weight. The paper illustrates the quantile regression technique and its benefits over current methods (almost exclusively based on statistical models of the mean using OLS regression, or dichotomous measures of low birthweight using logit or probit regression) by focusing on the association between maternal education and subsequent birth weight using the 2001 U.S. Natality Data Set containing nearly 4 million observations. After establishing the complex relationship between maternal educational attainment and birth weight, we then further consider how maternal education is associated with birth weight outcomes within 14 race/ethnic groups. Preliminary results indicate that the common analytical techniques would have obscured the strong association between maternal education and birthweight at the most vulnerable portion of the birthweight distribution.	Michael	S. Pollard
2007	126	Statistical Applications in Population Research	Growth Mixture Modeling for Sequential Growth Processes	We re-visit the issue of “compensatory growth hypothesis”. The main idea is that some infants who experience substandard growth due to nutrition deficiency may grow faster than other children at a later age, and eventually catch up. We test this hypothesis using the data from the Cebu longitudinal study that records two developmental phases for each individual: the first developmental phase includes 12 bi-monthly records from age zero to age two, and the second developmental phase includes three records measured around age 7, 10 and 14. To test the compensatory growth hypothesis is to identify a subgroup in the sample that grows slower than others from age 0-2, but catches up from age 7-14. Being able to simultaneously identify the optimal number of subgroups that has qualitatively different growth trajectories and the growth trajectory within each subgroup based on empirical data is the major strength of growth mixture modeling technique.	Shige	 Song	Bengt	 Muthen
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Modeling the Effect of Disease on Functional Change in the HRS	Previous research on functional decline has largely focused on the onset of disability or short-term changes in ADLs. The purpose of this paper was to model functional change longitudinally using mixed effects models and to estimate the effect of existing disease and disease onset on functional change. Participants came from five waves (1998-2004) of the combined Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) and Assets and Healthy Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey, providing a nationally representative longitudinal study of Americans aged 50 and over living in the community (N=17,318). Functional change was nonlinear and varied by sex, race, education, and income. Existing chronic conditions and onset of disease were both related to functional decline; arthritis, heart disease, and lung disease caused the largest drops in function.	Dawn	 Alley	Beth	J. Soldo
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Trends in Disability-Free Life Expectancy in France: Consistent and Diverging Patterns According to the Underlying Disability Indicator	In this study we propose several estimates of disability-free life expectancy (DFLE), based on various indicators of disability. The aim is to point out specific patterns related to the underlying concept and indicator used: common functional problems, activity restrictions, dependency on someone.  We estimated 10 different DFLE based on 4 different household based surveys, three of them providing chronological series. The study confirms the usual patterns of age trajectory, gender gap, whatever the underlying concept, while these patterns are not evenly stressed. It shows the closeness of DFLE estimates based on similar disability indicators, even coming from different databases. Time trends differ according to the estimates; the more  severe the disability indicator, the steeper the increase in DFLE.  Despite data constraints and limitations, this study highlights the policy relevance of producing a whole set of DFLE indicators to better appraise disability patterns and trends in each country.	Emmanuelle	 Cambois	Aurore	 Clavel	Isabelle	 Romieu	Jean-Marie	 Robine
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Chronic Conditions and the Decline in Late-Life Disability, 1997-2004	Using the 1997-2004 National Health Interview Survey, we examine changes in chronic conditions as explanations for declines in late-life disability prevalence. We first decompose disability declines into changes in the prevalence of chronic conditions and in the risk of disability given a condition. In doing so, we extend traditional decomposition techniques to incorporate annual measures. We then repartition these traditional components into causal and co-morbid components based on respondents’ reports of conditions causing disability. We find increases in most conditions and declines in their association with disability. However, only 2 of the 7 condition groups that we examined—heart/circulatory conditions and sensory impairments (specifically, vision impairments)—were less likely to cause disability in 2004 than in 1997. Out of a total decline in disability prevalence of 1.45 percentage points, declines in heart/circulatory conditions causing disability account for .92 percentage points and declines in vision impairments causing disability account for .59 percentage points.	Vicki	A. Freedman	Robert	 Schoeni	Linda	G. Martin	Jennifer	C. Cornman
2007	127	Health Trajectories in Old Age	Productive Social Activities and Well-Being in Mid-Old Age	The purpose of this study is to test whether paid jobs and unpaid volunteer work reduce the rate of health decline in middle and later life. Using four waves of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we estimated a series of individual growth curve models to assess the effects of productive activities on health trajectories. The central finding is that both paid work and volunteering have an independent promoting effect on self-rated health and psychological well-being. Specifically, both duration and diversity of engagement are associated with a slower rate of health deterioration across waves. However, in terms of intensity, only a modest amount of productive activities is sufficient for a health benefit. These findings suggest the optimal activity pattern for older adults based on activity and adaptation theory. The results are net effects after controlling for sociodemographic characteristics and predictors for poor health at baseline.	Yanni	 Hao	Linda	 Waite
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Pill Discontinuation and Its Aftermath in 18 Developing Countries	In most developing countries the pill is the most commonly used reversible method of contraception. Yet typically about 30% of women abandon the method within 12 months for reasons that imply dissatisfaction with the method. What happens thereafter this has considerable significance for the incidence of unwanted pregnancies, induced abortion and fertility. This paper uses DHS contraceptive calendar data from 18 countries to assess, in detail, method-specific switching probabilities following pill discontinuation and their correlates. Within 3 months, the percentage of women switching to another modern method ranged from 18% to 57% with a mean of 35%. Switching to a traditional method ranged from less than 5% in 4 countries to over 30% in 4 other countries, with a mean of 18%. Two individual correlates of switching (women’s education and fertility preference) are assessed and the paper ends with an examination of the link between program characteristics and switching.	Mohamed	M. Ali
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Preliminary Findings on Migrants-Nonmigrant Differentials in Contraceptive Discontinuation and Contraceptive Switching Behavior in Indonesia	Understanding the contraceptive use dynamics among women migrants is considered important, especially to a country like Indonesia that is undergoing demographic, social, economic and political changes and experiencing an increasing female-dominated migration during the last few decades. Using the 2000 wave of Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS3), this study seeks to examine the determinants of contraceptive discontinuation and switch among women migrants in Indonesia. The major conclusion from the competing event history analysis is that several demographic, socioeconomic, and community characteristics as well as the quality of the family planning program are significant predictors of contraceptive discontinuation and contraceptive switching among women migrants, although the magnitudes of such effects vary across different migrant types. Hopefully the results of this study will provide guidance to policymakers to employ effective means to incorporate migration and issues that are sensitive to women migrants in their family planning and reproductive health programs.	Hui-Peng	 Liew
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	The Effect of Access to Family Planning Services during Antenatal, Delivery and Postpartum Care on Contraceptive Use in the Postpartum Period	This study explores the importance of family planning services during antenatal, delivery and postpartum care on the use of a contraceptive method in the six-month postpartum period. We compare the access to family planning services during antenatal care, delivery and the postpartum period of women who are using a contraceptive method and women who would like to use a contraceptive method but are not using one. To assess the relative importance of family planning services in each of these phases, we fit a logistic regression model that controls for women’s socioeconomic and demographic characteristics and unobserved variables at the community level. Data come from a survey of 600 women who visited a health center in the six-month postpartum period in Nicaragua. Results show that family planning counseling and referral during antenatal care and offering a family planning method right after delivery increase the probability of contraceptive use.	Estela	 Rivero-Fuentes	Ricardo	 Vernon
2007	128	Contraceptive Use Dynamics	Discontinuation and Resumption of Contraceptive Use: Results from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth	Using data from Round 6 of the NSFG, we analyze the probability that a woman will discontinue using a contraceptive method, and having discontinued, she will resume use of that or another method.    We produce life table probabilities to analyze contraceptive failure and discontinuation for method-related reasons within 6 months, 12 months, 18 months and 24 months of initiating use of a method. After discontinuation, we calculate the probability of resuming use of specific methods within 12 months, controlling for the method used prior to discontinuation. Using data from the 2001 Abortion Patient Survey, we estimate probabilities adjusted for underreporting of abortions in the NSFG.    While contraceptive failure rates remain relatively unchanged since the prior round of the NSFG in 1995, discontinuation for all method-related reasons have increased substantially, as have total discontinuations. We use proportional hazards models to clarify the characteristics related to discontinuation and resumption of use.	Barbara	 Vaughan	James	 Trussell	Susheela	D. Singh	Kathryn	 Kost
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Designing Surveys of International Migrants: The Needle in the Haystack, or Finding the Right Haystack? A Case Study of Colombians in Ecuador	International migration is taking on increased importance in the world, leading to increased interest in how to collect data on international migrants, usually rare elements in destination countries. This is leading to the development and testing of methodologies for sampling and data collection. There have been few efforts to collect data on developing countries, on south-south migration. This paper will report on the design of a sample survey of Colombians, including refugees, who migrated to Ecuador since 2000. In the absence of a good up-to-date sampling frame, proportionate sampling of areas from a previous census, two-phase sampling, and snowball sampling were used to attempt to sample sufficient migrants. The paper will discuss rationales for the use of these methodologies and the actual experience in this case, concluding with recommendations for future surveys of similar populations in developing countries.	Richard	 Bilsborrow
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Contextual Factors Influencing Sexual Activity within Adolescent Social Networks in a Micropolitan/Rural Area	This paper examines factors influencing sexual activity among 15-19 year-olds from a micropolitan/rural area, recruited by peers through Participant-Driven Recruitment, a methodology that combines participatory research with Respondent-Driven Sampling.  Using the social network derived from recruiting as the unit of analysis, findings indicate that adolescents who: engaged in alcohol, drug and tobacco use; who were older; and who communicated with adults about alcohol, drugs, pregnancy, sex, and STDs were more likely to engage in sexual activity. Social network characteristics generated using RDS analysis software show moderate to substantial homophily (tendency of similar persons to form social ties) among the adolescents. Graphics of the social network are also included, providing greater insight into the contextual and reciprocal nature of social ties. Social structures beyond dyadic relationships are explored, illuminating distinctive influences not likely to be captured by conventional statistical methods alone, offering complementary data seldom found in studies regarding non-metropolitan adolescents.	Deladem	 Kusi-Appouh
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Assessment and Validation of Respondent Driven Sampling	We assess the statistical validity of respondent-driven-sampling (RDS), an approach that is becoming increasingly popular for sampling hard to reach populations. RDS is based on certain assumptions about the social network connecting members of the population. It purports to allow valid inference from the sample to all potential members of the population of interest and to yield statistically unbiased estimates of behaviors of hidden populations. We evaluate the validity of a number of the key assumptions of RDS with a simulation model that is able to describe potential populations of FSWs and includes a realistic structure of their social networks. By modifying the model parameters, we evaluate what effects the possible violation(s) of the assumptions have on the inference that can be drawn. Variation in model parameters are empirically informed by exploratory research conducted among female sex workers in Shanghai, China. We also explore a wider range of input parameters to allow our results to be generalizable to a broader range of hard-to reach populations.	Jing	 Li	Giovanna	 Merli	Erik	 Nordheim	William	Whipple  Neely
2007	129	Nontraditional Data Collection Methods	Surveying Migrant Households: A Comparison of Census-Based, Snowball, and Intercept Surveys	Few representative surveys of households of migrants exist, limiting our ability to study the effects of international migration on sending families. We report the results of an experiment designed to compare the performance of three alternative survey methods in collecting data from Japanese-Brazilian families of migrants to Japan. The three surveys conducted were 1) Households selected randomly from a door-to-door listing using the Brazilian Census to select census blocks; 2) A snowball survey using Nikkei community groups to select the seeds; and 3) An intercept survey collected at Nikkei community gatherings, ethnic grocery stores, sports clubs, and language schools where family members of migrants are likely to congregate. We analyze how closely well-designed snowball and intercept surveys can approach the much more expensive census-based method in terms of giving information on the characteristics of migrants, the level of remittances received, and the incidence of return migration.	David	 McKenzie	Johan	 Mistiaen
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Damned If You Do, Damned If You Don't: Religion and HIV-Risk Network Structure	While scholars have recently begun examining the link between religion and HIV-risk, their focus consistently conceptualizes both religion and risk as individual level factors. In this paper I show that this focus considerably limits our ability to understand the theorized relationships. The attention in existing research devoted to individual's “risk” behaviors, fails to recognize the important role of their partner(s)' characteristics in the riskiness of those behaviors. I draw on observed data for a number of sexual partnerships – constrained by gender and religious affiliation – to simulate networks from which I estimate how readily those differences subsequently correspond to changes in network-level factors of HIV-risk. By conceptualizing HIV-risk as a problem of network position, I demonstrate how reductions in risk behaviors resulting from religious participation (observed in previous work) can actually generate little-to-no effect on group level risk, and can even correspond to increases in group level risk.	Jimi	 Adams
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Social Interactions and Social Diseases	In this paper, we review what is known about the role of social and  sexual networks in the diffusion of sexually transmitted diseases and  clarify areas of demographic research that would benefit from new  theoretical approaches, new data and new methods. Our focus is on HIV  and other sexually transmitted diseases that are among the most  rapidly growing diseases through out the developing world,  particularly sub-Saharan Africa. Our general conclusion adds to the  evidence that sexual networks are the primary mechanism through which  HIV is spread and transformed in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) by taking  into account the influence of social networks on the structure and  composition of sexual networks. We also conclude that theoretical  perspectives from the network literature should lead to new data  collection and the use of methodologies that are not standard in this  area in order to understand better the social dynamics of social  diseases.	Susan	 Watkins	Hans-Peter	 Kohler
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Statistical Models for Sexual Networks on Likoma Island, Malawi: Implications for Sexual Behavior and HIV Control	Despite its importance, little research has addressed structural factors of sexual networks contributing to the generalized epidemic in Sub-Saharan Africa. We use sociocentric network data derived from a population-based survey of sexual partnerships conducted in Likoma Island (Malawi) and fit exponential random graph models (ERGMs) to a one-year sexual network, comprising 1463 individuals, from Likoma Island. The network is sparse, with a network density of 0.001. A simple structural ERGM incorporating edge effects and dyad-wise shared partnerships (DSPs) indicates that the log-odds of observing a new tie in the network are approximately -5.675, reflecting the sparseness of the observed network. Also significant is the coefficient on the DSP(1) term, with a log-odds of a new tie creating a DSP(1) of -0.519, indicating that a tie added to the sexual network is less likely to create a shared partnership than tie added to a random graph. This has important implications for the formation of sexual networks on Likoma.	James	H. Jones	Stephane	 Helleringer
2007	130	Sexual Behavior, Sexual Networks, STDs	Concordance in Perceived Partner-Types between Sexual Partners among Adolescents	Contraceptive and condom practices vary by partner-type (main vs. casual). Couple-level STI interventions require both partners’ participations, and may also require that both partners perceive the other as main. Objectives of this study were to examine 1) the reciprocity of adolescents’ sexual relationships, 2) the concordance in partner-types reported by females and males among reciprocally nominated dyads, and 3) odds ratios of dyad-level condom use at last sex by relationship-types reflecting concordance in perceived partner-types (main-concordant, discordant, and casual-concordant) among reciprocally nominated dyads. The relationships reported by adolescents were often not reciprocal. Perceived partner-types were largely discordant between partners. Main concordance in partner-types significantly decreased the odds of dyad-level condom use at last sex. When female adolescents perceived their partners as main compared to casual, couples were significantly less likely to report using a condom at last sex; however, there was no association between couples’ condom use and males’ perceived partner-types.	Michiyo	 Yamazaki	Jonathan	 Ellen
2007	131	Children and Time Use	Extent and Type of Child Care during the Kindergarten Year and Child Well-Being: A Comparison of Regression and Propensity Score Methods	While much research has focused on formal after-school programs and child outcomes, little is known about the relationship between more typical school-age child care experiences and child well-being. In addition, the relationship between child care prior to school entry and child well-being is well documented, but the association between school-age child care and child outcomes is poorly understood. This paper provides one of the first systematic examinations of school-age child care experiences and children’s socioemotional and cognitive well-being using a nationally representative sample of kindergartners. Preliminary results show that almost half of kindergartners spend a portion of their day in child care, but the type of child care, rather than the amount of time in care, relates to child well-being. Extending this analysis, this paper compares estimates from propensity score matching methods to more traditional regression estimates, expanding existing knowledge of the relationship between school-age child care and child outcomes.	Amy	E. Claessens
2007	131	Children and Time Use	Parents’ Time with Children: Patterns in Diverse Family Contexts	Scholarship on patterns of parental time involvement with children in the U.S. has increased in recent years. Few studies, however, have as their chief aim an understanding of parental time involvement with children across diverse family forms. The key contribution of this paper is to elaborate extant knowledge by examining time spent with children in a diverse array of two-parent family structures. We limit our investigation to households with two coresidential “romantically” involved adults (e.g., first marriage, remarriage, and cohabitation) because a deepened understanding of the heterogeneity of two-parent households as environments for children is important empirically and conceptually. A second contribution of this paper is that we investigate patterns using data at two time points: 1997 and 2003. While this is a relatively short time-span, this comparison provides important leverage on the robustness of patterns that emerge.	Hiromi	 Ono	Pamela	J. Smock
2007	131	Children and Time Use	The Quantity and Quality of Child Care Provision in Australian Households	Using data from the 1992 and 1997 Australian Time Use Surveys, we explore the patterns of child care time spent by parents in Australia and estimate censored regression models of the quantity and quality of the time that parents spend in child care and the time parents spend in market work.  Our results show that mothers and fathers differ remarkably in the determinants and levels of the quality of time they spend with children.  We also find that how the quality of time spent caring for children is conceptualized affects the conclusions we draw about the determinants of parental child care time.	Charlene	M. Kalenkoski	Gigi	 Foster
2007	132	Gender and Work	How Women's Employment and Related Gender Differentials Vary by Education: Common Patterns across Affluent Nations	Using LIS data on 13 affluent nations, we show a common pattern across nations that better educated women are more likely to be employed. Largely because of this pattern, gender inequality in median annual earnings (when the nonemployed enter as 0) is less extreme among the well educated than those with less education. Gender inequality in earnings among those employed full-time differs little by education, however. These patterns hold across nations. However, where women's employment differs the most across nations is at lower educational levels (college graduates have almost uniformly high levels in each nation), suggesting that policies may be most important at the bottom. Finally, we speculate about the theoretical implications of these findings in a context of marital homogamy.	Paula	S. England	Emily	F. Shafer
2007	132	Gender and Work	Gender Effects on Labor Market Outcomes in Russia, 1985-2001: Institutional Change, Family Structure, and Regional Variation	We analyze factors influencing the evolving effects of gender on labor market outcomes in contemporary Russia. Using 7,167 employment histories spanning 1985-2001 from the Survey of Stratification and Migration Dynamics in Russia, we estimate event history models for employment events (employment entries and exits, job changes) and logistic regression models for changes in career trajectories (upward and downward mobility conditional on a job change taking place). We empirically address several research questions regarding institutional change and gender inequality in the labor market: 1) How has Russia’s market transition affected gender differences in access to employment and career trajectories through jobs of different quality? 2) How do marital status and fertility shape the labor market transitions of Russian women and men during the late-Soviet and post-Soviet era? 3) Do the dynamics of gender differences in labor market outcomes vary by region and type of locality in a context of market transition?	Theodore	P. Gerber	Brienna	 Perelli-Harris
2007	132	Gender and Work	The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Gender and Caste Groups in India	This paper investigates whether there have been beneficial wage gains for women and minorities because of increased competition following liberalization of trade in India. Based on Becker’s model of taste-based employer discrimination, it is expected that as an economy becomes more competitive, employer discrimination should decline. The trade liberalization reforms that began in 1991 in India increased competition by lowering protection in certain manufacturing industries. Firms who could indulge a taste for discrimination when trade protection allowed supernormal profits, may not have been able to continue to do so as competition eliminated such profits. Using individual-level data and tariff data from pre- and post-reform periods, the paper finds that wage differences reduced for female workers relative to male workers in the more open manufacturing sector industries. However, there is no significant effect on the wage differential between low and high caste workers.	Marilyn	 Jacob
2007	132	Gender and Work	Does Economic Globalization Benefit Women? Export Production, Foreign Investment, and Gender Inequality in Mexico	In this paper we examine the effect of foreign investment and export production on gender inequality in Mexico, a country that epitomizes the global shift to an open-market economic strategy. Using data from nationally representative surveys of manufacturing firms between 1992 and 2001 we find that foreign and export-oriented firms employ significantly more women at every occupational level than nationally-owned firms producing goods for sale in the domestic market. The greater employment of women in foreign and export firms cannot be explained by their higher demand for workers of lower skill levels, their size, capital intensity, or industry among other factors. Using managers’ responses to survey questions regarding their gender preferences in hiring we find that managers in foreign-owned export firms have a preference for hiring women that cannot be explained by firm-level factors and which may partly account for the observed differences in female employment.	Andres	 Villarreal	Wei-hsin	 Yu
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Childhood Health, Nutrition, and Average Adult Height in Low-Income Countries	We create a database of adult heights for twenty-nine low-income countries for birth cohorts born between 1945 and 1985. We study the effect of average protein and calorie consumption, and the infant mortality rate, on cohort adult height. Most of the variation in height across countries is due to fixed effects, while sampling variation in measured cohort height produces a low signal to noise ratio in the data. Taking account of these factors, we find that variations in cohort height over time are sensitive to changing health and nutrition at birth and in adolescence. The presence of large fixed effects means that it may be unwise to use population height as a measure of health and nutrition in comparisons across different populations. Changes in cohort height over time can be used as a measure of changing childhood health and nutrition, provided health is understood as morbidity rather than mortality.	Yoko	 Akachi	David	 Canning
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Seeking Evidence for Finch and Crimmins’s Hypothesis of Inflammatory Exposure: The Effect of Canton of Birth on Costa Rican Elderly’s Health.	In order to explain the secular decline in mortality due to cardiovascular illnesses, Finch and Crimmins (2004) propose that exposure to infectious diseases early in life increases the risk of chronic inflammation through the life course. This paper seeks evidence for this hypothesis with data from a Costa Rican aging study, called CRELES. This country is ideal for studying the hypothesis because it has recently achieved very high life expectancy, but its current elderly population experienced a highly infectious environment early in life. The hypothesis is tested by studying the association of a highly infectious environment early in life with prevalence of chronic conditions, mortality, and biomarkers linked to inflammation. We find no conclusive evidence for Finch and Crimmins’ hypothesis, because the measure for early inflammatory exposure is only associated with diabetes biomarker and hypertension. Results seem to provide evidence for Barker’s hypothesis of early life programming of chronic diseases.	Gilbert	 Brenes
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	Black-White Differences in the Relationship between Childhood Socioeconomic Status and Adult Health	A growing literature suggests that childhood socioeconomic disadvantage has long term, and perhaps cumulative, effects on health. However, little if any previous research examines race/ethnic differences in the association between childhood socioeconomic status and health. In the U.S., racial minorities are more likely to experience socioeconomic adversity than whites at all ages. In addition, the health effects of childhood economic adversity may be dissimilar for racial minorities than for majority whites. Thus differences in both exposure to childhood economic adversity and in the effects of this adversity may be very important to understanding race/ethnic differences in adult health. In this paper, I address these issues using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. I examine black-white differences in the impact of childhood socioeconomic status on the presence and age of onset of any of six chronic conditions; I also examine the prevalence and age of onset of cardiovascular disease.	Mary	Elizabeth  Hughes
2007	133	Life Course Perspectives on Health: Effects of Early Environments	The Timing of Early-Life Health and Socioeconomic Disadvantage	This paper addresses the importance of the timing of a health or socioeconomic disadvantage during childhood. Specifically, it has two goals. First, I ask whether some periods of exposure to disadvantage during childhood are more important than others. Are there key points during childhood in which simultaneously experiencing an important educational transition with a health or socioeconomic disadvantage is particularly detrimental for later-life well-being? Secondly, does such a disadvantage affect all later points in an individual’s life equally, or do the effects cumulate or attenuate over time? I will examine these questions using data from the British National Child Development Study (NCDS), unique life course data from the U.K., a context with many similarities but also a few important differences to the U.S.	Margot	I. Jackson
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Inter-Neighborhood Migration, Race, and Environmental Hazards: Modeling Micro-Level Processes of Environmental Inequality	This study combines individual-level data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics with neighborhood-level environmental hazard data derived from the Environmental Protection Agency and sociodemographic characteristics drawn from the U.S. census to provide a first examination of racial and ethnic differences in migration between neighborhoods with varying levels of environmental pollution. Results indicate that profound racial and ethnic differences in exposure to industrial pollution are maintained more by differences in mobility destinations than by differential effects of pollution on the decision to move. Conditional upon moving, black and Latino householders enter neighborhoods that are significantly more polluted than those accessed by whites, while other-race householders enter neighborhoods with less pollution. These differences cannot be explained by group differences in socioeconomic resources or other micro-level characteristics but are shaped, to a certain degree, by group differences in the reaction to non-white populations that tend to be concentrated in highly polluted areas.	Kyle	D. Crowder	Liam	 Downey
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Home Leaving and Migration of Young Adults in Indonesia: The Role of Education and Household Assets	The departure from the parental home, whether to migrate or to establish an independent household nearby, is one of the salient events experienced by young adults during their life course. This paper investigates the factors determining home leaving among young adults in Indonesia, using data from three waves of the Indonesia Family Life Survey, IFLS1(1993), IFLS2(1997) and IFLS3(2000). The paper exploits the longitudinal nature of the survey to answer the following questions: what role do parental/household assets and human capital play in influencing whether the  individual: i) co-reside with their parents, ii) establish new households near his/her parents' households (move locally), iii) migrate. Preliminary findings suggest that age, potential wages, and household assets influence home leaving and migration decisions of sons. For daughters, wages of potential spouses influence decision to migrate but not to move locally. Different types of assets influence local move and migration differently.	Firman	 Witoelar
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	Rural Out-Migration to Alternative Destinations in the Southern Ecuadorian Andes: The Roles of Livelihood Diversification and Environmental Assets	Out-migration from rural areas is a key driver of change in the developing world, but connections between this process and rural livelihoods have not been fully explored. Motivated by the literatures on environmental refugees and livelihood diversification, this paper addresses the influence of environmental assets and livelihood strategies on rural out-migration from the southern Ecuadorian Andes. The data originate from a multilevel longitudinal survey implemented in a key region of out-migration and environmental risk. I use a multinomial event history model to compare the effects of demographic factors and livelihood activities and assets on out-migration to local, rural, urban and international destinations. The results indicate that (1) drivers of out-migration differ substantially across migration streams, (2) origin-area livelihood diversification primarily increases internal migration but mostly decreases international migration, and (3) environmental assets have important influences on out-migration, but effects are not unidirectional as predicted by the literature on environmental refugees.	Clark	L. Gray
2007	134	Environment, Land and Migration	People, Land, and Context: Multilevel Determinants of Off-Farm Employment in the Ecuadorian Amazon	This paper investigates factors affecting decisions of settler colonists to engage in off-farm employment (OFE) in rural or urban areas in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon (NEA). While OFE decisions are ultimately a matter of individual choice, factors associated with the farm household and the local community also play key roles in this decision-making. Little empirical research, however, has been done on the simultaneous identification of such factors and their effects on labor mobility, and consequently on deforestation and urbanization in frontier areas. This research develops a multilevel conceptual framework and uses a multinomial, multilevel statistical model to study OFE in the NEA in 1999 as a result of factors at the individual, farm household, and community levels. The results show differences between movers and nonmovers in personal characteristics, human capital, farm household life cycle, land use, land management, farm environmental conditions, transportation accessibility, community size, and structure of local labor markets.	Alisson	F. Barbieri
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Marital Disruption and Economic Well-Being: A Comparative Analysis	Though there is a considerable literature concerned with the economic consequences of marital breakdown, there is still substantial disagreement in terms of its magnitude. One of the major problems underlying this debate is how economic well-being is defined. In this work we implement several measures of well-being of monetary and multidimensional nature using data from European Community Household Panel. Another issue in this literature concerns selection bias of divorcing couples. We tackle this issue using a propensity score matching technique combined with a Difference-in-Differences estimator. Results confirm the importance of well-being definition. We find a high gender bias when using monetary measures but a considerably lower one or even non-existent when using non-monetary indices.	Arnstein	 Aassve	Gianni	 Betti
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Does Community Context Have Important Bearings on the Divorce Rate?	Decisions to divorce could be affected by a number of characteristics of the local community. Community characteristics may be barriers to divorce (e.g. strong social control) or increase the attractiveness of divorcing (e.g. through access to a good remarriage market), but our knowledge of such influences is sparse. This study examines the impact of several community-level factors that may influence a couple’s risk of divorce: Socioeconomic conditions, the local marriage market, and the normative climate. Discrete-time hazard models with community-level fixed effects are estimated using a register-based data set of all Norwegian first marriages contracted 1980-2000 that includes longitudinal information on both the community and the couple level. Results show that higher average education, an unbalanced marriage market, and population density drive divorce rates down but that economic conditions do not matter for divorce risk. Estimates obtained from regular models are markedly different than those obtained with the fixed-effects approach.	Torkild	 Lyngstad
2007	135	Union Dissolution	The Effects of Divorce Risk on the Labour Supply of Married Couples	This paper presents a model of lifetime utility maximization in which expectations of future marital transitions play a role in the determination of work hours. Married people with spouses who earn more are predicted to devote additional time to the labour market when they are confronted with a high likelihood of divorce and vice versa. Similarly, work hours should be positively associated with marriage probability for single people who expect to marry a higher earning spouse. These predictions are tested using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Marriage and divorce probabilities are calculated from proportional hazard models and are included in regressions of annual hours. Married women are found to work more when they face a high divorce probability. This relationship holds both over an individual's life-cycle and across people with different inherent risks of divorce and is robust to the use of alternative marital transition measures.	Kerry	L. Papps
2007	135	Union Dissolution	Sexual Frequency and the Stability of Marital and Cohabiting Unions	Prior research on marriage shows that lower sexual frequency or lower sexual satisfaction is associated with higher rates of divorce. Scant research, however, has addressed the role of sexual activity in the dissolution of cohabiting unions. We draw upon social exchange theory to develop our hypotheses and propose why sexual frequency is more important in cohabitation: lower costs to ending the union for cohabitors, cohabitors' lack of union-specific emotional and non-emotional capital, and cohabitors' higher demands for sexual activity. In short, sexuality occupies a more prominent role in cohabitation than marriage, and poor sexuality within cohabitation is more likely to lead to dissolution. Using the National Survey of Families and Households, we employ discrete-time event history models to examine the relationships between sexual frequency and union dissolution. Results indicate that low sexual frequency is associated with significantly higher rates of union dissolution in cohabitation than in marriage.	Scott	T. Yabiku	Constance	T. Gager
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	Higher Education Policy as Secondary School Reform: Texas Public High Schools after Hopwood	This article assesses three policies enacted in Texas after the elimination of affirmative action as high school reform initiatives. The Texas top 10% law, the Longhorn and Century Scholarships, and the TEXAS Grants Program were designed to improve diversity at Texas universities. Nonetheless, this paper's analysis of panel data describing Texas high schools between 1993 and 2002 demonstrates that each of these policies redistributed college-related activity at the state’s high schools and boosted high school students’ academic engagement. These findings lend support to comprehensive K-16 school reform proposals, which seek use of college opportunities as incentives to improve the educational outcomes of high school students.	Thurston	 Domina
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	Do Small Classes Lead to Larger Variability in Student Achievement? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment	Previous research from randomized experiments on class size indicates positive immediate and long-term effects of small classes on average achievement for all students. However, the effects of small classes on the variability on student achievement have not been examined. Differences in achievement variability between smaller and larger classes are of great importance, since they indicate differential effects of small classes across different types of students (e.g., lower or higher achieving students). Since previous findings on the social distribution of the small class effects are unclear, the present study uses data from a four-year large-scale randomized experiment to examine the effects of small classes on the achievement gap. The results indicate that higher achieving students benefit even more from being in small classes in early grades than other students. However, there is no indication that small class reduction is a mechanism that can reduce the achievement gap.	Spyros	 Konstantopoulos	Amelie	 Constant
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	College Going and the Texas Top 10% Law: A Regression Discontinuity Approach	The Texas legislature changed the college admission regime in 1997 when it passed H.B.588, popularly known as the top 10% law, which guarantees automatic admission to any public university in the state to all high school seniors who graduate in the top decile of their high school class. Using a representative survey of Texas high school seniors as of 2002, we use regression discontinuity methods to discern the impact of the top 10% law on four nested college enrollment decisions: college enrollment; enrollment at a 4-year institution; enrollment in Texas institutions; and enrollment at the Texas public flagships. We find that eligible seniors are more likely to attend college and to enroll in four-year institutions than seniors who do not qualify for the admission guarantee, but also that the law boosts overall minority students' college enrollment, their enrollment in 4-year colleges, and also at the two public flagships.	Sunny	Xinchun  Niu	Marta	 Tienda
2007	136	Educational Attainment: Trends, Determinants, and Consequences	State High School Exit Examinations and Retention in Grades 9 and 10	In a recent paper the senior author demonstrated that state high school exit examinations (HSEEs) have the effect of reducing state-level high school completion rates. The state-level analysis in that paper made clear that state HSEEs reduce public high school graduation rates, but they did not explore the mechanisms that might give rise to that effect. As a result, the policy implications of that important empirical finding are limited.    One of the best predictors of whether a student drops out of high school is whether they were ever made to repeat a grade in school. At the same time, there is speculation that schools frequently retain students in the grade prior to when state HSEEs are administered. In the present paper we test the hypothesis that state HSEEs affect graduation rates by affecting the rate at which students are retained in school.	John	R. Warren	Amelia	 Corl
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Understanding Contraception Use among Muslims of India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh	Within social demography, religion is frequently cited as an important factor forming the basis of one's identity. Values and practices placed on a list of demographic parameters could have intended and unintended effects on demographic performances of a particular religious community. However, Muslims across the globe are not behaving in a similar fashion. Keeping this view in mind, the present paper examines the attitude of Muslim women towards adoption of contraceptives in three neighboring countries namely India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. NFHS-1998-99 for India and DHS data for Pakistan-1992-93 and Bangladesh-1993-94 are used to carry out the study. It is clear from our analyses that the religious component of prohibition against contraceptives is not that high in Bangladesh as it is in Pakistan and also to some extent in India. Hence the goodwill of authorities in framing the policies may work in achieving the desired demographic goals, defying the conservative religious dictation.	Laxmi	Kant  Dwivedi	Usha	 Ram	Baishali	 Goswami
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	Racial Differences and Similarities in Childlessness, 1988 - 2002	In this paper we seek to understand the socioeconomic similarities and differences between white and black women who are childless. Past research has either neglected racial differences among childless women, or attributed childlessness to unique causes for black and white women. While white women’s childlessness has been attributed to increased educational and employment opportunities that conflict with family responsibilities, black women’s childlessness has been viewed as the result of inadequate health care, disease, and coercive sterilization. We re-evaluate these arguments with data from the three most recent waves of the National Survey of Family Growth (cycles 4, 5, and 6).	Jennifer	H. Lundquist
2007	137	Fertility, Family Planning and Reproductive Health among Immigrant or Minority Populations	The Importance of Ethnicity: Fertility Behavior and Ethnicity in West Africa	Africa is often the neglected stepchild of Eurocentric demographic transition theory. The weak nation-state, extended kinship networks and lasting socio-cultural supports for elevated fertility have often challenged demographers. This paper addresses this central debate and examines the importance of ethnicity in determining current fertility and its proximate determinants in West Africa. Utilizing recent DHS surveys I look at the fertility behavior of ethnic groups spanning more than one country in the region, with current fertility and various proximate determinants as the dependent variable. I fit models for each country separately in the first analysis, followed by pooled fixed effects models for all countries in the second analysis. The results are expected to show the importance of ethno-linguistic groupings, as well as the mitigating effects of structural circumstances in different countries.	Petra	 Nahmias
